              THE
CENTRALITY

     OF STYLE

                                    Edited by
                        Mike Duncan and
               Star Medzerian Vanguri
THE CENTRALITY OF STYLE
PERSPECTIVES ON WRITING
Series Editor, Susan H. McLeod

The Perspectives on Writing series addresses writing studies in a broad sense.
Consistent with the wide ranging approaches characteristic of teaching and
scholarship in writing across the curriculum, the series presents works that take
divergent perspectives on working as a writer, teaching writing, administering
writing programs, and studying writing in its various forms.

The WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press are collaborating so that these books
will be widely available through free digital distribution and low-cost print edi-
tions. The publishers and the Series editor are teachers and researchers of writ-
ing, committed to the principle that knowledge should freely circulate. We see
the opportunities that new technologies have for further democratizing knowl-
edge. And we see that to share the power of writing is to share the means for
all to articulate their needs, interest, and learning into the great experiment of
literacy.

Other Books in the Series

Charles Bazerman, Adair Bonini, and Débora Figueiredo (Eds.), Genre in a
    Changing World (2009)

David Franke, Alex Reid, and Anthony Di Renzo (Eds.), Design Discourse:
    Composing and Revising Programs in Professional and Technical Writing
    (2010)

Martine Courant Rife, Shaun Slattery, and Dànielle Nicole DeVoss (Eds.),
    Copy(write): Intellectual Property in the Writing Classroom (2011)

Doreen Starke-Meyerring, Anthony Paré, Natasha Artemeva, Miriam Horne,
    and Larissa Yousoubova, Writing in Knowledge Societies (2011)

Andy Kirkpatrick and Zhichang Xu, Chinese Rhetoric and Writing: An
    Introduction for Language Teachers (2012)

Chris Thaiss, Gerd Bräuer, Paula Carlino, Lisa Ganobcsik-Williams,
and Aparna Sinha (Eds.), Writing Programs Worldwide: Profiles of Academic

    Writing in Many Places (2012)
Charles Bazerman, Chris Dean, Jessica Early, Karen Lunsford, Suzie Null,

    Paul Rogers, and Amanda Stansell (Eds.), International Advances in
    Writing Research: Cultures, Places, Measures (2012)
THE CENTRALITY OF STYLE

    Edited by Mike Duncan and Star Medzerian Vanguri

                    The WAC Clearinghouse
                         wac.colostate.edu

                      Fort Collins, Colorado
                            Parlor Press

                       www.parlorpress.com
                    Anderson, South Carolina
The WAC Clearinghouse, Fort Collins, Colorado 80523
Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson, South Carolina 29621

© 2013 by Mike Duncan and Star Medzerian Vanguri. This work is released under a Creative
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 United States License.

ISBN 978-1-64215-047-6 (pdf ) | 978-1-64215-048-3 (epub) | 978-1-60235-422-7 (pbk.)

DOI 10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476

Produced in the United States of America.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

The centrality of style / edited by Mike Duncan and Star Medzerian Vanguri pages cm. -- (Per-
   spectives on writing)

Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-1-60235-422-7 (pbk. : alk. paper) -- ISBN 978-1-60235-423-4 (hardcover : alk.

   paper) -- ISBN 978-1-64215-047-6 (pdf ) -- ISBN 978-1-64215-048-3 (epub)
1. English language--Style. I. Duncan, Mike, 1975- editor of compilation. II. Vanguri, Star

   Medzerian, 1980- editor of compilation.
PE1421.C46 2013
808'.042'0711--dc23

                                                2013011457

Copyeditor: Don Donahue
Designers: Mike Palmquist
Series Editor: Susan H. McLeod

The WAC Clearinghouse supports teachers of writing across the disciplines. Hosted by Colo-
rado State University, it brings together scholarly journals and book series as well as resources
for teachers who use writing in their courses. This book is available in digital format for free
download at wac.colostate.edu.

Parlor Press, LLC is an independent publisher of scholarly and trade titles in print and mul-
timedia formats. This book is available in paperback, cloth, and Adobe eBook formats from
Parlor Press at www.parlorpress.com. For submission information or to find out about Parlor
Press publications, write to Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson, South Carolina
29621, or e-mail editor@parlorpress.com.
    CONTENTS

Foreword vii
         Paul Butler

Introduction to the Centrality of Stylexi
         Mike Duncan and Star Medzerian Vanguri

Part One: Conceptualizing Style1

Introduction to Part One: Conceptualizing Style5
         Mike Duncan and Star Medzerian Vanguri

An Ethics of Attentions: Three Continuums of Classical and
    Contemporary Stylistic Manipulation for the 21st Century
    Composition Classroom 9
         William C. Kurlinkus

Stylistic Sandcastles: Rhetorical Figures as Composition's
    Bucket and Spade 37
         William FitzGerald

Using Stylistic Imitation in Freshman Writing Classes: The
    Rhetorical and Meta-Rhetorical Potential of Transitions in
    Geoffrey of Vinsauf 's Medieval Treatises 57
         Denise Stodola

Architectonics and Style71
         Russell Greer

Making Style Practically Cool and Theoretically Hip81
         Keith Rhodes

Jim Corder's Generative Ethos as Alternative to Traditional
    Argument, or Style's Revivification of the Writer-Reader
    Relationship97
         Rosanne Carlo

Teaching Style as Cultural Performance119
         Chris Holcomb and M. Jimmie Killingsworth

                                                                                                    v
Contents

Inventio and Elocutio: Language Instruction at St. Paul's
    Grammar School and Today's Stylistic Classroom 135
         Tom Pace

The Research Paper As Stylistic Exercise153
         Mike Duncan

Part Two: Applying Style 167

Introduction to Part Two: Applying Style169
         Mike Duncan and Star Medzerian Vanguri

Style in Academic Writing 173
         Nora Bacon

Tracking Interpersonal Style: The Use of Functional
    Language Analysis in College Writing Instruction191
         Zak Lancaster

Multimodal Style and the Evolution of Digital Writing Pedagogy 213
         Moe Folk

Voice, Transformed: The Potentialities of Style Pedagogy
    in the Teaching of Creative Nonfiction 239
         Crystal Fodrey

Fighting Styles: The Pedagogical Implications of Applying
    Contemporary Rhetorical Theory to the Persuasive Prose
    of Mary Wollstonecraft and Mary Hays259
         Luke Redington

Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum: Teaching
    Stylistic Fluency through Science Writing 279
         Jonathan Buehl

Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance309
         Erik Ellis

What Scoring Rubrics Teach Students (and Teachers) about Style 341
         Star Medzerian Vanguri

vi
    FOREWORD

      Paul Butler
      University of Houston

   The Centrality of Style presents readers with a paradox. The editors begin with
the convincing argument that style must be regarded as central to the discipline
of composition studies. Indeed, the collection's rich diversity of chapters
reasserts the prominent place of style in the field from different perspectives,
historical moments, and theoretical and pedagogical approaches.

   Yet despite the book's claim of style's centrality, it makes an equally forceful
case--which may appear contradictory at first--that some of the most exciting
new ideas in stylistic study have emerged not from the center but the margins of
the field--and the margins' intersections with other disciplines, ideas, cultures,
and sites of inquiry.

   The paradox inherent in the tension of seeing style as both central and marginal
is not new to those in rhetoric and composition. Mikhail Bakhtin (1981) has
described a similar phenomenon in discussing the clash of language's unifying,
or centripetal forces, and their counterpart--the dispersing, or centrifugal forces
that often disrupt prevailing norms. In public sphere theory, critical theorist
Michael Warner (2005), borrowing from Jurgen Habermas (1989) and others,
depicts an identical discordance in the tension between publics that dominate
social discourse and their counterpart, a culturally less powerful, oppositional
group, called a counterpublic, which constantly works against that dominance
even as it maintains, says Warner, "at some level, conscious or not, an awareness
of its subordinate status" (p. 119). With respect to counterpublics, Warner says
it is the oppositional aspect of their style that "performs membership" (p. 142).

   There is no question that The Centrality of Style navigates the push and pull of
these kinds of oppositions in compelling new ways. The real question is, How does
the volume manage to position style in the field as what Frank Farmer (2008),
borrowing from anthropologist Victor Turner, calls a liminal counterpublic,
emanating from the break or rupture of the public-counterpublic relationship
that somehow exists "betwixt and between" the two? How, in other words, does
style's very centrality depend on its marginalization, lack of power, and sometimes
"renegade" status (Johnson, 2003) both inside, and outside, the field?

    Some answers to that question, and paradox, can be found in this volume.
While there are many examples throughout the collection, here are some of the
representative concepts that suggest even larger ideas in The Centrality of Style
and show the current push and pull of style's liminal status in the field.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.1.2  vii
Butler

STYLE AS LINGUA FRANCA

   In his article in this volume, William FitzGerald argues that "[s]tyle has
become a contemporary lingua franca," and he gives evidence of the centrality
of style historically, in popular culture, and in what he calls "the return of the
figurative." Yet even as he restores style to a pivotal location in composition and
rhetoric, FitzGerald makes a parallel move of relocating style at the periphery--
marginalized, he says, by the continuing struggle of the figures of speech for
disciplinary legitimacy and for circulation among a broader writing public.
Thus, in a move widely used by the writers in this volume, FitzGerald shows the
value of style as a common language while maintaining its status as marginal in
working toward broader recognition. FitzGerald intimates that both moves are
necessary in forging a unique place for style in the field, betwixt and between
other disciplinary forces and interests.

   A similar move in situating style as liminal is made by Keith Rhodes, who
argues, on the one hand, for an "aesthetics of style" that he sees as "persuasively
influential" but also recognizes, on the other hand, as "problematized by the
conserving and regressive power of monologic forms of art." Thus Rhodes
suggests that having an "art of writing," with style at the center, remains elusive,
on the margins of the field, as we hesitate to embrace an aesthetics that includes
nonlinear or affective influences. Rhodes thus demonstrates the complicated
aspect of style as a lingua franca for composition studies.

STYLE AS RESEARCH

   In his essay for the collection, Mike Duncan shows how the traditional
research paper reflects the centrality of style, especially in the way research
"leads to increased control over many styles" and serves as "a door to a
multitude of other demanding styles." Yet Duncan sees competing aspects of
the genre as well, connecting some parts of research to the destabilized aspects
of style that have historically rendered it powerless, ineffectual: "The generic
research paper simultaneously displays all the weaknesses of a rhetoric reduced
to ornament." In his focus on research, however, Duncan not only relegates
style to the margins it has traditionally occupied but resurrects it as a vital part
of research, showing how the research paper genre can function as "a mastery
of style, a way of arguing." How does this "stylistic dance," to use Duncan's
words, happen? He intimates, much like Warner (2005) does, that research is
located in many sites of inquiry, what Warner calls a "multicontextual space
of circulation, organized not by a place or institution but by the circulation of

viii
                                                                                                    Foreword

discourse" among publics and counterpublics (p. 119). It is significant, then,
that Duncan locates the very centrality of research in a contested space where
style is part of a freely circulating discourse within a traditionally constrained
genre.

   In her look at style as research, Nora Bacon argues for a similar move in
academic writing, showing the way it reflects variation between normalized
styles and those that deviate from the norm and thereby demand our attention.
In analyzing academic writing whose "style is sometimes ugly, sometimes lovely,
sometimes almost invisible," she includes excerpts that "serve as counterexamples
to the idea that academic writing is dry, dull, objective, passionless, or merely
utilitarian." Bacon illustrates the way style draws us in, demanding our
attention, by quoting from philosopher Elaine Scarry: "The boy copies the face,
then copies the face again. Then again and again. He does the same thing when
a beautiful living plant--a violet, a wild rose--glides into his field of vision, or a
living face: he makes a first copy, a second copy, a third, a fourth, a fifth." Bacon
uses Scarry as an example of style that calls attention to itself, a move Warner
acknowledges: "Public discourse craves attention like a child. Texts clamor at
us. Images solicit our gaze. Look here! Listen! Hey!" (p. 89). Bacon shows how
academic styles that we might consider most central are, paradoxically, often
those most on the margins, centrifugal, dispersing, and as such, capturing our
attention by deviating from the norm.

STYLE AS SCIENCE

   Jonathan Buehl begins his piece in the collection with some assumptions
about the centrality of style in science when he writes that "specific stylistic foci
are often required by programmatic mandates or pedagogical objectives." In
terms of science, we normally think of style as normalizing, yet Buehl, much
like Warner's counterpublic discourse, moves the intersection of science with
style to the margins: "Scientific discourse is difficult and `strange' for many
students--even students in scientific fields." Contrary to conventional wisdom,
Buehl says this movement is positive because "by reading, writing, and writing
about scientific prose, students engage unfamiliar discourse, which encourages
them to apply newly learned strategies." Buehl's call for "defamiliarization" is the
opposite of the impulse toward transparency or clarity usually associated with
scientific discourse. Buehl thus works against a notion mentioned by Warner--
that "a clear style results in a popular audience" (p. 138)--and instead embraces
the kind of defamiliarizing language Warner sees as central to counterpublics
and a nonnormative style.

                                                                                                  ix
Butler

STYLE AS ASSESSMENT

   Star Medzerian Vanguri exemplifies the paradox of style in her chapter on
scoring rubrics in composition classrooms. Vanguri's study reflects the way
style remains at the margins, sometimes undergoing a reversal of sorts: "We
are more specific about those aspects we value least ... while we are less specific
about the qualities we value most." Vanguri goes on to explain the paradox
she outlines: "Qualities like eloquence, rhetorical appropriateness, and tone are
less quantifiable when placed into the context of a rubric than are the qualities
we value least about style--mechanics, sentence structure, documentation, and
word choice." Style is thus centralized--and marginalized--at the same time.
Style as assessment becomes a lens through which we see a reversal of ideology
at work. In the end, we need to see the juxtaposition of the center and the
margin to understand what we value most.

   The examples here offer just a few of the many ways in which the paradox of
style plays out in the pages of The Centrality of Style. The collection places style
at the center of the field. Many of the chapters work within the liminal space
in which style serves as both a centralizing and decentralizing force in rhetoric
and composition. Clearly, the authors and editors have made an invaluable
contribution in their collection by exposing the paradoxical nature of a canon
that continues to play a vital role in our disciplinary history.

REFERENCES

Bakhtin, Mikhail. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays by M. M.
   Bakhtin. (Michael Holquist, Ed. Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist,
   Trans.). Austin: University of Texas Press.

Farmer, Frank. (2008). Composition studies as liminal counterpublic. JAC
   28(3-4), 620-34.

Habermas, Jurgen. (1989). The structural transformation of the public sphere:
   An inquiry into a category of bourgeois society. (Thomas Burger, Trans.).
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Johnson, T. R. (2003). A rhetoric of pleasure: Prose Style and Today's Composition
   Classroom. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann-Boynton/Cook.

Warner, Michael. (2005). Publics and counterpublics. New York: Zone.

x
INTRODUCTION TO THE
CENTRALITY OF STYLE

Mike Duncan and Star Medzerian Vanguri
University of Houston-Downtown and Nova Southeastern
University

   In the classical era, Aristotle's Rhetoric places style in Book III, almost as
an addendum, despite the Rhetoric's recognition of the centrality and power
of metaphor to the persuasive enterprise. Cicero realized the inexorable link
between form and content, particularly in his Orator to Brutus, but in the later
Roman empire, his idea of style was simplified into imperial ornamentation,
having had already settled into one of the five rhetorical canons. Style remained
an auxiliary to rhetoric and persuasion for over a millennium, save occasional
questionable revivals, such as the Ciceronian movement in the Renaissance
that stressed only using the Latin words present in Cicero's work to achieve an
imitative mastery of his style, and the later Ramist reduction of style to tropes
and figures only.

   In the last hundred years, however, the nuances of lexis have enjoyed
a different sort of theoretical attention. In particular, studies on sentence
structure, paragraph structure, diction, rhythm, tone, genre, visual rhetoric, and
document design have grown exponentially in the last fifty years, paralleling the
increased specialization of the academy and theoretical study of instruction in
rhetoric and composition. These studies, in total, have greatly expanded our
understanding of how language works rhetorically and demonstrated the value
of attention to stylistic matters.

   Style now stands at an interesting crossroads. Considerable work has been
done recently to establish style's significance within composition, with the
recent authoritative 2010 Bedford St. Martin's collection Style in Rhetoric in
Composition, edited by Paul Butler, placing it in a long theoretical tradition that
offers a stylistic way of understanding compositional pedagogy, parallel and
complimentary to other histories. It is only on this formidable bulwark that this
collection can stand.

   As such, the editors of this volume feel that it is no longer necessary to
argue for style. That has been done, and done convincingly and well, by T.
R. Johnson, Richard Lanham, Butler, Joseph Williams, and many others. The
question, then, is what to do next, now that a growing number of composition
scholars and teachers recognize style's relevance and usefulness to composition.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.1.3     xi
Duncan & Vanguri

The answer to that question is presented in this collection: to imagine style as
central to the act of composition and to the discipline of composition studies
and consider what that might involve when enacted.

   To explain that claim a bit further, we should reveal its origination. The
germinal idea for this collection began shortly after a large workshop on style
on the first day of the March 2010 Conference on College Composition and
Communication in Louisville, KY. Many of the participants--some of which
are represented in this volume--spoke of a need to keep building attention to
style in composition studies, and further opined that style was so central to
composition that the terms were almost synonymous. It seemed odd to us, the
editors of this volume, to be content with style as a specialty subject within the
conference if we truly held that style was central to composition studies. As
such, we felt that it would be prudent to build a book-length collection that
represented this viewpoint far better than one or two authors could.

   This collection is the result of that observation and theoretical commitment.
Its title reflects a belief by its editors and authors that style is what makes
composition an art, that style is composition enacted, and that style is an
ideal means by which teachers and theorists of composition can explain what
occurs in writing. Furthermore, as Paul Butler has noted, style "offers a way for
composition to embrace the cacophony of differences that defines our field"
(2010, p. 2).

   Style is epistemic, both creating and reflecting knowledge, and as such, style
allows us to access the ideology and cultural values of a text. In "Prolegomena
to the Analysis of Prose Style," Richard Ohmann presents the notion of style
as epistemic choice, wherein he asks us to increase our understanding of
our students, whose worldviews are embedded in their prose, as a means of
better understanding their written word. Furthermore, as Min-Zhan Lu has
acknowledged, style helps us to appreciate difference. Because style is a reflection
of a writer, and thus the writer's life experiences and background, it moves us
from the conception of non-standard English as error to an appreciation of
stylistic difference.

   Style also stretches across disciplinary boundaries. Because style has homes
in literature, linguistics, rhetoric, technical communication, and other fields,
teachers and scholars in composition have multiple traditions from which to
draw, reinforcing composition's existing propensity to reference other fields.
Style also allows for more productive cross-disciplinary efforts, because style is
a term that is already familiar, if not ubiquitous, in these other realms. As such,
style can act as a language that guides our discipline by defining our mutual
priorities and differences. Even if we do not subscribe to the same theoretical
approach to composition, style allows us to talk about what we value and to

xii
                                                                                                 Introduction

name those differences. Style also enables us to extend those conversations
outside the discipline. We can more easily to share our work with the public
when we employ its commonly stylistic definition of composition.

   Most particularly, in the classroom, stylistic terminology allows us to discuss
writing with our students in detail. We can move beyond impressionistic
language that is rooted in value judgments and toward specific language that
names those features of writing we value. Perhaps most importantly, the language
of style allows students to talk to each other about their writing in meaningful
and productive ways. In other words, style keeps composition classes focused on
student writing and keeps learning reflexive. In classrooms where style is treated
as central to composition, student writing can be the content students study
to learn how to write effectively. When students work off an established and
shared stylistic vocabulary and deliberately employ stylistic devices, the class
can treat these features as intentional. Furthermore, once students understand
the nuts and bolts of how writing "works," they can analyze their own texts and
choices. A stylistic approach to composition, then, builds reflection into the
curriculum. Students must be able to identify what they are doing in their own
writing before they can comment on its effectiveness.

   Through an emphasis on style, writing is given a methodology. Disrupting
the myth of the "artistic genius," stylistic methods of analysis can remove the
mystery from writing for students and make it something that can be learned and
improved. The methods that Edward P. J. Corbett and Robert Connors offer in
Classical Rhetoric for the Modern Student ask students to calculate statistics such
as word count, sentence types, and average sentence and paragraph lengths so as
to recognize the effects these features have on an overall text and to help define
an author's style. Style also allows for genre-based approaches in composition;
technical communication in particular has long established genre as a paramount
concern, but this is not always reflected in rhetoric and composition. Fairly
recently, the work of Anis Bawarshi, Amy Devitt, Carolyn Miller, and others
has ignited interest in genre studies in rhetoric and composition, arguing that
a goal of composition courses should be genre awareness. Style is a necessary
consideration within genre-based approaches to composing, as all genre
conventions are, at their core, stylistic.

   Finally, the term "style" itself, particularly as represented in Part One of this
text, is able to simultaneously hold a variety of definitions quite comfortably,
with each of those definitions able to dialogue with each other and promote
a multifaceted view of the importance of the canon and how it suffuses the
act of composition. Further, stylistic principles (namely, rhetorical tropes and
schemes) are uniquely able to describe phenomena ranging across mediums
and modalities in recognition of composition's many forms. We believe this

                                                                                                 xiii
Duncan & Vanguri

multifaceted aspect of the canon allows for a position that has not yet been
reached in other attempts to align an ancient rhetorical concept with the
practices of theorizing and teaching composition. We acknowledge the value
of the extensive work arguing for the centrality of other rhetorical canons,
namely--and perhaps most notably--invention (Crowley; Lauer & Atwill;
Young & Becker); however, in this collection, we focus on style.

   This collection is organized into two sections. Each section is prefaced by an
introduction that discusses how each chapter builds upon the claim of style's
centrality. As such, this collection has some of the qualities of a monograph: the
connection between the essays is not merely topical or thematic, but rather is
built upon a common claim.

   Part One, "Conceptualizing Style," contains essays that offer different--
sometimes complementary, and sometimes conflicting--ways of conceptualizing
what style is. Style is presented as deception, as figures, as imitation, as
Bakhtinian architecture, as style itself, as ethos, as cultural performance, and
as invention. Many of these essays also explore pedagogy, but we have placed
these nine essays together primarily for their unique theoretical viewpoints on
style, which we believe advance the field's understanding of the concept by
collectively demonstrating its presence in so many aspects of language.

   Part Two, "Applying Style," as its name suggests, explores ways by which
style can be incorporated into the teaching of composition. These proposed
ways are diverse, including writing across the curriculum (WAC), linguistics,
multimodal rhetoric, creative nonfiction, rhetorical/literary criticism, "stylistic
sensitivity," the rhetoric of science, and the rhetoric of fiction. Teachers of
composition will find much to mull over and consider in this second half of the
collection, given that, like in Part One, style again appears in multiple locales
as a critical concept, demanding attention due to style's centrality. These essays
offer strategies for teachers that allow students to address and grasp style in the
classroom.

   We see this collection as a step forward for the study of style in composition
studies. We hope, in particular, that it will lead to further work in the discipline
on stylistic issues in a contemporary environment where the centrality of style
to composition can be treated as a given.

xiv
THE CENTRALITY OF STYLE

                                                                                            1
2
PART ONE: CONCEPTUALIZING
STYLE

                                                                                            3
INTRODUCTION TO PART ONE:
CONCEPTUALIZING STYLE

Mike Duncan and Star Medzerian Vanguri

   As stated in the introduction, this collection establishes and advances the
assumption that style is central to the whole enterprise of composition, from
how we theorize and conceptualize the work we do as a discipline, to how
that understanding is communicated among us and to our students via our
pedagogy. Treating the centrality of style as a given, however, requires that we
subscribe to a definition or definitions of style that align(s) with our values as
scholars and teachers. As T. R. Johnson and Tom Pace rightfully point out in
the introduction to their 2005 collection Refiguring Prose Style: Possibilities for
Writing Pedagogy, "style means different things to different people," and as a
result, style can have so many meanings that it ceases to have meaning at all.
We do not have a problem with this plurality, as the following summaries will
demonstrate that these essays have far more in common than not. A plurality
of definitions, rather, speaks to the pervasive and qualitative centrality of style
in rhetoric and composition, as well as in other language-oriented disciplines,
much like the vast array of available definitions of "rhetoric" speaks to the term's
universality within language use.

   Taking a cue from Johnson and Pace's collection, and from other recent
scholarship that has sought to revive style, we begin this collection by presenting
a variety of conceptions of style that are both theoretically and pedagogically
informed. The definitions of style presented by the following essays in Part
One are markedly different from one another, but are joined fundamentally by
their objective to increase style's visibility in composition and explore the value
of scholarship that assumes the centrality of style to composition. Further, the
chapters in this section offer relevant ways of understanding style that intersect
with the current interests and values of our discipline, so as to not simply revive
style from the past.

   In "An Ethics of Attentions: Three Continuums of Classical and
Contemporary Stylistic Manipulation for the 21st Century Composition
Classroom," William Kurlinkus draws upon theories from classical rhetoric to
new media to argue that style is a form of deception. He offers a series of three
continuums along which he plots the degrees of control that style has on an
audience's attention. These three continuums--point of attention, apparent
mediation, and felt agency--reveal the manipulation inherent in every stylistic

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.01  5
Duncan & Medzerian Vanguri

choice that a writer makes. This chapter also brings to light the ethical element
of style that, despite its power, has been too often ignored. As rhetorical language
is commonly recognized as inherently deceptive due to its selection of focus,
Kurlinkus's link between style and deception clarifies the central nature of style
to the compositional enterprise.

   While Kurlinkus's work draws attention to the responsibility style requires,
William FitzGerald's "Stylistic Sandcastles: Rhetorical Figures as Composition's
Bucket and Spade" calls, rather, for stylistic play. He argues for a return to
"the figurative," including rhetorical tropes and schemes and figures of speech
and thought in composition, suggesting that while students may not think
of themselves as embodying style, they have surely encountered figurative
devices. After presenting a brief historical account of the treatment of figures in
composition scholarship, FitzGerald offers a curriculum for an upper-division
rhetoric elective titled "Go Figure." He provides this curriculum as an example
of how figures can be taught and of the further possibilities that they offer
the teaching of composition. Further, FitzGerald suggests that the figures are
more easily transferable to visual modes of composition than the sentence level
pedagogies with which style has been more traditionally associated. This essay's
emphasis on the explanatory power of figures demonstrates the unifying value
of style's exhaustive terminology.

   Denise Stodola's "Using Stylistic Imitation in Freshman Writing Classes:
The Rhetorical and Meta-Rhetorical Potential of Tropes and Transitions in
Geoffrey of Vinsauf 's Medieval Treatises," like the previous chapter, presents
a new application for a traditional form of style instruction. Stodola proposes
a meta-rhetorical method of style pedagogy that follows imitation exercises
with rhetorical analysis assignments that ask students to reflect on their stylistic
choices. A necessary component of Stodola's pedagogy is transitions, not at the
text level, but at the curricular level. Situating her approach historically within
Geoffrey of Vinsauf 's Documentum de modo et arte dictandi et versificandi,
she suggests that how assignments are sequenced, and the transitions that lie
between them, affects their pedagogical value. Her chapter concludes with a
sample assignment on figures of thought from a Business Communication
course she teaches, demonstrating the pedagogy set forth in the chapter. Like
FitzGerald, Stodola's conception of composition pedagogy as an exploration of
stylistic choices on the part of the instructor reflects our central claim, though
she metacritically reverses the emphasis from student to teacher.

   In "Architectonics and Style," Russell Greer draws upon Mikhail Bakhtin's
concept of "surplus of vision"--the ability of an outsider to perceive an individual
more fully than that person can see him or herself--to argue that it can further
our understanding of stylistic clarity. Greer builds on the established relationship

6
                                                                                  Introduction to Part One

between style and clarity by suggesting we must also consider how surplus of
vision factors into this relationship. He further suggests that it gives us a way
to define good style, in that the most effective style is that which has the most
surplus of vision. In using this Bakhtinian lens, Greer speaks to the importance
of stylistic awareness, not just stylistic savvy. This concept is illustrated through
an analysis of a paragraph of a student essay in David Bartholomae's "Inventing
the University." Like Cicero, Greer's emphasis on knowledge of the possible
options as well as the implementations (like all writers, even if unconsciously)
points again toward how style is key to the rhetorical act.

   While the other authors in this section relate style to another concept to
define it (style as deception, figures, imitation, and vision, respectively), Keith
Rhodes find value in style as style. His "Styling: Making Style Practically Cool
and Theoretically Hip" draws from linguistic frame theory and argues that we
must abandon the current "stodgy" frame for style and invent a new way to
frame it, one that is more accepted in our discipline and relevant for students.
Rhodes argues for a progressive pedagogy of style that values stylistic variety and
is informed by art, philosophy, and technology. The perception of style, then,
can be said to determine its control and use, and vice versa.

   In "Jim Corder's Reflective Ethos as Alternative to Traditional Argument,
or Style's Revivification of the Writer-Reader Relationship," Rosanne Carlo
explores how style and ethos are connected, referencing T. R. Johnson's work
on style and audience pleasure. She then analyzes Jim Corder's "Notes on a
Rhetoric of Regret" to demonstrate how he simultaneously argues for a particular
stylistic theory, that of "enfolding," and enacts that theory to establish ethos
as he composes. Carlo suggests that it is Corder's personal, performative style
that draws an audience into participation with the text, and that this is what
should be the desired effect of stylistic prose. While Carlo makes this point, she
enacts, as Corder does, the very style she encourages readers to consider. This
performative aspect to style, connected to ethos, is particularly important as it
examines not just stylistic effect, but how stylistic effect is accomplished.

   Chris Holcomb and M. Jimmie Killingsworth, like Carlo, offer a performative
approach to style pedagogy in "Teaching Style as Cultural Performance." They
encourage us to reconsider the dichotomy in how style is typically defined
(broadly as a way of knowing, or narrowly as an author's choices at the text
level) and see these two definitions as interrelated. To elucidate the relationship
between these definitions of style, they offer two frameworks for the teaching
of style that are based on the interaction between verbal forms and culture.
One framework uses what the authors define as the "arenas" of interaction
(the textual, social, and cultural) to move students from the textual features
of style to its cultural implications, while the other reverses this sequence and

                                                                                                   7
Duncan & Medzerian Vanguri

begins with style in its cultural context, a realm that is arguably more familiar to
students. The chapter outlines in detail, and builds upon, their methodologies
for style as performance. We place this essay with that of Carlo's to reflect
the growing perception of style as performance, though they have added an
important cultural aspect to style.

   In "Inventio and elocutio: Language Instruction at St. Paul's Grammar School
and Today's Stylistic Classroom," Tom Pace establishes the curriculum at St. Paul's
grammar school in London as a historical precedence to the centrality of style to
rhetorical education. Pace situates his argument within recent style scholarship
that has highlighted style's inventive potential and public function. This brief
overview lays the groundwork for his more thorough historical discussion of the
relationship between style and invention in the Renaissance grammar schools.
Finally, Pace outlines a first-year composition course he teaches that draws on
the historical stylistic pedagogies he presents, by using Gerald Graff and Cathy
Birkenstein's They Say/I Say as a modern-day equivalent. Pace demonstrates the
universality of a style-centric model of composition by borrowing techniques
from this historical text as well as Graff and Birkenstein's imitative exercises.

   Lastly, Mike Duncan's "The Research Paper As Stylistic Exercise" continues
the exploration of the value of past stylistic emphasis. Duncan describes three
versions of the genesis of the research paper assignment, and teases apart the
assumption that the research paper is both content-driven in form and purpose,
placing it firmly within style as a generic stylistic exercise that enables mastery
of other, yet-to-be-encountered genres. Furthermore, this piece provides a
transition to the discussion of academic style by Nora Bacon that opens Part
Two of this collection.

8
AN ETHICS OF ATTENTIONS:
THREE CONTINUUMS
OF CLASSICAL AND
CONTEMPORARY STYLISTIC
MANIPULATION FOR THE
21ST CENTURY COMPOSITION
CLASSROOM

William C. Kurlinkus
Ohio State University

I. INTRODUCTION

   Throughout the Western rhetorical tradition, rhetors and stylisticians have
consistently claimed that some styles are more ethical than others: "Let the virtue
of style be defined as `to be clear;'" "It is good prose when it allows the writer's
meaning to come through ... as a landscape is seen through a clear window;"
"We owe readers an ethical duty to write precise and nuanced prose;" "Write in
a way that draws attention to the sense and substance of writing, rather than to
the mood and temper of the author" (Aristotle, trans. 1991, 1404b; Sutherland,
1957, p. 77; Strunk and White, 1979, p. 70; Williams, 2007, p. 221). Thus,
popularly, the best style has been the one that styles the least; transparency is
next to godliness; see the meaning not the writer--clarity is ethical. But clarity,
as the existence of every style manual and every writer struggling to be clear
exemplify, is also constructed and controlling. "Simplicity," as novelist William
Gass reminds us, "is not a given. It is a human achievement, a human invention
..." (305). It is hard work to be clear, and clear authors ask/direct/coerce/
manipulate the reader into looking at the meaning behind their words often
hiding the act of writing, the medium of construction, and the author.

   Yet, if the ethics of alphabetic writing style are often founded on clarity and
transparency of language, the stylistic ethics of new media composition appear to
be based on an entirely opposing standard. In new media composition, theorists
since Marshall McLuhan have argued that "the medium is the message" and,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.02  9
Kurlinkus

thus, honest new media compositions make readers aware of materiality and
how it affects an audience's reception of a text. As Anne Wysocki explains:

         I think we should call "new media texts" those that have been
         made by composers who are aware of the range of materiali-
         ties of texts and who then highlight the materiality: such
         composers design texts that help readers/consumers/viewers
         stay alert to how any text--like its composers and readers--
         doesn't function independently of how it is made and in what
         contexts. Such composers design texts that make as overtly
         visible as possible the values they embody. (2004, p. 15)

   Consequently, the best style becomes the one that styles the most. But as
Kenneth Burke reminds us, "Even if any given terminology is a reflection of
reality, by its very nature as a terminology it must be a selection of reality;
and to this extent it must function also as a deflection of reality" (1968, p.
45). "Every way of seeing is a way of not seeing," so when new media authors
ask/direct/coerce/manipulate the reader into focusing on specific points of
constructedness, author, and medium, what is the audience distracted from
(Burke, 1984, p. 70)?

   Through comparing classical and new media stylistic theory, this chapter
explores what stylistic venues become available when one acknowledges that
every choice of style and every act of rhetoric is one of manipulation; when one
understands that concealing in rhetoric is neither immoral nor escapable; when
one gets beyond a singular "styles the least" or "styles the most" mindset and
comes to understand that the best style is the one that serves the best. Thus, this
chapter asks: If composition is style, and style is the manipulation of attention,
what are the ethics and options for controlling an audience's attention? Upon
what values is the current system of stylistic ethics constructed? When is it
appropriate and inappropriate to reveal one's stylistic operations to an audience?
And to what effect?

   Though, as the rest of this collection illustrates, definitions of prose style
are wonderfully multifarious, here I discuss style as the aesthetic control of
an audience's attention along three different "ethical" continuums--point of
attention (where do the author's stylistic devices direct the audience's attention?);
apparent mediation (does the rhetor's style appear deceptive or just?); and felt
agency (does the audience feel silenced or encouraged to analyze and critique
the text's construction, reasoning, etc.?).

   In order to elucidate composition's current anomalous notion of stylistic
ethics I explore these continuums using a trio of classical and new media

10
                                                                                    An Ethics of Attentions

pairings--progressing from traditionally1 unethical to ethical styles. I begin
with the Greek rhetorician Longinus's "unethical" notion of the sublime, a
stylistic concept that attempts to move listeners to action through an aesthetic
arrest that "enslaves the hearer," conceals stylistic device and orator, and makes
the topic of oration appear to be present and in need of an immediate response
(1972, p. 161). I compare this "unethical" sublime to new media theories
of immediacy and erasure, which discuss how many technologies (virtual
reality simulators, for instance) are designed to, or simply have the effect of,
disappearing when the rhetor and audience use them, making the experience
all the more real. Next, I move to Renaissance rhetorician Baldesar Castiglione's
slightly more "ethical" concept of sprezzatura or "the art of artlessness."
Sprezzatura focuses on disguising the preparation of art so that the orator can
appear all the more natural, kairotic, nonchalant, and amazing in delivery: "He
who does well so easily, knows much more than he does" (Castiglione, 2000,
p. 38). As sprezzatura's new media counterpart I discuss the web, magazine,
and advertising design trend of mimicking analog technological markers by
using digital technology, a simulacral style I term "leaked constructedness."
Finally, I move to an "ethical" conception of style in St. Augustine of Hippo's
concepts of confession and Christian oratory, which I argue seek to put the
power of authorial and biblical interpretation into the hands of the audience
rather than the orator. Similarly, exemplified in the reference to Anne Wysocki
above, I compare such confession to several notions of new media construction
(Wysocki's new media, Bolter and Grusin's hypermediacy, etc.) that seek to
empower the audience by giving them the ability to see, interpret, and construct
multiple personal readings of a text.

   I pair these classical and new media notions of style to highlight that ethical
evaluations of style do not disappear as writers move from paper to screen and
to ward off the notion that either a styles-the-least or a styles-the-most approach
is always the best option in textual or new media construction.2 I hope such
a pairing elucidates the contradictory nature of a fixed system of stylistic
ethics, where "ethical" can mean both the revealing and concealing of textual
construction, author, and medium. If notions of ethics change with audiences
and mediums, style must also constantly adapt. Thus, multiple notions of style
must always be taught seriously, escaping what might be seen as the binary--
formal or creative3--stylistic system of many contemporary composition
classrooms. On a more comprehensive note, I also pair these stylistic options
in hopes of offering style as a bridge between classical and new media rhetoric,
two fields that (as I hope this chapter illustrates) have much to learn from one
another and that must necessarily come together to make a contemporary
composition classroom whole.

                                                                                                 11
Kurlinkus

Definitions

   Before examining these stylistic pairings and continuums, however, I
must establish a few definitions--attention, style, manipulation, and ethics.
In his Economics of Attention Richard Lanham argues, "Information is not in
short supply in the new information economy ... What we lack is the human
attention to make sense of it all ..." (2006, p. xi). In such an economy, then,
neither material possessions nor raw information are the capital; the human
attention that interprets, focuses on, and deconstructs that data is. Whoever can
get an audience to pay attention (and the right kind of attention) to his or her
idea, product, or celebrity rules such an economy. Lanham posits that style (and
this is the definition I build from here) is what directs such attention. Therefore,
the best definition of rhetoric might be the stylistically focused "economics of
attention." The crux of Lanham's argument is "oscillatio," a rhetorical figure
that illustrates how "we alternately participate in the world and step back and
reflect on how we attend to it" (2006, p. xiii). We switch between looking at
content and the stylistic devices that organize that content, but we have a hard
time looking at both sides of the oscillation simultaneously. Manipulation, then,
is the way in which writers attempt to focus their readers' attentions on either
the content of the argument or the style.4 Like all terministic screens, stylistic
manipulation is inescapable because readers will always focus on something
and good rhetors aid in that focusing. Something Lanham does not give much
attention to, however, is the system of ethics that often gets applied to his
concept of oscillatio.5

   In this chapter I use the framework of manipulation and ethics in hopes
of challenging the common misconception in rhetoric, composition, and
the general public that style is attached in fixed ways to morality. The three
continuums I examine are the unsteady formulas upon which these fixed notions
are calculated. For too long because style and rhetoric (and specific styles and
rhetorics in particular) have been misconstrued as unethical slights of hand in
popular thought, compositionists and stylisticians have responded by studying
and teaching style as neutral and ethically transparent. Such a fearful reaction
to accusations of rhetoric as trickery (and these have been present since Plato6
at least) has perpetuated the notion of "plain style" and severely limited stylistic
options, especially in student writing. In this chapter I offer three diverging but
equally "ethical" ways of performing style to disrupt the notion that clarity, or
any other style claiming universality, is always the best option. I thus define
ethics, like style, as an always local and contextualized process by which one
negotiates an "appropriate" relationship between rhetor and audience. I do not
endeavor to argue that style is never used unethically or that stylistic devices

12
                                                                                    An Ethics of Attentions

are neutral. In fact, style is never neutral. Because all style and language hides
and reveals, all style is politically charged, but that doesn't mean we shouldn't
use it. Style, like language, is unavoidable, and all its manifestations should be
embraced as rhetorical possibilities.

II. SUBLIMITY, IMMEDIACY, AND THE
CONTINUUM OF ATTENTION

Sublimity

   The Greek rhetorician Longinus (fl. ca. 50 C.E.) is the devil of stylistics.7
He illustrates what every lay audience finds wrong with rhetoric and what
every rhetorician finds wrong with the study of style. His willingness to throw
off any guises of dialogic persuasion, embracing, rather, an oratorical force that
"tears everything up like a whirlwind" and "get[s] the better of every hearer"
perpetuates an ideology that a brilliant rhetor should not allow his audience
any sort of agency, ability to resist, or even a chance to respond to an argument
(1972, p. 144). Such an "unethical" treatment of style is, in part, what has
lead to Longinus's relative excommunication from the rhetorical tradition
in favor of viewing him as a literary critic. Yet, Longinus discusses rhetoric
and designs his sublime to serve rhetorical purposes: "addressing a judge ...
tyrants, kings, governors ...", "hitting the jury in the mind"--"[sublimity]
enslaves the reader as well as persuading him" (1972, pp. 164, 166, 161).
And if one looks closely at Longinus's On Sublimity, one begins to discover
not unethical madness but, rather, a serious mode of rhetorical style designed
around engaging an audience.

   Early in On Sublimity, Longinus defines the sublime:

         A kind of eminence or excellence of discourse. It is the source
         of the distinction of the very greatest poets and prose writ-
         ers and the means by which they have given eternal life to
         their own fame. For grandeur produces ecstasy rather than
         persuasion in the hearer; and the combination of wonder and
         astonishment always proves superior to the merely persua-
         sive and pleasant. This is because persuasion is on the whole
         something we can control, whereas amazement and wonder
         exert invincible power and force and get the better of every
         hearer. (1972, p. 143)

                                                                                                 13
Kurlinkus

   Sublimity trumps persuasion because persuasion is controllable and permits
an audience response, whereas sublime rhetoric is uncritiqueable because it
overwhelms the listener. But what is most interesting about the machinations
of Longinus's style is where sublimity seeks to keep the audience's attention.
Although Longinus says the goal of the sublime is the goal of any great piece of
literature, "eternal life" for the author, the sublime act doesn't focus the reader
on the greatness of the author: "The speaker vanishes into the text" (Guerlac,
1985, p. 275). Rather, it is the greatness of the oratory that captures the
reader--the attention of the listener is so fully transfixed on the world created
by words that when the listener snaps out of this sublime ecstasy they are
"elevated and exalted... . Filled with joy and pride ... [and] come to believe we
have created what we have only heard" (Longinus, 1972, p. 148). Within the
Longinian system, the audience doesn't know from where ideas originate. As
Suzanne Guerlac explains, "The transport of the sublime ... includes a slippage
among positions of enunciation ... the destinateur gets `transported' into the
message and the destinataire achieves a fictive identification with the speaker"
(1985, p. 275). The aesthetic arrest created by the sublime is so great that the
actual moment of hearing and the author appear to have disappeared: "The
artifice of the trick is lost to sight in the surrounding brilliance of beauty and
grandeaur, and it scapes all suspicion" (Longinus, 1972, p. 164). Longinus seeks
to eliminate the constructedness of language by erasing the reader's memory,
"hitting the jury in the mind blow after blow" with majesty (1972, p. 166). The
sublime is a stylistic concussion. The listener remembers solely the ideas as if
they experienced the subject of the speech for themselves. Longinus creates this
immediacy and reader absorption through the numerous stylistic devices he lists
in On Sublimity--complexity of emotion, asyndeton, anaphora, hyperbation,
and hyperbole to name a few.

   Visualization (phantasia) is the first sublime device Longinus explores at
length. He describes how image production through "Enthusiasm and emotion
make the speaker see what he is saying and bring it visually before his audience...
. There is much it can do to bring urgency and passion to our words..." (1972,
pp. 159, 161).

   Mark Antony's "Friends, Romans, countrymen" speech in Shakespeare's
Julius Caesar is an example of such visual urgency. Antony is attempting to gain
control of the Roman crowd in order to help him avenge Caesar's death. The
first part of Antony's oration relies on rhetorical persuasion and logic, resulting
in analytical responses from the crowd: "Me thinks there is much reason in his
sayings... . Mark Ye his words" (3.2.108, emphasis mine). But once Antony
begins his sublime phantasia, reenacting the scene of Caesar's murder using
Caesar's corpse ("Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb'd"), there is a

14
                                                                                    An Ethics of Attentions

mass identification (3.2.176). The crowd becomes a mob, is elevated through
a Longinian communal sublime, and seeks a somewhat mindless revenge,8
marked by the murder of the wrong Cinna. Antony uses the Longinian sublime
to make Caesar's death and the danger of Caesar's murderers immediate to the
audience.

Immediacy

   In new media composition, such a proximity and a transparency of style
is apparent in Jay Bolter and Richard Grusin's discussion of immediacy: "The
ultimate mediating technology ... Is designed9 to efface itself, to disappear from
the user's consciousness" (2000, p. 3). Marshall McLuhan expands upon this
effect with his concept of technologies as "extensions of man," illustrating how
mechanisms (for better or worse) become our body parts through immediacy
(2003, p. 67). Video game designers, for instance, create controllers that fade
away, becoming actual extensions of players' hands as they are absorbed into the
game and the virtual environment becomes more immediate. Only when the
technology fails, we drop the controller or a button sticks, does the player again
become conscious of the mechanism.

   The connection between Bolter's immediacy and the Longinian sublime is,
perhaps, best seen in virtual reality environments: "In order to create a sense
of presence, virtual reality should come as close as possible to our daily visual
experience. Its graphic space should be continuous and full of objects and
should fill the viewer's field of vision without rupture" (Bolter & Grusin, 2000,
p. 22). The best virtual reality (like the best sublime oration) occupies all the
participant's senses so that the device is forgotten, and the virtual experience
approaches the real, as if the gamer's own senses, not the machine, are creating
the sensorial world. Like the Longinian sublime disguises its own artifice, most
websites are designed so that the surfer can easily navigate through beautiful
content, unaware of the code or the designer behind the art. Operating systems
are designed around metaphors of windows and desktops that make the content
easily navigable and more apparently "there," but that also disguise the code
that perpetuates them. Immediate technologies, just like sublime stylistics,
are designed to make stylistic mediation (alphabetic, oral, or technological)
disappear.

Continuum of Attention

   In Longinus's sublimity and digital immediacy, we discover our first
continuum upon which ethical evaluations of style and manipulation are

                                                                                                 15
Kurlinkus

judged--the object of attention. The Longinian sublime, and to a lesser extent
technological immediacy, are sometimes seen as unethical because the orator/
programmer seeks to focus the reader's attention on content and message rather
than how knowledge of media or rhetor affect and shape that content. Under
the aegis of narrative theory, Erik Ellis labels this rhetorical move a closeness of
"psychic distance" in his chapter in this collection. A familiar ethical critique of
these tactics might be: If something is being revealed, then something is being
concealed; if something is being concealed, then something unethical must be
going on. Critics may liken such a focus to the sleight of hand of a magician--
look at the shiny kerchief, not the rabbit coming out of the magician's sleeve. In
alphabetic writing Lanham calls this effect "an aesthetics of subtraction": "Print
wants us to concentrate on the content, to enhance and protect conceptual
thought. It does this by filtering out all the signals that might interfere with
such thinking ... By choosing a single font and a single size, it filters out visual
distraction as well. Typographical design aims not to be seen or more accurately,
since true invisibility is hard to read, to seem not to be seen ..." (Lanham, 2006,
p., 46).

   But is such an aesthetic unethical? We like to lose ourselves in books. We often
get annoyed when speakers are too self-critical in speeches. When typing in a
word processor we don't want the programmer constantly diverting us from our
writing.10 When we go to the movies we don't like to see boom mics hanging in
the shot, fake props and settings, or other such signifiers of constructedness that
call attention to artificiality. DVDs are designed with the ability to turn director's
commentary on and off. One of the biggest questions for a stylistician regarding
the continuum of attention, then, is when do audiences enjoy immersion in
artificial environments and when do they feel such an immediacy is unethical?
Alternatively, when do audiences enjoy viewing the constructedness of writing,
and when is such a focus distracting?

   The problem with point of attention, as Lanham, Burke, and McLuhan all
argue, is that it is difficult to pay attention to more than one thing at a time.
It's hard to become absorbed in a book's plot, proofread its grammar, analyze
its binding quality, and apply theoretical interpretations simultaneously. This
may be the origin of the literature student's common complaint of "you ruined
my favorite book!" Once an instructor teaches a student to read in an analytical
manner, the point of attention shifts from plot to construction and theory, and
the level of absorption changes. This is the "economics of attention." This is
why sleight of hand magicians can perform their tricks. We have examined the
Longinian sublime as focusing the audience's attention on content and as being
"unethical," but the "clear" and ethical style discussed in the opening of this
chapter does a shockingly similar thing.11 Each seeks immediacy of content,

16
                                                                                    An Ethics of Attentions

but in opposite ways. As Strunk and White direct, "Write in a way that draws
attention to the sense and substance of writing, rather than to the mood and
temper of the author" (1979, p. 70). If a style of transparent immediacy is
offered in so many style manuals, a sublimely immediate style could easily be
offered as an "ethical" option as well.

   The two other styles this chapter explores, which seem to get more and more
traditionally "ethical," similarly direct the audience's attention to two other
places. Sprezzatura places the audience's attention on the rhetor and the act of
writing, whereas confession places the audience's attention on the medium and
the audience's relationship to the text. Each is an act of concealing and an act
of manipulation yet, to their champions, each one appears more ethical than
the sublime, perhaps because what each conceals, especially in confession, is less
apparent than in the sublime. Though Longinus uses some ethically troubling
phrasing, "get[s] the better of every hearer," "enslaves the reader," "hitting the jury
in the mind," proponents of the more "ethical" styles should investigate whether
their style of choice does the same thing. If "Art [and rhetoric] is whatever the
artist wishes to call our attention to," every rhetor needs to ask what is and is not
being focused on in their composition (Lanham, 2006, p. 43).

   Thus, before writing, rhetors should consider what they want their audience
to pay attention to at each point of their text and choose a style accordingly. At
points where writers want their audience to participate emotionally, a sublime
and immediate style is the strongest; where writers want their audience to
examine the author and their ethos, a sprezzatura style can be invoked; where
writers want their audience to participate in logical and critical analysis of
production, a confessional style might be more appropriate.12

III. SPREZZATURA, LEAKED CONSTRUCTEDNESS,
AND THE CONTINUUM OF APPARENT MEDIATION

Sprezzatura

   Renaissance stylistician Baldesar Castiglione (1478-1529) wrote his Book of
the Courtier to educate courtiers on how to speak, perform, and impress in the
presence of royalty. Much of Renaissance rhetoric, especially that of Castiglione's
Italy, which underwent massive court restructuring with the invasion of Louis
XII in 1499, was built on a system of kairos. A true courtier needed to know
how to identify the opinions of the shifting center of power and to adapt not
only his speech but also his entire identity to the delight of that authority in

                                                                                                 17
Kurlinkus

order to gain its patronage. Founded upon this intense kairos is Castiglione's
primary stylistic point of counsel, sprezzatura:

         To use possibly a new word, to practice in everything a cer-
         tain spezzatura that shall conceal design and show that what
         is done and said is done without effort and almost without
         thought. From this I believe grace is in large measure derived,
         because everyone knows the difficulty of those things that
         are rare and well done, and therefore facility in them excites
         the highest admiration; while on the other hand, to strive
         ... is extremely ungraceful, and makes us esteem everything
         slightly, however great it be. (2000, pp. 35-36)

   Sprezzatura, often defined as "the art of artlessness," requires a rhetor to be
well-prepared to argue but also well-prepared to disguise the effort it took to gain
and organize that argument. It is key that one's identity not appear constructed
to please the court but instead give the impression of being naturally in alliance
with the seat of power. Like Longinus's sublime, Castiglione's sprezzatura
disguises style. But rather than obscuring artifice through a mesmerizing focus
on image and immediacy, sprezzatura controls perceived artifice by focusing on
the acting of the casually unprepared orator. In The Book of the Courtier such
performances usually begin with the courtier feigning ignorance on a topic then
slowly unfold into a display of wit and wordplay on a theme the orator has
secretly prepared in advance. Part of sprezzatura, therefore, involves steering
the course of conversation into an area in which one can thrive. Thus, unlike
sublimity, sprezzatura still retains some perceivable styling and the semblance of
a creationary act but only enough to illustrate that the act was easily constructed.
All hint of the artifice is filtered by the careful hand of the rhetor.

   For instance, an orator might plan a digression into his speech that at first
appears to be completely detached from the course of conversation but then
skillfully connects back to the topic, evoking new thoughts on the subject.
Such a digression highlights the orator's quick wit as nonchalant, natural, and
kairotic, hinting that "He who does well so easily, knows much more than he
does" (Castiglione, 2000, p. 38). Of course, Castiglione is only one champion13
of natural style and "flow," but, with sophistic echoes, he seems the most honest
in holding that the idea of naturalness (as well as the identity of the perfect
orator) is subjective and constructed; to survive an orator needs to be deceptive
in constructing the strongest "natural" ethos possible.

   Beyond casting Longinian shadows in the disguising of art, sprezzatura
has a similar effect on the mind of the listener, "[W]hoever hears and sees us

18
                                                                                    An Ethics of Attentions

may from our words and gestures imagine far more than what he sees and
hears, and so be moved to laughter" (Castiglione, 2000, p. 120). Where the
concussion of the sublime leaves the audience thinking it was they who came
up with the idea they experienced, the manipulation of sprezzatura urges the
audience to look carefully into everything they hear; deeper meaning, produced
communally by author and interpreter, is always just below wit and style.
Thus, casual construction and stylistic devices that encourage interpretation
like juxtaposition, subtle extended metaphors, and digressions perpetuate a
sprezzatura style.

   Castiglione also discusses the fate of rhetors who fail to conceal their art,
or worse, fail to conceal the concealing of art: "If it is discovered, it quite
destroys our credit and brings us into small esteem" (2000, p. 36). Further,
he reminds readers that such failure has consequences, both for creating more
wary audiences ("men who are ever fearful of being deceived by art") as well
as for compromising an author's ethos ("If it had been detected it would have
made men wary of being duped") (2000, p. 36). Audiences are suspicious of the
art of concealing because style might cloak bad ideas, intentions, and people.
And in the case of the court, a constructed style might reveal that the courtier
does not truly agree with the sovereign. At times, though, Castiglione seems
less concerned about breaking an audience's trust and more worried about
destroying the orator's beauty. The ultimate goal of sprezzatura is grace. An ice
skater who performs a nonchalant triple lutz is more graceful than one who
performs it while showing great effort.14 Or, as Castiglione explains, "Do you
not see how much more grace a lady who paints (if at all) so sparingly and so
little, that whoever sees her is in doubt whether she be painted or not; than
another lady so plastered that she seems to have put a mask upon her face"
(2000, p. 54).

Leaked Constructedness

   A nonchalance similar to that which Castiglione instructs appears in
numerous modern publications, advertisements, and websites in the form of
what I dub "leaked constructedness." To create leaked constructedness, graphic
designers and artists employ bibliographic signifiers that appear to be casual and
handmade but which are probably digitally created, such as seemingly hand-
scripted fonts, crayon and marker drawings, collage aesthetics, photocopier
mimicry, and smudged inks. Highly complex digital design programs are
carefully employed to replicate the smear of a fountain pen or a hapless collage in
order to cater to an audience that is nostalgic for signs of less mediated personal
connections in an impersonal digital world. Thus, leaked constructedness

                                                                                                 19
Kurlinkus

plays to its audience through sprezzaturic styling that has the look of art that
was created with ease or through accident. Such a Do-It-Yourself (rather than
digitally) aesthetic plays a key role in what is often dubbed "hipster culture"
with its postmodern code of radical nonchalance and can be viewed in such
magazines and websites as Adbusters, Found magazine, and the websites of
most "indie" music labels and "zines." Though it seems inaccurate to claim that
digitally created texts aren't DIY or handmade, analog art often holds a more
"authentic" appeal, possibly because it is less mediated and somehow represents
the artist more immediately.

   But sprezzaturic nostalgia has also been harnessed since computers went
personal as seen, again, in the metaphors that govern it--the desktop; the
dashboard; the trashcan; the folder and file; copying, cutting, and pasting; space
on a hard drive; etc. Just as the metaphor on the computer seeks to focus the
reader on content rather than construction, it seeks to revive the physicality of
those metaphors through familiar images like the trashcan and the folder. Such
a nostalgic immediacy15 keeps the user's attention away from the fact (and fear)
that he or she has no idea how the device is actually operating and focused on
the idea that it might be functioning as easily as the metaphor that represents it.
Thus, the connection to sprezzatura--the technology seems to be working at a
much simpler level than it really is.16

Continuum of Apparent Mediation

   Through Castiglione's sprezzatura and the concept of leaked constructedness
we begin to explore another continuum upon which ideas of stylistic ethics are
formed: apparent mediation and manipulation. Since the time of Sir Francis
Bacon, Petrus Ramus, and empiricism, scientists have sought to purge rhetoric
and style from language because they felt it obscured truth; it deceived; it
mediated too much. Thus, plain style was born because people don't like being,
or more precisely feeling, deceived. But in examining the U.S. population's
hatred of "The Media" we can complicate this continuum as well.

   We often don't like too much mediation in our media because we want to
create our own views of the news from objective evidence. We want to get as
close to pure objective data as we can--we want language to be immediate.
Thus, newspapers usually seek to keep the opinion of the writer, and many
times any reference to the author, out of journalism.17 As veteran journalist and
pop culture guru Chuck Klosterman explains, "Being a news reporter forces
you to adopt a peculiar personality: You spend every moment of your life trying
to eradicate emotion. Reporters overcompensate for every nonobjective feeling
they've ever experienced" (2003, p. 205). Reporters and editors purge opinion

20
                                                                                    An Ethics of Attentions

in order to avoid libel and media bias, but, as Klosterman further discusses, such
a quest for objectivity, "really just makes them [news stories] longer and less
clear. The motivation for doing this is to foster objectivity, but it actually does
the complete opposite. It makes finding an objective nearly impossible, because
you're always getting facts plus requisite equalizing fiction" (2003, p. 209).
Rather than producing objective facts for the reader to interpret, equalizing
fiction (like transparent language) functions as sprezzatura, creating the
appearance of easy objectivity and disguising another layer of mediation. Such
an artificial objectivity smacks of deception and the spin that Americans hate
and has a somewhat contradictory effect: "Skeptical news consumers often find
themselves suspecting that deeper truth can be found on the newspaper opinion
pages, or through talk radio.... The assumption is that--since these pundits
openly admit their biases--you can trust their insights more" (Klosterman,
2003, p. 209). Thus, an audience trusts confession as a rhetorical style because
it makes its deception and spin readily available where sprezzatura, although
based on similar selectivity and styling, hides its bias.

   But at some point as we begin to trust such confession and the focus of
attention switches from spin back to content, do we forget the spin? When bias
is confessed, sometimes an audience no longer feels the need to criticize that
bias, and when people aren't critical of bias, it fades to the background. This is
true, for instance, of both conservative and liberal news programs--at some
point, to liberals The Daily Show seems less and less biased because it admits
its bias; to conservatives, the O'Reilly Factor has a similar effect.18 Sometimes it
seems that an audience is more aware of bias and willing to pick it apart when
it isn't confessed. Thus, the second continuum of stylistical ethics is related to
the first and is labeled apparent mediation because audiences react to mediation
differently when it is or is not made evident.

   Klosterman's discussion of removing the author from the news and the
idea of trusting confessors makes ready another important reality of stylistic
ethics. In the first continuum I discussed how sublimity is viewed as unethical
because it focuses the reader only on content; yet, shouldn't a style that focuses
a reader on the author be somehow more ethical? Of course, sprezzatura (and
confession, as we will see below) demonstrates that what an author reveals about
him or herself is not always the full truth and opens debates about whether the
self is socially constructed or not. But shouldn't we want more of the author
so that we can decide for ourselves whether we trust their bias or not? Such a
complication opens up numerous stylistic moves that are often excluded from
"serious writing" because they reveal too much of the author and obviate such
advice as "don't use `I' in a formal paper." The balance between revealing and
concealing mediation is a tricky and often contradictory proposition.

                                                                                                 21
Kurlinkus

   Writers, therefore, should consider when it is appropriate to reveal their
subjectivity and mediating power and when they should be elided in a
sprezzatura-like style. When will readers respond well to confession of bias and
when does such a style become a distracting repetition of "seems to me," "I
think," and "might"?

IV. CONFESSION, HYPERMEDIATION, AND
THE CONTINUUM OF FELT AGENCY

Confession

   Progressing to a more typically "ethical" stylistic presence, Saint Augustine of
Hippo's (345-430 C.E.) De Doctrina Christiana and Confessions offer models of
style (Christian oratory and confession) that do something few teachers of style
had done before him; they give power to the audience through instruction on
analysis as well as open the orator to critique and discussions on the subjective
nature of confession.

   Before his conversion to Christianity, Augustine was trained in, instructed
on, and won declamation competitions through classical "pagan" oratory
(Confessions). After he converted, he sought to take what he saw as a powerful
rhetorical model (classical Greek and Roman oratory) and apply it to the
radically differently styled Christian rhetorical tradition in order to convert
pagans who often disdained the comparatively muted Christian style.

   Although Augustine seems to take up Cicero's divisions on the purposes of
rhetoric (to teach, delight, and persuade) in his three divisions of style (subdued,
moderate, and grand), Augustine's discussion of ethos in Book Four of De
Doctrina Christiana is somewhat more complex and radical than his classical
predecessors. For Augustine the ethos of God, not necessarily the Christian
orator himself, is what certifies the reliability and efficacy of the message:

   Now Christ is truth and still, truth can be preached, even though not with
truth... . Thus, indeed, Jesus Christ is preached by those who seek their own
ends, not those of Jesus Christ... . And so they do good to many by preaching.
(2008, 4.59-60).

   Though Christian orators should strive to do justice to the word of God,
corrupt people can still preach effectively because the power of Christian
rhetoric is housed in God and the listener, not necessarily in the orator.

   Indeed the idea of audience in Augustine's works (and in the Hebraic
rhetorical tradition more generally) differs from classical models because of

22
                                                                                    An Ethics of Attentions

the relationship between faith and persuasion. Faith cannot be induced in
an audience through persuasion; the Christian rhetor must give his audience
information and let God (and the mind of the would-be convert) do the rest,
otherwise it wouldn't be faith. As Christine Mason Sutherland explains, "For
Hebrew rhetoric, persuasion is vested in the audience, not the speaker... . The
object is to enlighten the audience, not to persuade, to empower by knowledge
the individuals" (2004, p. 4, 10). Thus, Books Two and Three of De Doctrina
Christiana contain instructions on "analyzing and resolving the ambiguities of
the scriptures" with rules that may be distilled down to four basic concepts that
leave room for multiple correct interpretations of the text:

         1. The Bible cannot contradict itself;
         2. The Bible always promotes love of God and neighbor;
         3. Consider the sentence you are interpreting within the context of

              the sentences around it;
         4. In order to interpret correctly, similar to what Cicero outlines in

              De Oratore, you need a broad background of knowledge (about
              snakes, metals, animals, astronomy, history, law, etc.) (Augustine,
              2008, 3.2).
   In his Confessions Augustine further elaborates on this concept of
interpretation and readerly agency in Book Ten when he discusses his
relationship with his audience and their belief: "Although I cannot prove that
my confessions are true, at least I shall be believed by those whose ears are
opened to me by charity... . Charity which makes them good tells them that I
do not lie about myself when I confess what I am, and it is this charity in them
which believes me" (2010, 10.3.4). Augustine cannot persuade his audience to
believe his story but can only give them information to interpret in hopes that
they take something from it. Thus, Augustine's favoring of the subdued style
and its purpose of teaching over the other two styles (though he ultimately
concludes, as does this chapter, that one should mix and match styles): "This,
of course, is elegance in teaching, whereby the result is attained in speaking, not
that what was distasteful becomes pleasing, nor that what one was unwilling to
do is done, but that what was obscure becomes clear" (2008, 4.26).
   Augustine continues to explain that the content the confessor and Christian
orator provide are flawed (similar to the content of the sprezzaturic orator)
because of the impossibility of inclusivity in language: "For I pass over many
things, hastening on to those things which more strongly impel me to confess to
thee--and many things I have simply forgotten" (Augustine, 2010, 3.12). Like
any autobiographer knows, recalling every detail of the past is impossible, and
even if it were not, such a retelling would make for a tedious and unpurposeful
text. Thus, every act of confession is necessarily selective and manipulative of an

                                                                                                 23
Kurlinkus

audience's attention, despite whether confessional rhetoric makes an audience feel
deceived or not. Augustine further elaborates on the subjectivity of memory in
Book Ten of Confessions saying that "There, in the memory, is likewise stored what
we cogitate, either enlarging or reducing our perceptions, or by altering one way
or another those things which the senses made contact with ..." (2010, 10.8).

Hypermediation19

   New media theorists Jay Bolter and Richard Grusin describe their concept
of hypermediation as media that "ask us to take pleasure in the act of mediation"
and foster a "fascination with media" (2000, p. 14). Or, as Wysocki states with a
slightly more ethical connotation, "What is important is that whoever produces
the text and whoever consumes it understand--because the text asks them to,
in one way or another--that the various materialities of a text contribute to
how it ... is read and understood" (Wysocki, 2004, p. 15). Thus true new media
confess their materiality by calling the reader's attention to themselves.

   Such a style of media confession is fairly young in the rhetorical tradition
and truly comes into power, as Bolter and Grusin, and Lanham discuss, with
late-modernist art: "It was not until modernism that the cultural dominance of
the paradigm of transparency was challenged," (Bolter & Grusin, 2000, p. 38).
For instance, in composer John Cage's "4'33," which consists of four minutes
and thirty-three seconds of silence, Cage seeks to remind the listener that music
is just sound, labeled differently: "I'm talking about sound that doesn't mean
anything, that is not inner, just outer ... I don't want sound to pretend it is a
bucket or that it's president ... I just want it to be a sound." His work makes
music confess itself. Marcel Duchamp's "readymades," objects that become art
simply by the fact that they are displayed as art, have a similar effect. Such pieces
place the burden of the art not on the composer but on the audience, asking
whether art can simply be enjoyed as style.

   Moving to new media, Susan Delagrange's hypertext, "Wunderkammer,
Cornell, and the Visual Cannon of Arrangement,20" exemplifies hypermediation
through the interplay of its construction and content by creating a digital
wunderkammer on wunderkammer. Through a rich collage-like interaction
of text and image that calls attention to its own construction, the reader of
Delagrange's "associative knowledge-building" space is encouraged to explore
and wander through a history of curiosity cabinets, new media composition, and
visual arrangement--propelled on by a design aesthetic that promotes "`critical
wonder': a process through which digital media designers can thoughtfully
and imaginatively arrange evidence and articulate links in a critical practice
of embodied discovery" (2010). Analogy, comparison, and juxtaposition are

24
                                                                                    An Ethics of Attentions

the stylistic tropes that perpetuate such exploration. Like Augustine's Christian
oratory, such tropes are created collaboratively between the author's arrangement
and the reader's interpretation. Where digital metaphors designed with a sublime
and sprezzatura stylistic aesthetic seek to focus the reader on content rather than
construction, reviving a nostalgic physicality, those designed with a confessional
aesthetic (such as Delagrange's wunderkammer metaphor) seek to aid readers in
deconstructing them through a freedom of interpretation and analysis.

Continuum of Felt Agency

   Augustine's Christian and confessional oratory, Delagrange's
"Wunderkammer" and similarly, Geoffrey Sirc's "box logic," all seek to empower
the reader by, as Sirc explains, imagining "text as box=author as collector," and,
I would add, reader as collaborator (2004, p. 117). Rosanne Carlo's discussion
of the generative ethos and "enfolding" rhetoric of Jim Corder in this collection
is another example of such an argument towards the power of a confessional
style. In all these models readers seem more empowered to explore and create
and less likely to be manipulated, hypnotized, coerced, and abused. True
literacy becomes, as Wysocki and Johndan Johnson-Eilola explain, "the ability
to make the instantaneous connections between informational objects that
allow us to see them all at once" (1999, p. 363). This notion introduces our
third continuum of stylistic ethics--felt or apparent agency.

   On this continuum, sublime rhetoric and immediacy become unethical
because readers "Lose themselves in reading (and so to come back with different
selves that better fit a dominant culture)" (Wysocki & Johnson-Eilola, 1999,
p. 366). Such a styling gives us no agency to resist, and we are brainwashed.
Yet, such a totalizing view seems to give too much power to the writer and
conversely, a viewing of confessional rhetoric as totally empowering might give
too much power to the reader. When we delve into a text, we "suspend our
belief "; we enter into a contract with the rhetor; and, conversely, we have the
choice to refuse: we don't need to fall in; we don't have to enjoy and agree; if we
have any sort of analytical training (formal or informal), we can resist.

   In On The Sublime Longinus analyzes examples of sublimity (Homer,
Euripides, etc.), to illustrate how the style functions. Thus, Longinus is able to
be critical of the sublime. He can be "sublime on the sublime" (Lamb, 1993,
p. 553). As Jonathan Lamb explains, "Being sublime upon the sublime is,
according to [John] Dennis, the reader's way of seizing the initiative, just as
Longinus himself seizes it from Homer ... converting the servitude of reading
into the mastery of writing" (1993, p. 553). The sublime may function as an
emollient during the rhetorical act (and even this may be a totalizing fiction),

                                                                                                 25
Kurlinkus

but its existence is largely kairotic; its true power is fleeting. Once the orator
stops, the reader begins interpreting (I liked that movie; I hated that movie;
etc.) and has agency.

   We also must remember that there will always be situations where the
rhetorical audience begins with more power than the rhetor, for example, when
the writer is part of a minority and the reader is part of a majority. This is what
Michel Foucault warns against in his discussions of the transformative nature of
confession in his History of Sexuality: Volume 1: An Introduction:

          One does not confess without the presence (or virtual presence) of
          a partner who is not simply the interlocutor but the authority who
          requires the confession, prescribes and appreciates it, and intervenes
          in order to judge, punish, forgive, console, and reconcile ... a ritual
          in which the expression alone ... produces intrinsic modifications
          in the person who articulates it. (Foucault, 1990, p. 61-62)

   As Carlo, in this volume, reminds in her analysis of Corder, "Enfolding is
about vulnerability of self," "a vulnerability which is not appropriate to expose in
all rhetorical situations." Is it necessary to give even more power to an audience
and open oneself up to a critical reading by the majority? Must the writer always
play according to the rules set by the audience?21 Offering any one fixed set of
stylistic rules limits authorial moves of resistance as well as those of power. Such
thought complicates Joseph Williams's22 advice that, "We write ethically when
as a matter of principle, we would trade places with our intended readers and
experience the consequences they do after they read our writing" (2007, p. 215).

   In addition, just because a writer uses a confessional style doesn't mean that
the audience is empowered through, or will want to accept, the power of analysis.
Being constantly analytical and explorative is exhausting. Though it may or may
not be the best thing for one to do, readers can choose to ignore, choose to
participate, choose to lie back, choose to be active, choose to be lazy--it is true
that the rhetor can create an openness to participate or can try to encourage the
audience to plunge into the sublime or can seek praise through nonchalance,
but the audience doesn't have to respond. As Williams reminds us, "We ought
not assume that they [our audience] owe us an indefinite amount of their time
to unpack it" (2007, p. 221). Andrew Feenberg espouses a similar view in his
Critical Theory of Technology surrounding how the democratization of labor
"presupposes the desire for increased responsibility and power," and requires "a
culture of responsibility," that we can see developing in techno-rhetorical culture
through the call for multiliteracies23 (1991, p. 17). Such a breakdown of power
and a reminder that, as Foucault states, "in order to be a movement [of power]

26
                                                                                    An Ethics of Attentions

from above to below there has to be a capillarity from below to above at the
same time" make my definition of style transform from "the manipulation of
attention" into the attempted manipulation of attention (1980, p. 201).

   Confessional rhetorics, because they are rhetoric and contain a guiding author
or editor, no matter how hard they try, can never entirely cede power to the
reader. Hypertext fiction, similar to Delagrange's wunderkammer, are groupings
of links and nodes through which authors allow readers to explore and often
"choose their own adventure," roving through seemingly random collections of
media, creating their own interpretations as they proceed. Such freedom seems
to turn readers into authors, but most times the numerous circuits readers roam
through are planned in advance. Readers can't navigate outside of the hypertext.
New media theorist Lev Manovich calls the inability for an author to ever fully
give up control of their text, "the myth of interactivity"; he argues, "interactive
media ask us to identify with someone else's mental structure ... to click on a
highlighted sentence to go to another sentence ... we are asked to follow pre-
formed, objectively existing associations" (2001, p. 61). Again, similar to the
transport of the Longinian sublime, "we are asked to mistake the structure of
somebody else's mind for our own" (Manovich, 2001, p. 61).

   This final breakdown of the traditional continuums of stylistic ethics
confirms the argument that there is no fixed relationship between style and
morality, no most ethical style, thus, welcoming a plurality of styles. As Wysocki
states, "I do not want the instructions on my kitchen fire extinguisher to ask me
to stop to think about how the instructions compose me as a rational, modern,
gendered, raced, classed, fire-fearing, early twenty-first century individual ... I
hope that the fire extinguisher is transparently useful without them ..." (2004,
p. 22). Writers must ask, then, when space for interpretation and attention
needs to be purposefully constructed and when it is to be brought by the
audience. When should texts be immediate and when should they confess and
complicate themselves? Which audiences will automatically be critical of which
texts? Which audiences need to be urged to pay attention to which points? And
when does a critical eye destroy an immersive experience? Certain conditions
call for certain styles, and we will only discover those most effective through
experimentation with as many styles as possible.

V. BRINGING PLURALISTIC STYLE AND MANIPULATION
TO THE COMPOSITION CLASSROOM

   This chapter has asked you to consider what commonly eschewed avenues
of style become available when one acknowledges that each choice of style and

                                                                                                 27
Kurlinkus

each act of rhetoric is one of manipulation and thus equally valid for ethical use.
In conclusion, then, I offer three pluralistic and manipulative stylistic classroom
activities that attempt to reintroduce composition students to a more complex
notion of style, purpose, and exigence. In doing so I also, admittedly, argue for
my own personal composition classroom exigencies: to teach students to be
critical of their style and communication methods, to purposefully adapt to and
control numerous audiences (whether that means to intrigue, disgust, incense,
or hypnotize), and to enjoy experimentation in language.

   Basic questions in a classroom of pluralistic styles:
         · How do you want the audience to participate in the text?
         · How does your audience want to participate in the text?
         · What stylistic choices will mediate between these two desires?

1. The Found Object: Absorbed in Materiality

   Style: Sublimity, Immediacy, and the Continuum of Attention
   Goals: Learn to capture and focus an audience's attention, create identification
between author and reader, and present issues as in need of immediate action.
   Activity: Many writing assignments ask students to make the assumption that
the audience will have some knowledge of the writer and his or her exigence:
a memo written for a boss, a speech delivered to the city council, an opinion
column composed for the local newspaper. The found object assignment,
however, asks students to design a message that must engage an unsuspecting
audience with no assumed familiarity of the students or their exigences.
   For instance, students might create a "shopdropped" item, a consumer good
that is redesigned to subvert its original materiality.24 A shopdropper might buy
a sugary children's cereal, take it home, and use a computer program (or simply
markers and paste) to redesign the packaging to highlight the cereal's unhealthy
content by the addition of images of rotting teeth and obese children. The
shopdropper then places the box back on the shelf for the unsuspecting audience
to encounter. Through visual interest and interactivity the object is designed to
engross the audience in a type of participation similar to that of a confessional
object, but rather than directing the audience's critical eye at the construction
of the item or the rhetor, it directs attention to the negative elements of the
original product.
   Thus, the goal of the found object assignment is to create a materially and
stylistically engaging object (a dvd, sign, pop-up-book, comic, sticker, game)
which will be found by a rhetorical audience, somehow gain their attention,
and immediately absorb them in an understandable argument through
interactivity.

28
                                                                                    An Ethics of Attentions

   Beyond wise object design, I ask students to come up with a hypothetical
plan of distribution that explains where their object will be placed, how they
will get the object there, what legal considerations might affect the placement
of their object, and how the location of the object relates to the immediacy
of the argument (arguments about nutrition are placed in the grocery store,
arguments about fashion are attached to clothing racks, etc.).

   Finally, I ask my students to explain the rhetorical choices they made in their
object and placement designs: how ethos, pathos, and logos work in this object,
how the context in which they place their object will affect their audience's
reception, how they designed their object to avoid misreadings, how they think
their audience will respond and why.

   The purpose of this activity is to prompt students to think critically about
audience interaction and immersion in composition. It also asks them to
consider how medium affects such immersion. Students must consider the
benefits of one medium over another in terms of the exigence of the author, the
point of attention, and the continuums of felt deception and agency. Finally, this
assignment asks students to consider the ethical implications of surprising an
unsuspecting audience, using public/private space, and redesigning/subverting
someone else's composition.

   Further Question to Consider: When do audiences enjoy immersion in an
artificial environment and when do they feel such immediacy is unethical? How
does a sublime style occur outside of "creative" venues? How can a sublime
author overcome a naturally critical audience?

2. Manipulate Your Teacher through Constructing Yourself

   Style: Sprezzatura, Leaked Constructedness, and Apparent Mediation
   Goals: Learn to control presentation of self, the subtle use of style, how to
adapt to the opinions of an audience, and how materiality affects image of the
author.
   Activity: Many times in the composition classroom (including in my first
activity) students are asked to suspend their belief and imagine that they are
writing to a "real" rhetorical audience other than their teacher. This activity asks
for just the opposite. In this activity I want my students to manipulate me and
to do it without my knowledge.
   In order to encourage a pluralistic notion of style, students must experiment
with simultaneous rhetorical purposes and numerous selves surrounding those
purposes. One of the biggest questions I want my students to ask in a style-as-
manipulation environment is, "How do I want my audience to react to me?" An
easy response like, "I want my audience to be convinced," is not enough. Thus,

                                                                                                 29
Kurlinkus

in this activity, in addition to their original argument/purpose, I ask my students
to choose from a list of (or come up with their own) odd sprezzaturic goals such
as: make me think you're cool; make me disgusted by your composition process;
make me pity you; make me want to be a member of your family; make me
think you're pompous but lovable.

   The more weirdly complex the achievement of the secondary ethos goal,
the more fun my students have and the higher the grade they will receive. But,
the subtle manipulation of attention towards the author is key here; if I realize
where the student is trying to lead me, the effect won't work as well. Thus, a
student attempting the "disgusted by your composition process" prompt (and
this is an extreme example), wouldn't overtly describe the composition process
but might spread just enough peanut butter on the edges of his or her pages
for me to notice and be disgusted on the third page turn. A student attempting
the "member of your family" prompt might include several subtle and specific
familial metaphors or anecdotes, creating familial subtext.

   I ask my students to write their sprezzaturic goal at the bottom of the
last page so I can't read it until I've finished the paper. If they've succeeded at
manipulating my view of them, they generally will get a few extra points though
I don't punish them if they fail.

   The purpose of this activity is the ambition that encircles sprezzatura, the
manipulation of the audience through the presentation of self. It also imparts
the idea that every stylistic choice (whether linguistic or material) affects an
audience's reception of message and perception of author. Ultimately, this
activity attempts to push students beyond the idea that the best style hides the
author.

   Further Questions to Consider: How does a writer (especially a student writer)
encourage an audience to analyze and take seriously the subtle use of language?
When does authorial adaptation begin to alter an author's original goals?
When is it appropriate to reveal subjectivity and authorial presence (through
sprezzatura or confession), and when is such a revealing distracting?

3. Making an Essay Confess Itself

   Style: Confession, Hypermediation, and the Continuum of Felt Agency
   Goals: Learn to encourage active participation and analysis by an audience,
highlight the constructedness of a text, enlighten an audience rather than
persuade, help an audience to "take pleasure in the act of mediation" (Bolter &
Grusin, 2000, p. 14).
   Activity: By the end of a composition course most students have become
somewhat experienced in directing audience attention to the flaws of an

30
                                                                                    An Ethics of Attentions

opposing side's argument. Confessional rhetoric, however, asks writers to
do something much more frightening: direct the audience's attention at the
constructedness, mediation, and limitations of the writer's own argument and
guide the reader in a participatory experience that allows them to understand
and rewrite the rules and goals of that experience.

   This final activity, then, asks students to take an essay they've already composed
and somehow make it confess its own constructedness. To prompt my students'
imaginations, we think of messages that are designed to do this in the real
world: a director's commentary on a film, a musician's blog kept while recording
an album, Joseph Williams's infamous meta-stylistic "The Phenomenology or
Error." Together, we examine how each of these confessionally-styled pieces
draws readers' attentions to some points of constructedness while eliding others.
How each confession paints a picture of the author, process, and materiality
that supports a certain view and argument.

   Students then begin to make their own previously written papers confess
their materialities through a variety of methods. Some choose to play on the
footnote by equipping their essays with "making of flaps" which can be lifted to
reveal authorial commentary on how their own piece subverts or conforms to
their argument. Others use a different font to indicate a running self-critiquing
commentary. And some students make their papers interactive through
elaborate fill-in-the-blank participation that asks the audience to consider how
the student constructs and directs them.

   Whatever the method, the key point is that students choose confessional
techniques that develop their original argument and make the reader aware
of how the student's writing process impacts them. Such confessional writing
teaches the student that self-awareness and analysis don't have to occur only in
the student's head, they can be invaluable on the page as well.

   Further Questions to Consider: How does an audience's awareness of
construction and mediation affect their reception of texts? Which audiences
will automatically be critical of which texts? What limitations do you want to
place on your audience's exploration and analysis?

NOTES

1. This paper assumes a current-traditional baseline of concise and transparent style
when referring to "traditional" notions of style in order to engage with popular notions
of style outside of the academy.

2. Though no theorist of new media I mention in this chapter makes such clear-cut
ethical claims.

                                                                                                 31
Kurlinkus

3. For further information on this false dichotomy see Winston Weathers's discussion
of "Grammar B" in his Grammars of Style: New Options in Composition (2010).

4. I hope, however, that this chapter and collection illustrate "style" and "content" are
indivisible.

5. To see how Lanham does address the ethics of style see chapter eight of his Revising
Prose (2007).

6. See Plato's Gorgias and Phaedrus.

7. For a more negative view on Longinus and sublimity see Paul de Man's "Hegel on
the Sublime" (1982).

8. Indeed, Julius Caesar and many other Shakespearean tragedies might be investi-
gated as models of Longinian ecstatic tragedy rather than Aristotelian cathartic ones.

9. One should note that the idea of agency in immediacy is infinitely complex. Are
technologies designed to erase themselves? Do they simply have that effect without pur-
poseful design? Or are users implicit in the act, causing technologies to erase themselves
by not paying attention? All three answers are most likely simultaneously true and help
bring insight to discussions of agency and style.

10. We all know how distracting it can be when automatic features like the red and
green spelling- and grammar-check lines or "Clippy," the talking paperclip, pop up
when we are trying to compose in Microsoft Word. For more on hatred for Clippy, see
Luke Swartz's electronically available bachelor's thesis, Why People Hate the Paperclip:
Labels, Appearance, Behavior, and Social Responses to User Interface Agents (1998).

11. In fact, if one looks closely at popular nineteenth century American rhetoric hand-
books (of authors like Day, Hill, and Genung) one sees sublime language (especially
references to force, energy, and transport) being applied to the proto current-traditional
pedagogy of perspicuity.

12. Though each of these points of attention, like each rhetorical appeal, is almost im-
possible to separate from one another and should be viewed more as a network of
effects.

13. Indeed such an artificial natural style is deeply connected to the history of kairos
in the rhetorical tradition and can be viewed in Gorgias's "The Defense of Palamedes;"
Aristotle's claim that "A writer must disguise his art and give the impression of speaking
naturally and not artificially," in On Rhetoric (1991, 3.2); and in Cicero's statement,
"The main object of the orator was that he should both appear himself, to those before
whom he was pleading, to be such a man as he would desire to seem ... and that the
hearts of his hearers should be touched in such a fashion as the orator would have them
touched" (De Oratore, 1.19).

32
                                                                                    An Ethics of Attentions

14. Similarly, we might recall how Samuel Taylor Coleridge's claim to have written
"Kubla Khan" while dreaming makes the mind of the poet seem all the greater.

15. Regarding the convergence of selectivity, manipulation, nostalgia, and digital meta-
phor, one might question: Where do these metaphors come from? On whose nostalgias
are they based? If every act of collective memory and nostalgia is also an act of selective
memory and amelioration of the past, whose oppressed and suppressed experiences are
being recalled or elided in these metaphors?

16. For further reading on the sprezzaturic design of digital interfaces see Cynthia and
Richard Selfe's Politics of the Interface: Power and Its Exercise in Electronic Contact
Zones, 2010).

17. Though, a history of yellow and stunt journalism might disrupt this narrative.

18. Such confessions, however, do not seem to mollify opposing critics, as liberals will
still critique O'Reilly and conservatives will still critique Stewart. In addition, Stewart
has an even stronger confessional defense in his constant claims that The Daily Show
is "the fake news" despite the fact that perhaps a large number of viewers get their only
"news" from the show.

19. Though labeling new media conceptions of hypermediacy as "confessional" may be
somewhat troubling because few, if any, of the authors I discuss conceive of their ideolo-
gies along an ethical continuum, I think the benefits of drawing a comparison between
confessional rhetoric and hypermediation outweigh the risk of misinterpretation.

20. Accessed for free online at: http://www.technorhetoric.net/13.2/topoi/delagrange/
index.html.

21. See John Schilb's Rhetorical Refusals as well as Schroeder, Fox, and Bizzell's collec-
tion Alt Dis: Alternative Discourses in the Academy (2007) for examples of scholars
who agree that writers need the ability to resist the style of the majority.

22. Though Williams's other work on style is richly theoretical, his style manual, Style:
Ten Lessons in Clarity and Grace, like those of other stylistic mavericks (I'm thinking
of Lanham's "paramedic method," here) falls slightly short of the plurality he suggests
in his more academic pieces. Indeed, the "grace" of the subtitle refers more to conci-
sion than anything else. But maybe such condensing is simply necessary to create a
pragmatic manual. For a more complex analysis of the pros and cons of Wiliams's (and
Lanham's) stylistic oeuvre, see Lester Faigley's Fragments of Rationality: Postmodernity
and the Subject of Composition.

23. See Warschauer's and Banks's multiple accesses; Mossberger, Tolbert, and Stans-
bury's multiple digital divides; and Selber's muliliteracies.

24. For further information on shopdropping and other culture jamming examples see:
www.woostercollective.com.

                                                                                                 33
Kurlinkus

REFERENCES

Aristotle (1991). On rhetoric. (Kennedy, G. A., Trans.). Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.

Augustine. Confessions and Enchiridion. (Outler, A. C. Trans.). Retrieved from
   http://www.ccel.org/ccel/augustine/confessions.toc.html

Augustine (2008). Book IV: De doctrina christiana. In Enos, R. L. & Thompson,
   R. et al. (Eds.), The Rhetoric of St. Augustine of Hippo: De Doctrina Christiana
   and the Search for a Distinctly Christian Rhetoric (pp. 33-183). Waco: Baylor
   University Press.

Banks, A. J. (2006). Race, rhetoric, and technology: Searching for higher ground.
   Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Bolter, J. D. & Grusin, R. (2000). Remediation: Understanding new media.
   Cambridge: MIT Press

Burke, K. (1968). Language as symbolic action: Essays of life, literature, and
   method. Berkley: University of California Press.

Burke, K. (1984). Permanence and change (3rd ed.). Berkley: University of
   California Press.

Cage, J. (1992). Listen [DVD].
Carlo, R. (2013). Jim Corder's reflective ethos as alternative to traditional

   argument: Style's revivification of the writer-reader relationship. In M.
   Duncan & S. Vanguri (Eds.), The centrality of style. Fort Collins, CO/
   Anderson, SC: The WAC Clearinghouse/Parlor Press.
Castiglione, B. (2000). The book of the courtier (Opdycke, L. E., Trans.). Her-
   fordshire: Wordsworth.
Delagrange, S. H. (2009). Wunderkammer, Cornell, and the visual canon of
   arrangement. Kairos: A Journal of Rhetoric, Technology, and Pedagogy. 13(2).
   Retrieved from http://kairos.technorhetoric.net/13.2/topoi/delagrange/in-
   dex.html
De Man, P. (1982). Hegel on the sublime. In M. Krupnick (Ed.), Displacement:
   Derrida and after (pp. 139-153). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Erasmus, D. De copia.
Feenberg, A. (1991). Critical theory of technology. Oxford: Oxford University
   Press.
Foucault, M. (1980). The confessions of the flesh. In Colin Gordon (Ed.),
   Power/knowledge: Selected interviews & other writings 1972-1977. New York:
   Random House.
Foucault, M. (1990) The history of sexuality: Volume 1: An introduction. New
   York: Vintage Books.

34
                                                                                    An Ethics of Attentions

Gass, W. H. (1997). Finding a form: Essays by William H. Gass. Ithaca: Cornell
   University Press.

Guerlac, S. (1985). Longinus and the subject of the sublime. New Literary
   History 16(2), 275-289. JSTOR. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/sta-
   ble/468747

Klosterman, C. (2003). Sex, drugs, and cocoa puffs: A low culture manifesto. New
   York: Scribner.

Lamb, J. (1993). Longinus, the dialectic, and the practice of mastery. English
   Literary History 60(3), 545-567. JSTOR. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.
   org/stable/2873404

Lanham, R. (2006). The economics of attention: Style and substance in the age of
   information. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lanham, R. (2007). Revising prose (5th ed.). New York: Pearson Education.
Manovich, L. (2001). The language of new media. Cambridge: MITP.
McLuhan, M. (2003). Understanding media: The extensions of man. Critical Edi-

   tion. (W. Terrence Gordon, Ed.). Corte Madera: Gingko P, 2003.
Mossberger, K., Tolbert, C., & Stansbury, M. (2003). Virtual inequality beyond

   the digital divide. Georgetown: Georgetown University Press.
Russell, D. A. & Winterbottom, M. (Eds.) (1972). Classical literary criticism.

   Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schilb, J. (2007). Rhetorical refusals: Defying audience's expectations. Carbondale:

   Southern Illinois University Press.
Schroeder, C., Fox, H., & Bizzell, P. (Eds.). (2002). Alt dis: Alternative discourses

   and the academy. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.
Selber, S. (2004). Multiliteracies for a digital age. Carbondale: Southern Illinois

   University Press.
Selfe, C L., & Selfe, R. J., Jr. (1994). The politics of the interface: Power and its

   exercise in electronic contact zones. College Composition and Communication
   45(4), 480-504.
Shakespeare, W. (1997). The tragedy of Julius Caesar. The Riverside Shakespeare:
   The complete works (2nd ed.). New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Sirc, G. (2004). Box-Logic. Writing new media: Theory and applications
   for expanding the teaching of composition. Logan: Utah State University
   Press.
Strunk, W, & White, E. B. (1979). The elements of style (3rd ed.). New York:
   Macmillan Publishing Co.
Sutherland, C. M. (2004). Augustine, ethos, and the integrative nature of
   Christian rhetoric. Rhetor 1, 1-18.
Sutherland, J. (1957). On English prose. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

                                                                                                 35
Kurlinkus

Swartz, L. (1998). Why people hate the paperclip: Labels, appearance, behavior,
   and social responses to user interface agents. Stanford University. Retrieved
   from http://xenon.stanford.edu/~lswartz/paperclip/

Warshauer, M. (2003). Technology and social inclusion: Rethinking the digital
   divide. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Weathers, W. (2010). Grammars of style: New options in composition. In P.
   Butler (Ed.), Style in rhetoric and composition: A critical sourcebook (pp. 219-
   238). New York: Bedford/St. Martins.

Williams, J. (2007). Style: Lessons in clarity and grace (9th ed.). New York: Pear-
   son.

Williams, J. (1981). The phenomenology of error. College Composition and
   Communication 32(2), 152-68.

Wysocki, A. F. (2004). Opening new media to writing: Openings & justifica-
   tions. Writing new media: Theory and applications for expanding the teaching
   of composition (pp. 1-41). Logan: Utah State University Press.

Wysocki, A. F & Johnson-Eilola, J. (1999). Blinded by the Letter: Why are we
   using literacy as a metaphor for everything else? In G. E. Hawisher & C.
   Selfe (Eds.), Passions, pedagogies, and 21st Century technologies (pp. 349-368).
   Logan: Utah State University Press.

36
    STYLISTIC SANDCASTLES:

    RHETORICAL FIGURES AS

    COMPOSITION'S BUCKET AND

    SPADE

      William FitzGerald
      Rutgers

          For all a rhetorician's rules teach nothing but to name his tools.

                                                         -- Samuel Butler, Hudibras

   Aposiopesis? Metalepsis? Zeugma? What did my students think when first
introduced to these and other terms? I know because they told me. "How do
you expect us to remember them? They're all Greek!" I replied that I did not
expect they would remember them, not all of them, at least not for very long.
I confessed that I didn't remember all of them either. "But do we really use
them?" All the time--far more than you realize--was my early and repeated
assurance until it became clear that, just like the discovery delighting Moliere's
bourgeois gentilhomme--that he had been speaking prose his whole life--my
students acknowledged they have been performing rhetorical figures by the doz-
ens for much of their life. I emphasized that I was simply providing names, al-
beit unfamiliar names, for verbal effects abundant in everyday language as well
as in literary and academic prose. I hoped to convince them that there is much
to be gained from being on formal terms with antonomasia or synecdoche and
recognizing them as useful tools for their own acts of composing.

   For my students in "Go Figure," an elective course in style centered in
rhetorical figures, meeting litotes and polyptoton was akin to being transported by
time machine (or "magic treehouse") to scenes of classical rhetorical education.
Such scenes are strikingly different from the modern composition classroom,
where terms such as enallage or homeoteleuton are at best a footnote. What I
did was not so very strange, I think. Efforts in time travel are in keeping with
pedagogical initiatives such as Sharon Crowley and Debra Hawhee's Ancient
Rhetorics for Contemporary Students, a textbook inspired by the pioneering work
by Edward P. J. Corbett in Classical Rhetoric for the Modern Student. If any
difference is to be noted in my approach from these, it is in the realization that
the figures--the tropes and schemes of classical rhetoric--need not be reclaimed,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.03  37
FitzGerald

exactly. To the contrary, the figures are alive and well, as they have always been,
if also occluded by current models of writing instruction. More than a subject
of antiquarian interest, I argue, rhetorical figures remain a vital, but under-
valued, resource for composition pedagogy. Their utility is particularly evident
in a multimodal era, when textual, oral and visual performance have become
open to new understanding.

   This chapter expands on this reasoning to imagine a place for rhetorical
figures in contemporary composition. It does so, first, through a reading of
style in rhetorical tradition focused on the role of ornament (the broadest term
for figurative elements of language) and, second, through an account of a
recent course on figures for what light it sheds on possibilities for a figure-rich
pedagogy. In brief, I propose that approaches to composition through style will
be most fruitful if ornament is brought into conjunction with other stylistic
virtues of clarity, correctness and propriety.

THE RISE AND FALL OF THE FIGURES

   In her magisterial account of the figures in Rhetorical Figures in Science,
Jeanne Fahnestock observes that what would later come to be understood as
ornament in a merely decorative sense was first appreciated in more forceful
terms, when rhetoric was a phenomenon of speech more than of writing. As
Fahnestock explains, the earliest notions of ornamentum are not reducible to
present-day notions of embellishment. Rather, ornament was closer in meaning
to "armament," akin to the "gear" a foot soldier carries into combat (1999, p.
18). In military terms, a well-prepared rhetor is not only appropriately dressed
for the occasion but fully equipped for a mission. One meaning of ornament
that bridges decorative and functional notions is the insignia that mark one's
military rank and station. If the canon of invention can be likened to an arsenal
from which arguments are drawn and the canon of arrangement (in Greek,
taxis) likewise imagined as a tactical deployment of those arguments in the field,
the various figurative devices may be analogized to the thrusts and parries by
which one engages an enemy in close quarters.

   I appreciate these martial conceits for rhetoric in their emphasis on effective
use of force. This chapter, however, offers a more playful image for style
in its pairing of bucket and spade--tools for building stylistic sandcastles.
Although couched in symbols of child's play, my concerns are equally serious
as those animating Fahnestock's investigation of figurative devices in science.
Despite the gradual eclipsing of a once lively figurative tradition, the figures
offer a vibrant pedagogy of ornament. Powerful tools for constructing

38
                                                                                         Stylistic Sandcastles

arguments, the disappearance of figures from the composition classroom at
all levels of the curriculum comes at a significant loss to fluency, and with
that loss a corresponding loss of agency. Fortunately, their reappearance--
through a return to a pedagogy of ornament--is not something difficult to
achieve.

   I read this loss of a "feel" for figures in composition as symptomatic of
style's ongoing marginalization. It has much to do with anxiety about the status
of "literary" language in relation to scientific and technological discourse. It
likewise has to do with the perceived status of composition studies in relation
to other academic disciplines. For the figures can be seen as rhetoric at its
most trivial or cosmetic. Or old fashioned--so many Latin and Greek terms!
As Keith Rhodes observes in this volume, style-centered pedagogy risks being
labeled uncool or "stodgy" ("Styling"). Rhodes is correct that the contemporary
dismissal of style, conceived as a focus on writing at the sentence-level, has
typically been expressed as critiques on clarity or correctness--virtues turned to
vice through excess. Similar critiques can be leveled at belletristic notions of
grace or writing "with style." My approach to ornament moves in a different
direction entirely.

   For on close inspection, the figures represent opportunities to connect
students to a felt sense of writing (and speaking and designing) as rhetorical
performance. By way of hypophora, the figure of reasoning by question and
answer: Why bother teaching the figures when students cannot write clearly
and correctly? Because the figures are crucial to a fully developed rhetoric of
style. Without them, effective writing remains elusive. By some combination of
imitation, instruction, and instinct, successful communicators acquire a robust
repertoire of figures appropriate to the contexts in which they compose.

   I am by no means the first to call for a reinvigorated canon of style in the
teaching of composition. One need only turn to recent accounts of style's
manifold practices and shifting fortunes in the rich collection of essays in T.
R. Johnson and Tom Pace's Refiguring Prose Style (2005) or in Paul Butler's
masterful Out of Style: Reanimating Stylistic Study in Composition and Rhetoric
(2008) and T. R. Johnson's provocative A Rhetoric of Pleasure (2003) to confirm
that over the past decade scholars in composition have approached rhetoric's
central canon afresh. On a parallel track, Barry Brummett claims that style is
now "the basis for a rhetoric that undergirds today's global culture" (Brummett,
2008, p. xiii, emphasis in original). Style has become a contemporary lingua
franca--a semiotic code or performative grammar of display in various modes,
e.g., speech, dress, and habits of consumption. Brummett identifies in style a
figural logic of performance. Thus are emerging paradigms of style heralded,
in composition and in cultural studies, even as consensus has yet been reached

                                                                                                 39
FitzGerald

about specific pedagogies to enact a stylistic vision. Still, prophesies may be self-
fulfilling when, the zeitgeist read accurately, incipient stirrings leveraged into
concrete outcomes.

   This is the situation with respect to composition as a stylistic art. The present
moment is open to curricular revisions in ways that resonate with Brummett's
cultural insight that style has acquired renewed rhetorical agency. This moment
is not unlike previous moments, notably in the English Renaissance, when
style assumes a character marked by energy and experimentation. Indeed,
contemporary discussion of style's wax and wane seeks to make sense of the
sources from which, in the subtitle of Paul Butler's Out of Style, this "reanimating"
occur. Similarly, Johnson and Pace announce a "refiguring" of prose style. Both
texts find warrant in notions of restoration, a "once and future" paradigm in
which style again plays a vital role in rhetorical education.

   I concur with these sentiments, even as I admit that such calls may be
overly sanguine in their estimation of style's prospects for reanimation in the
near term. Yet on the whole, I believe such calls to be warranted. Marginalized
during a "process" era of composition studies, style may emerge "post-process"
as equal partner with canons of invention and arrangement and, significantly,
memory and delivery. In other words, renewed attention to matters of form
and performance signal that style has something to contribute to composition
beyond nostrums on clarity and correctness. My efforts in reanimating style or,
in the words of Keith Rhodes, in "making style practically cool and theoretically
hip" take this "refiguring" announced by Johnson and Pace literally, even though
none of the essays in Refiguring Prose Style address figurative dimensions of
language in a sustained way (this volume). Refiguring the figures addresses the
contrast between their prominent role in classical rhetoric and their conspicuous
absence today.

   The most obvious and crucial difference between classical and contemporary
contexts is performative mode--speech vs. writing. As Jay David Bolter and
David Grusin observe, later media "remediate" prior media by "representation
of one medium in another" (Bolter & Grusin, 2000, p. 45). Classical rhetoric
largely imagines performance as speech even as the technology of writing
transforms speech. Indeed, "style" (from the Latin stylus, a pointed tool for
inscription) complicates neat distinctions in a remediated landscape as the
English translation of Greek lexis and Latin elocutio--both terms for speech.
The term "figure of speech" links the verbal and the visual in a dynamic pairing
in which words perform acrobatic turns (tropes) and other visible patterns
(schemes). The account of the figures presented here bridges speech and text,
but also recognizes fluidity of mode.

40
                                                                                         Stylistic Sandcastles

STROLLING THROUGH THE GARDEN OF ELOQUENCE

   Amid calls for a stylistic renaissance, not all reanimated pedagogies are
commensurate. If past is prologue, various rebirths of style will differ in
their aesthetic, philosophical and political commitments, in their streams of
inspiration, and in their agendas. What is most valued in prose and its encoding
in specific curricula varies from context to context. Obvious though this may
be, it bears mentioning when imagining room for figures in an expanded style
curriculum.

   Consider the focus on clarity in Joseph Williams' Style: Lessons and Clarity
and Grace. This popular text is one response to a crisis in literacy exacerbated,
Williams notes, by an unproductive emphasis on grammatical correctness and
arbitrary conventions. Yet Williams' approach to style is not identical with that
of Richard Lanham, whose Revising Prose resembles Style in its advice against
nominalizations and for strong agent-action pairs in subject-verb relations.
Despite similarities, the differing motivations of Williams and Lanham are
evident. Style reflects Williams' background as a linguist--his PhD is from the
University of Wisconsin--and its substantial debt to cognitive psychology.
Indeed, Williams' stylistic precepts have an empirical basis in research on the
efficient communication and retention of information.

   By contrast, Lanham's Revising Prose (famous for its "paramedic method")
offers a decidedly political critique of language practices it would seek to
remedy. In this respect, Lanham works in a tradition epitomized by George
Orwell's celebrated essay, "Politics and the English Language." But Lanham's
concerns with style are broadly humanistic rather than narrowly political.
Lanham goes after bureaucratic prose not for its inefficiency only, but for its
vulgarity and dehumanizing character. He is far more explicit in articulating
ethical concerns in drawing connections between our prose and our character.
"The moral ingredient in writing, then," Lanham writes, "works first not on the
morality of the message but on the nature of the sender, on the complexity of
the self " (Lanham, 1974, p. 106). Joseph William is likewise concerned with
ethics. Recent editions of Style feature a final chapter on the "Ethics of Style."
Here, however, ethics refers to a writer's relations with an audience, rather
than to a diffuse, if no less important, linkage between the activity of writing
and character development. While these differences are not inconsequential,
Williams' and Lanham's remedial projects are kindred spirits in many respects.
For one, they represent style as a stage of composing that follows upon activities
of invention and arrangement. Both Style and Revising Prose approach style an
act of revision and of adapting to the needs of an audience.

                                                                                                 41
FitzGerald

   While yet more radical differences in understanding and teaching style
could be juxtaposed, my purpose is not to delineate motives and means in
contemporary approaches to style. Rather, it is to note that surface similarities
in style or in style pedagogy can conceal greater variability in the objectives
of style, i.e., to what ends style or the teaching of style is directed. Indeed,
variability across contexts and change over time are arguably style's most
distinctive attribute. Certain things are in style and go out of style, only to come
back in style again. We can speak of idiosyncratic styles as well as of style being
a reflection of particular historical periods, social movements and cultural
traditions. In lay terms, style is recognized as precisely those elements that vary
from performer to performer, age to age, or situation to situation.

   But what dimensions of style persist across multiple contexts and conditions?
Notwithstanding variations in style, conceptions of style, and approaches to
teaching style, a spine of tradition extends back more than two millennia. Largely
Aristotelian, this stylistic tradition is still relevant, even dominant, in the present
era. As noted at this essay's beginning, this tradition is centered in precepts of
clarity, correctness and appropriateness. Style's traditional virtues (each with an
attendant vice), continue to be represented as desiderata in countless textbooks.
Yet to these a fourth may be added in the virtue of ornament (or force)--the
domain of the figurative. Writing in Aristotelian tradition, Theophrastus (c.
370-c. 285 BCE) is credited with codifying these virtues in On Style, a lost
treatise known to Cicero and thus a vital link between Greek and Latin accounts
of style. In important respects, my approach is Theophrastean in seeking to
square style's triangle by returning ornament to the stable of virtues.

   From earliest days, ornament (in Latin, ornatus) has had a complicated
relationship with style's other virtues. As the force produced through figuration,
ornament links style with other dimensions of discourse, other canons of
rhetoric. Leaning left, toward invention, ornament discovers appropriate form
for arguments. Leaning right, toward delivery, ornament gives speech liveliness
of expression and emotive force. As Jeanne Fahnestock observes in Rhetorical
Figures in Science, the use of figures was especially associated in Ciceronian
tradition with the grand style, the highest of style's three levels; by contrast,
the plain style, the lowest level, was notable for a lack of verbal embellishment
(1999, p. 19). Such associations suggest that the figures function primarily as
vehicles for, or triggers of, emotion. However, Fahnestock points out, thinking
about figuration this way, though widespread, obscures a more complex
relationship between figures as tools for argument and figures as carriers of
emotional affect. By way of example Fahnestock considers aposiopesis, the figure
by which a speaker, overcome with emotion (e.g., anger or sadness), breaks off

42
                                                                                         Stylistic Sandcastles

speech in mid-sentence. In this instance, Fahnestock contends, dimension of
pathos and logos of this performative gesture cannot really be separated (1999,
p. 19).

   Thinking about figures as the embellished expression of thought otherwise
plainly expressed--what Fahnestock terms "value added theories" of figuration--
papers over a productive tension between two ways of understanding the
structural properties of figurative language: "artful" deviation from a norm such
that figures stand out from a neutral ground and the characteristic way to express
something (1999, p. 22). Surveying the range of theoretical perspectives on the
figures, Fahnestock observes that "expressions available for a particular function
[exist] on a continuum" rather than being distinct categories of "the literal and
the figurative" (1999, p. 22). At the far end of this continuum are "iconic"
expressions characterized by Fahnestock as "epitomes" (1999, p. 22). In other
words, figures are "formal embodiments of certain ideational and persuasive
functions" (1999, p. 22). As epitomes, figures are idealized forms representing
some "line of reasoning" or a "condensed or even diagram-like rendering of a
relationship among a set of terms" (1999, p. 24).

   This notion that figures are inventional topoi made visible and hence forceful
does much to re-establish their centrality and to explain their ubiquity in
discourse of all types. Indeed, Fahnestock's epitomizes her argument through
the figure of oxymoron in the title of her book, Rhetorical Figures in Science,
insofar as science is typically regarded as unadorned, even figure-free, discourse.
If rhetorical figures such as antithesis (paired contrasts in balanced phrases),
gradatio (stepwise amplification or progression) and polyptoton (repetition of
words with shared roots) function as arguments in scientific discourse, a fortiori
they do so in many other discursive domains.

   Fahnestock emphasizes the argumentative dimension of figures--style in
relation to invention. Chris Holcomb underscores their performative character
as style in relation to delivery. In "Anyone Can Be President," Holcomb argues
that figures "do more than simply organize or cue other performative elements.
They also constitute the performance as such. Working in oral discourse in
concert with changes in pitch, volume, pacing, and gesture, the figures help
define and manage relationships among speaker, listeners, and subject matter"
(Holcomb, 2007, p. 74) Here, Holcomb draws attention to figures as sites of
oral and bodily performance. As writing, the figures retain their association
with embodied performance. Holcomb's central observation is that the figures
must be understood in their capacity to mediate social relations between
speakers and audiences, between writers and readers. In this respect, the virtue
of ornament is closely tied to the virtue of decorum, or appropriateness. For

                                                                                                 43
FitzGerald

Holcomb, then, the figures function as an amalgam of cultural form and social
practice. This notion of style as "cultural performance" is the focus of Holcomb
and Killingsworth's essay in this volume ("Teaching Style").

   Having identified the ornamental dimension of style as simultaneously a
matter of argument and performance, I have yet to address the vexed efforts
to categorize the profusion of figures within rhetorical tradition in formal
and functional terms. Efforts to do so begin with Aristotle's account of style
in Book III of the Rhetoric, the foundational text for stylistic analysis. Here,
Aristotle presents the first definition of metaphor in semantic terms as a
word-level substitution involving some deviation from ordinary or accepted
meaning (1991, 3.2.6). From this proto-category of analogical reasoning and
expression will develop the tropes involving some turn of phrase, including
metonymy, synecdoche, simile and personification. Three hundred years later,
the influential Rhetorica ad Herennium (c. 90 BCE)--for centuries erroneously
attributed to Cicero--provides the first comprehensive catalogue of the figures,
sixty four in all. Here is the first effort to divide the figures between those that
involve a departure in meaning at the word level, the tropes, and those whose
effects depend on a deviation from expected or natural word order, the schemes
(Greek schemata translates into Latin figura.).

   The ad Herennium is also the first effort to distinguish figures of diction
(figurae dictionis) from figures of thought (figurae sententiae). The latter depends
not on particular choice of expression but on performative functions, including
description, comparison, commemoratio (dwelling on a point at length) and
dimunitio (understatement). Placing understatement with figures of thought, as
the ad Herennium does, rather than with the tropes, where figures of distortion
such as hyperbole or litotes have traditionally been placed, indicates how
overlapping are these categories. Complicating matters further, the author of ad
Herennium imagines the tropes to be a subset of figures of speech. Two centuries
later, Quintilian, in his Institutio Oratio (c. 90 CE), places tropes into a category
distinct from either the figures of diction or of thought.

   Throughout rhetorical tradition, taxonomic relations continue to be
contested and further categorizations proposed. Renaissance scholar Philip
Melanchthon, in Institutiones Rhetorices (1519), divides tropes into those based
in words (e.g., metaphor, various forms of pun) and in larger units of discourse
(e.g., irony, allegory) and also rearranges the schemes to include a major heading
of amplification for figures that elaborate, qualify or digress to rhetorical effect.
These multiple and conflicting efforts in categorization reveal the figures to be
far more than a matter of embellishment to lend distinction to one's speech.

   In her essay "Aristotle and Theories of Figuration," Jeanne Fahnestock reads
Book III of Aristotle's Rhetoric in light of subsequent treatments of the figures

44
                                                                                         Stylistic Sandcastles

within rhetorical tradition. Although Aristotle appears to say very little about
the figures, apart from discussing metaphor, Fahnestock observes that Aristotle
identifies three figures in metaphor, antithesis, and energeia, or bringing
something before the eyes. She recognizes these figures as epitomes for what will
later develop into categories of tropes, figures of diction, and figures of thought.
In other words, Aristotle anticipates the broader bins of a rich catalogue of
formal devices and performative moves. These bins correspond to "semantic,
syntactic, and pragmatic components of discourse" identified, respectively in
tropes, figures of diction, and figures of thought (Fahnestock, 2000, p. 127).
Aristotle thus anticipates subsequent theorizing of figurative in recognizing
early on that verbal effects are more than optional decoration.

   Against this backdrop, a gradual dissipation of a once vibrant figurative
tradition in the modern era, following a high water mark in the Renaissance, is
all the more striking. Holcomb singles out as arguably the richest account of the
figures Henry Peacham's Garden of Eloquence (1590), which identifies over two
hundred figures, insightfully analyzes their formal and functional properties,
and considers the social dimensions of their use. After such careful tending to
these "flowers" of rhetoric, the subsequent waning of the figures as a stylistic
resource becomes symptomatic of rhetoric's slow decline until more recent
stirrings in the latter half of the twentieth century. What happened?

   Isolating one factor among many in this development, Fahnestock points
to the separation of invention from style in the de-coupling of topical patterns
of reasoning and rhetorically expressive figures. Noting that the topics and the
figures were once cross-fertilizing contributors to rhetorical aptitude, Fahnestock
cites the disparate fortunes of metaphor, the prototypical semantic figure,
and antithesis, the prototypical syntactic figure. In the modern era, metaphor
emerges as the master trope to the near exclusion of other figurative devices.
By comparison, the scheme of antithesis, an epitomizing form for contrastive
reasoning, has lost much of its status over time as a valued figure. As a result,
antithesis functions as a fine barometer for the eventual association of "the
figurative" with poetic modes of discourse; for absent a scene of argumentation,
antithesis seems merely a device for heightening contrast.

   This separation of the structures of reasoning from the structures of
expression reflects a broader historical development in which written language,
especially in the medium of print, displace oratory as the paradigmatic mode of
communication. Under the influence of Peter Ramus (1515-1572), rhetoric's
scope was to become much more limited with the reassignment of the canons
of invention and arrangement to dialectical methods of reasoning. With print
the canons of memory and delivery also atrophy, so that only style remains as
a canon. Rhetoric becomes virtually synonymous with style, conceived in a

                                                                                                 45
FitzGerald

superficial sense as the dress of thought--artful spin. In this development, the
figures, the most performative aspect of style, fare especially poorly and attain
their status as a catalog of verbal embellishment.

   It is possible to locate an historical and conceptual divide between rhetoric
and composition by the perceived value of the figures. In the movement from
rhetoric, conceived as training in the performance art of public speaking,
to composition, understood as practice in conventions of written prose, the
figures are slowly drained of their compelling force. As exemplified in the highly
influential Rhetoric and Belles Lettres of Hugh Blair (1718-1800), prose style
becomes associated with matters of taste, an elevation of the virtue of decorum,
or appropriateness, as the divide between speech and text ever more widened. In
the polite contexts of written discourse, the vast catalog of figures increasingly
comes to be seen as irrelevant or, worse, indecorous. Shaking off an oral residue,
written composition leaves the figures behind as an antiquated corpus (with
a fearsome, foreign vocabulary) of stylistic devices. Once colorful flowers, the
garden of eloquence turned to weeds.

   In many respects, the figures are the last elements of classical rhetoric to fade
away, not unlike that eerie smile of the Cheshire cat. The catalog of vital figures
gradually contracted in response to changed circumstances in the production
and reception of texts. In this shift from the production to the critical reception
of texts, especially literary texts, the tropes, recognized as departures from literal
meaning, became privileged over the schemes. Style became stylistics. This
narrowing of the canon of style finds its apex in the notion of four master
tropes (metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche and irony) with priority assigned to
metaphor as the paradigm of figural as distinct from literal expression. Relatedly,
the cleavage of poetic from persuasive discourse profoundly influences how
the scope of composition is defined and, consequently, how style comes to be
understood.

   In many respects, recovery of a figurative pedagogy involves running this
reel in reverse to reclaim the figures as dynamic elements of discourse for a
multimedia age. In an era of montage and "remix," rhetorical practices of
ornamentation regain currency. The question, then, is what role can figurative
pedagogy play when the print culture that has for so long defined stylistic
conventions begins to yield to something new?

THE RETURN OF THE FIGURATIVE: "GO FIGURE"

   It may seem peevish to identify rhetorical tradition with the figures when
much broader identifications are possible. In the wake of rhetoric's reclamation

46
                                                                                         Stylistic Sandcastles

in the last century, the figures are a narrow slice of rhetorical pie. Indeed,
rhetoric's recent rise to respectability and relevance comes about not by
association with the figures but largely by moving beyond them (and beyond
style, too) to reclaim invention, above all, as the heart of rhetorical inquiry.
Even if one grounds composition in a rhetoric of style, there are many others
ways to do so besides explicit, intensive instruction on the figures.

   In this volume, William Kurlinkus emphasizes stylistic performance at the
macro level through strategies of ethos writers use to engage readers ("An Ethics
of Attentions"). Russell Greer similarly sets sights on the whole composition in
dynamic relation to its parts ("Architectonics and Style"). And Denise Stodola
reinforces the wisdom received from rhetorical tradition that practices of
imitation at the sentence and passage level are indispensable aids to stylistic
competence ("Using Stylistic Imitation"). To be clear, this essay, in concert with
these other voices, imagines a place for figures in a comprehensive rhetorical
pedagogy. It does so in the belief that the goals attendant to rhetorical education
through style-focused pedagogies are most fully achievable when the figures are
returned to a place of prominence.

   Despite the availability of multiple frames for rhetorical pedagogy, the
impulse to teach rhetoric through style, and style through figures, was one I
embraced in "Go Figure: Style and Thought in Word and Image," offered as
an advanced elective. Now having occasion to teach this course several times, I
would do so again, as a course in its own right and as a laboratory for exploring
the pedagogy of style. My experience suggests that a figure-based pedagogy
may be productively integrated into a range of pedagogical contexts from first-
year composition and beyond. As previously noted, imagining a (re)turn to
the figures requires that one understand their absence in the first place. This
absence persists. Despite rhetoric's return, even a perfunctory account of the
figures is impossible to find in contemporary composition textbooks. One
searches in vain for a treatment of litotes as an effective form of understatement,
of ploce as strategic reinforcement through repetition, or of persuasive strategies
of impersonation through prosopopoeia. Exposure to the figures, if it comes,
comes in encounters with a small number of critical terms for the close reading
of literature. Students typically have heard of metaphor, but not synecdoche,
alliteration but not anaphora.

   Even so, the remediation of text and image in emerging forms of digital
media and across multiple modalities will continue to trouble written discourse
as a paradigm of literacy. As we engage composition in various performative
domains, the resources of figuration (if not necessarily their classical terms) will
regain currency. This will occur because a robust visual and digital rhetoric,
like their oral and written counterparts, depends on employing figurative

                                                                                                 47
FitzGerald

resources in their semantic, syntactic, and pragmatic character as these resources
are manifested in any performative domains. This presumption of relevance
not only to a discursive past or present but, especially, to our discursive future
served as warrant to this course on the figures.

   Having taught courses in both prose style and in professional and technical
communication with a strong emphasis in style--see Jonathan Buehl's "Style
and the Professional Writing Curriculum" in this volume--I discover that
the figures are teachable in conjunction with other approaches, including
the pedagogies centered on stylistic revision offered by Richard Lanham and
Joseph Williams. In the case of "Go Figure," I desired to put into practice a case
eloquently made some time ago by Richard Lanham in Style: An Anti-Textbook
(1974) and later in Analyzing Prose (2003). In these texts, Lanham calls for a
return to the ludic, or playful, dimensions of language in writing instruction.
I had my reasons for not calling the course "Fun With Figures," but I took
notions of play quite seriously in my goals for the course. It was necessary to
do so given the daunting motivational hurdle: what to do about the arcane
nomenclature? Indeed, only a sense of play can transport students to a time
when the figures were alive and apply the insights gained from this experience
to contemporary contexts.

   I taught "Go Figure" twice, in 2007 and in 2010. In both iterations, I was
amazed by how well students took to the challenge to learn new and confusing
terms only to use them with increasing authority and insight. Their enthusiasm
for the value of their new tools was eye-opening. Learning ten or twelve terms
per week for the first half of the course along with their classification schemes
proved less difficult than I initially imagined. Of course, this was possible
because it is not the figures themselves that students had to learn, just their
names. My students discovered have been meeting and using the figures all of
their lives; they were only lacking a vocabulary.

   Prior to the course, few had ever heard more than a smattering of terms they
would encounter. As the course progressed, they routinely expressed surprise
that they had not learned to assign useful names, whether in Greek, Latin or
English, to seemingly ubiquitous phenomena. Indeed, my students were quite
open to learning these terms, to puzzling through at times subtle distinctions
between related terms, and to discovering new figures not found on venerable
lists. They were eager to identify current instances of classical forms and to
convince themselves that these rhetorical devices transcended language and era.
They learned, for example, that syllepsis--a form of zeugma in which one word
governs several others in unrelated senses (e.g., Alexander Pope's "she stained
her honor and her new brocade")--was Greek in name only. They confirmed

48
                                                                                         Stylistic Sandcastles

their ability to invent novel instances of a figure once its form and function were
understood. They could identify contexts in which a particular figure might be
effective and also those contexts when it was not.

   Beyond learning individual figures, my students came to realize that the
figures constituted an open-ended, yet not arbitrary, set of linguistic moves. It
was not long before class discussion gravitated quite naturally to questions of
form and meaning. What, exactly, is a figure? When is something not a figure?
How do figures work? Are certain figures unique to one language or culture?
How many figures are there? Often, then, our efforts to categorize figures and
describe their effects would lead to questions that required more than a simple
yes or no. Often, we would discover that language is complex enough that several
figures might be interacting in a given expression.

   To achieve these insights on my part and theirs, a range of learning activities
beyond introducing, memorizing, and recalling of terms was required. After
all, what fun is that? And what transfer value? Among such practices were
exercises in imitation along lines outlined by Denise Stodola in "Using Stylistic
Imitation" and in copia as described in Tom Pace's "Inventio and Elocution" as
well as an engagement with compilation through use of a commonplace book
(see Zak Lancaster's "Tracking Interpersonal Style"). Beyond these activities, the
course afforded opportunities for analytic inquiry by writing academic essays
on figurative topics. To present a finer-grained account of the course's multiple
working parts, I will outline its major features.

TEXTS

   Both iterations of "Go Figure" opened with an introduction based on Arthur
Quinn's accessible, idiosyncratic Figures of Speech: Sixty Ways to Turn a Phrase
(1995). An excellent text in many ways, Figures of Speech proved useful in the
early weeks of the course. Clever thematic arrangements and witty commentary
put students at ease and for the most part Quinn does not introduce too many
terms at once. However, the examples Quinn draws upon to illustrate the figures,
from the Bible, Shakespeare, and other literary sources, are rather limited in
appeal. In the absence of a wealth of authoritative and accessible materials from
which to choose, Quinn proved to be a reasonable point of entry.

   Much of the material one might share with students can be found on a
handful of websites, most notably Gideon Burton's "Silva Rhetoricae: The For-
est of Rhetoric" (http://rhetoric.byu.edu).("Silva") hosted by Brigham Young
University. This comprehensive overview of classical rhetoric includes a deep

                                                                                                 49
FitzGerald

catalog of rhetorical figures and helpful classification schemes. Non-academic
sites include Robert Harris' annotated catalog of figures at "Virtual Salt" and
Jay Heinrich's "It Figures," a playful examination of contemporary uses of the
figures through sardonic blog entries.

   In both iterations of "Go Figure," we turned to primary texts from
rhetorical tradition with short excerpts from Aristotle's Rhetoric, the Rhetorica
ad Herennium, Quintilian's Institutes and Peacham's Garden of Eloquence as
historical interludes. In addition, we read Jeanne Fahnestock's magisterial
overview, "The Figures as Epitomes," the introduction to Rhetorical Figures
in Science (1999). All of these texts are appropriately challenging, but in the
context of upper-division language study, they provided a necessary intellectual
framework.

   In each iteration, we turned in later weeks to a deeper engagement of
tropes. In 2007, we read George Lakoff and Mark Turner's More Than Cool
Reason: A Field Guide to Poetic Metaphor(1989). In 2010, we read George
Lakoff and Mark Johnson's Metaphors We Live By (2003). Each of these texts
offered something distinct and valuable. Metaphors We Live By demonstrates
how profoundly metaphor, and by extension all figurative thought, structures
ordinary experience. My students appreciated its scope and intellectual heft
and regarded it as an important book. Metaphors We Live By generated some
of our richest discussions. Yet, on the whole, More Than Cool Reason, with its
pronounced tilt to literary and stylistic concerns, holds greater promise for
integrating stylistic theory and practice. It offers strategies for reading poetic
texts structured by figurative devices such as simile or allegory. In general,
English majors found More Than Cool Reason most valuable. Finally, in both
iterations, we read Kenneth Burke's profound "Four Master Tropes." More than
any other text, this essay communicated the indispensability of figuration to
our ways of seeing things.

   In 2010, "Go Figure" featured two additional texts to broaden coverage
of style in composition beyond the figures. Chris Holcomb and Jimmie
Killingsworth's Performing Prose: The Study and Practice of Style in Composition
(2010) is among the most promising pedagogical treatments of style to date.
A thorough, yet accessible, guide to stylistic analysis, Performing Prose proved
a useful spine, especially with its exercises in style. Its treatment of the figures
in separate chapters devoted to tropes and schemes among other topics allowed
it to serve as a broad overview of prose style. Finally, Richard Lanham's Style:
An Anti-textbook (1974) offered a philosophical perspective on our goals,
particularly in its emphasis on going beyond precepts of clarity and efficiency
in thinking about the virtues of style.

50
                                                                                         Stylistic Sandcastles

ACTIVITIES

   Daily activities of "Go Figure" were responsive to the range of stylistic
exercises provided by Performing Prose, even before this text's use in a second
iteration. Such exercises draw on a classical tradition of style pedagogy re-
introduced to modern audiences through Edward P. J. Corbett's Classical
Rhetoric and the Modern Student. (This book's unit on style is published by
Corbett and Robert Connors as Style and Statement.) Central to this pedagogy
are practices of imitation and amplification. Following in this tradition, we
would on a weekly basis get inside various figurative devices through word-
for-word and looser imitations and by efforts to generate figures on demand or
impose figures on existing texts.

   With a nod to Renaissance pedagogy, we turned to exercises in copia, or
abundance, in the tradition of Erasmus, specifically his influential textbook, De
Duplici Copia Verborum et Rerum (1512). As Tom Pace details in "Inventio and
Elocutio," Erasmus offers in De Copia practical means for achieving fluency in
thought and expression. "Exercise in expressing oneself in different ways will
be of considerable importance in general for the acquisition of style" (Erasmus,
1978, p. 302). As a culminating activity, "Go Figure" adopted Erasmus'
celebrated exercise in sentence variation, based on his own 200 variations (in
Latin) of the sentence "Your letter pleased me very much." Students in "Go
Figure" were asked to compose 50, 100, or even 200 variations on a sentence
of their choosing and, in doing so, demonstrate as many figurative elements as
possible.

   Beyond producing more varied sentences, we embraced opportunities to
practice figurative techniques of balance, repetition, omission and contrast,
among other moves. The object of these activities in "Go Figure" was to link
style with invention and thereby internalize a stylistic repertoire upon which to
draw in novel contexts in the belief that verbal fluency contributes to rhetorical
dexterity. Students in "Go Figure" discovered that exercises performed
independently of assigned papers help them employ stylistic elements more
effectively in those papers. Indeed, most students wished they had been exposed
to the figures and related exercises much earlier, when it might have better
prepared them for the writing they did in college.

   The most enjoyable activity was a Figure Journal featuring the figures as found
objects. In each iteration of "Go Figure," students compiled 25 to 30 entries
illustrative of the range of figurative elements encountered in various media. In
the tradition of commonplace books, students prepared individual entries for
specific figures by providing an example, a definition, and a brief analysis of how

                                                                                                 51
FitzGerald

this figure worked in a given context. Twice each term, I collected these journals
to read and grade, offering commentary or corrections to any misunderstandings.
They were a joy to read because the examples were fresh and reflected increasing
understanding of the figures as vehicles for creative and persuasive expression.
Many students put great effort into compiling and designing this journal as a
window onto popular media, literary texts, oral conversations, text messages and
tweets, advertising rhetoric, religious discourse, etc. They drew from verbal and
visual domains. In fact, in the final weeks of the course we turned specifically to
figures in visual rhetoric, looking at tropes and schemes in political cartoons, print
ads, websites and other visual texts. But for time, we could have explored visual
figuration more extensively. Even so, this modest effort helped us to understand
how figures perform across media and modes.

   In the final activity of the course students completed individual projects with
a six to eight page essay analyzing figurative language in a particular context.
Among the more notable outcome of the course for me was the realization
that the figures are productive sites of rhetorical analysis. Writing about the
figures presents students opportunities for academic writing. Most recently,
students wrote about strategies of copia in motivational speaking, centered on
Vince Lombardi; on the use of color as metonymy in Irish rebel ballads; on
the figure of paradox in Bram Stoker's Dracula. In the first iteration of "Go
Fgure," students addressed such topics as the satiric uses of antithesis in opinion
pieces by Maureen Dowd; the use of anaphora in religious language; and the
function of isocolon and homeoptaton, or rhyme, in Dr. Seuss. The point to
be emphasized is that study of the figures generates intellectual curiosity and
practice with the figures generates compositional fluency.

GOING FORWARD

   "Go Figure" was imagined as a deceptively easy way into rhetoric under the
premise that overt attention to argumentation and invention was more difficult.
Beyond the use of ornamentation as hook, "Go Figure" was premised on a
belief that style is a legitimate and productive portal into rhetorical theory and
practice. It posits that attention to formal and functional dimensions of style
effectively engage latent interest in rhetoric among a generation of multimodal
multitaskers.

   Even so, I confess anxiety. Looking over my shoulder, I fear that representing
rhetoric as the study of tropes and schemes implicitly endorses rhetoric's
reduction to mere figuration. This anxiety extends to the place of style in

52
                                                                                         Stylistic Sandcastles

composition more generally, because one reason for style's marginalizatin is
that style-centered approaches to composition are suspected of being reductive,
overly focused on surface features of texts, too pedantic--in other words, not
cool. (See Keith Rhodes' essay "Styling.") "Go Figure" was conceived as a "gut
check" to see if there is sufficient heft in the figures to call for deeper engagement
with them in other courses. I conclude from my efforts that there is more than
enough substance--perhaps too much.

   Bringing this account to a close, several points remain open to speculation.
First, given that "Go Figure" is an upper-division elective and not a composition
course per se, what possibilities exist for integrating its approach into composition
courses, including in the first year of college ? On the whole, I believe this
approach to the figures travels well. A seminar model for composition might
well choose style, including the figures, as a focus and employ many of the
practices of analysis and writing outlined here. This is especially the case if
the figures are brought into dialogue with other elements of style, including
the virtues of clarity, correctness and appropriateness or the various levels of
style. When offering the course a second time, I was conscious of the recent
turn in composition to writing about writing as addressed in Doug Downs
and Elizabeth Wardle's "Teaching about Writing, Righting Misconceptions:
(Re) envisioning `First-Year Composition' as `Introduction to Writing Studies'"
(2007). Much as other efforts to make writing itself the topic of exploration in
a composition course, writing with and about the figures fosters crucial meta-
cognition and rhetorical sensibility. It also provides concrete benchmarks for
students to measure their own development as practitioners of the craft of
composition.

   An entire semester in rhetorical figures is not really necessary, of course. The
figures can be productively integrated into writing courses through judicious
selection of, say, a half-dozen key figures to be introduced and practiced with each
major unit or writing assignment. Building off exercises in copia and imitation,
students can practice employing figures of substitution, omission, balance
and repetition in their texts as they develop and revise drafts. One assignment
might encourage anaphora, another zeugma. One unit of a composition course
might feature the use of gradatio to reinforce chained reasoning across clauses
or sentences or the use of antonomasia to refer to things by other than a proper
name. Another might ask students to experiment with one or more figures
of thought such as adynaton, the expression of inexpressibility, or correction,
a strategic correcting of oneself. Indeed, students can be invited to highlight,
interrogate, even celebrate, their use of specific figures when submitting or
revising drafts.

                                                                                                 53
FitzGerald

   Alternatively, students can embellish texts produced by peers and justify their
choice of ornamentation. By such means of systematic exposure to, and practice
with, the figures students may come to see speech and writing as performance
in ways that other approaches to style do not allow. As the classical treatment
of the figures long ago emphasized, rhetorical style pedagogy must foreground
the performative dimension of discourse through hands-on experience with
ornamentation as rhetorical force.

   Finally, a figurative approach to composition that foreground performance
opens onto different modes of communication and their interaction. As
others in this volume observe, including Moe Folk ("Multimodal Style"),
writing is but one mode of performance in a digital age. While figures are
located in texts at the level of word, sentence and passage, as performative
moves they structure information as well as shape interaction between rhetors
and audiences. They are not restricted to verbal modes of speech or text.
In addition, there are visual tropes and schemes that parallel their verbal
counterparts to manage effects of balance, contrast, progression, etc. A figure
is not in the words (or image), but the words (or image) in the figure (to use
an antimetabole).

   A figure-rich pedagogy for today must span performative modes and prepare
students to communicate ornamentally across those modes. In this respect, the
figures are an untapped resource--a working vocabulary (not an antiquarian
catalog) for twenty-first century communication. To be clear: there remains
great value in attaching names to the tools we use. That is the point of learning
the names, not to remember them, but to use them. My experience teaching
the figures is that they bring a level of energy and a sense of agency to the
composition classroom like few other elements of style.

   This is not to say that sentence-based pedagogies focused on matters other
than the figures should cease to be a focus of the composition course. Far from
it. Renewed attention to the sentence in response to the risk of its "erasure"
(Connors) and the possibilities for its "remembering" (Myers) is consistent with
my call for a return of the figures. A figure-rich pedagogy serves as an excellent
and necessary complement to rhetorically-attuned sentence-level pedagogies,
such as those represented in Nora Bacon's The Well-Crafted Sentence: A Writer's
Guide to Style (2009). This, finally, is the point. The classical tradition developed
a fully articulated theory of style, one that recognized an assemblage of virtues at
work--or at play--in any rhetorical performance. To the extent that the figures
remain marginalized, stylistic pedagogy will never be as robust as it could, and
should, be. A modest investment in figuration--composition's bucket and
spade--has the potential for equipping our students to build some impressive
sandcastles. Go figure.

54
                                                                                         Stylistic Sandcastles

REFERENCES

Aristotle. (1992). On rhetoric: A theory of civic discourse. (Kennedy, G., Trans.).
   Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bacon, N. (2009). The well-crafted sentence. New York: Bedford/St. Martins.
Brummett, B. (2008). A rhetoric of style. Carbondale IL: Southern Illinois Uni-

   versity Press.
Burton, G. O. (n.d.) Silva rhetoricae: The forest of rhetoric. Retrieved from

   http://rhetoric.byu.edu
Butler, P. (Ed.) (2010). Style in rhetoric and composition: A critical sourcebook.

   Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martin's.
Butler, P. (2008). Out of style: Reanimating stylistics in composition and rhetoric.

   Logan: Utah State University Press.
Burke, K. (1941). Four master tropes. The Kenyon Review 3(4), 421-38.
Cicero. (1954). Rhetorica ad Herennium. (Caplan, H., Trans.). Harvard: Loeb

   Classical Library. Retrieved from http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/
   Roman/Texts/Rhetorica_ad_Herennium/home.html
Connors, R. J. (2000). The erasure of the sentence. College Composition and Com-
   munication 52(1), 96-128. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/358546
Crowley, S. & Hawhee, D. (2008). Ancient rhetorics for contemporary students
   (4th ed.). New York: Longman.
Downs, D. & Wardle, E. (2007). Teaching about writing, righting misconcep-
   tions: (Re)Envisioning "first-year composition" as "introduction to writing
   studies." College of Composition and Communication 58(4), 552-584.
Erasmus, D. (1978). Copia: Foundations of the abundant style: De duplici co-
   pia verborum ac rerum Commentarii duo (Knott, B. I., Trans. and Ed.). In
   C. R. Thompson (Ed.), Collected works of Erasmus: Literary and educational
   writings (2nd ed., vol. 28) (pp. 279-660). Toronto: University of Toronto
   Press.
Fahnestock, J. (1999). Rhetorical figures in science. New York: Oxford University
   Press.
Fahnestock, J. (2000). Aristotle and theories of figuration. In Gross, A. G. &
   Walzer, A. (Eds.), Rereading Aristotle's Rhetoric (pp. 166-184). Carbondale
   IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Harris, R. A. (2011). Virtual salt. Retrieved from http://www.virtualsalt.com/
   rhetoric.htm
Heinrich, J. (2005). It figures. Retrieved from. http://www.figarospeech.com/
Holcomb, C. (2007). "Anyone can be president": Figures of speech,
   cultural forms, and performance. Rhetoric Society Quarterly 37(4), 71-96.
   doi:10.1080/02773940600865305.

                                                                                                 55
FitzGerald

Holcomb, C. & Killingsworth, M. J. (2010). Performing Prose: The study and
   practice of style in composition. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University
   Press.

Johnson, T. R. (2003). A rhetoric of pleasure: Prose style in today's composition
   classroom. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook, 2003.

Johnson, T. R. & Pace, T. (Eds.) (2005). Refiguring prose style: Possibilities for
   writing studies. Logan: Utah State University Press.

Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (2003). Metaphors we live by (2nd ed.). Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press.

Lakoff, G. & Turner, M. (1989). More than Cool Reason: A field guide to poetic
   metaphor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lanham, R. A. (1974). Style: An anti-textbook. New Haven, CT: Yale University
   Press.

Lanham, R. A. (1999). Revising prose (4th ed.). New York: Longman.
Lanham, R. A. (2003). Analyzing prose (2nd ed.). New York: Continuum.
Myers, S. A. (2003). Remembering the sentence. College Composition and

   Communication 54(4), 610-28.
Peacham, H. (1593/1954). The garden of eloquence. Gainesville, FL: Scholars'

   Facsimiles and Reprints.
Quinn, A. (1995). Figures of speech: Sixty ways to turn a phrase. Mahwah, NJ:

   Erlbaum.
Quintilian (2006). Institutes of oratory. (Honeycutt, L., Ed., Watson, J. S.,

   Trans.). Iowa State University. Retrieved from http://honeyl.public.iastate.
   edu/quintilian/
Williams, J. M. (2007). Style: Lessons in clarity and grace (9th ed.). New York:
   Pearson Longman.

56
USING STYLISTIC IMITATION
IN FRESHMAN WRITING
CLASSES: THE RHETORICAL
AND META-RHETORICAL
POTENTIAL OF TRANSITIONS
IN GEOFFREY OF VINSAUF'S
MEDIEVAL TREATISES

Denise Stodola
Kettering University

   Within the last decade or so, the debate over the relationship between form
and content in writing pedagogy has been gathering momentum once again.
In a New York Times article from May 31, 2005, Stanley Fish asserts that form
must take precedence over content, suggesting that "[s]tudents can't write clean
English sentences because they are not being taught what sentences are." Fish
thus has his students create their own languages with parts that operate as
English does, so that they can get a sense of how language works. Of course,
although Fish rightly observes that grammar has been subordinate to content
in much writing pedagogy over the last fifteen years or more, I think that many
of us would take a more moderate view of the issue and agree that form and
content shape each other. Along these lines, Laura Micciche's article, "Making
a Case for Rhetorical Grammar" asserts that grammar overlaps with style, and
that both categories shape and are shaped by the rhetorical context in which
they operate (2004). Despite the problematic conceptual relationship between
form and content as illustrated by the current incarnation of this perennial
debate, however, I contend that style actually serves to bridge the two. In fact,
much like rhetoric is the discipline without a subject and therefore cuts through
all subjects, style has no clear and specific definition, allowing it to transect the
rhetorical canons.

   More specifically, I assert that the medieval focus on stylistic imitation,
as well as the concept of transitions, can help us to bridge the form-content
dichotomy actively and construct a pedagogy and course that more effectively
enact the writing process for students of prose composition. In other words,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.04  57
Stodola

while process theory as presented in composition textbooks tends to present
the first three rhetorical canons--invention, organization, and style--in that
order (providing the potential for a type of imitation that is chronological and
task-centered), implying that students should likewise follow that order in their
own composing processes, I wish to suggest that focusing on style, essentially
disrupting the implied chronology, helps students gain insights about language
and their own ideas that can then help them move into invention, adopting a
more advanced, recursive form of revision. Transitions play a key role in this
dynamic: in fact, Geoffrey of Vinsauf 's Documentum de modo et arte dictandi
et versificandi provides a precedent for a pedagogical emphasis on transitions in
prose composition, while simultaneously implying, through its structure, a way
of implementing these pedagogical methods (1968). Moreover, an emphasis on
transitions is consistent with a lot of work being done in cognitive psychology,
which makes it, at least potentially, a valuable tool in the writing classroom.

   First, though, we must examine the notion of style more closely, as the
various definitions of style can illuminate both how and why the form-content
dichotomy has developed, as well as the importance of the role that style can
potentially play in the writing process. Several definitions from the O.E.D. are
significant in this context. The form-content dichotomy is apparent, of course,
when one considers the emphasis in the following definition on the "form" end
of the dichotomy. This definition states that style includes the "[f ]eatures of
literary composition which belong to form and expression rather than to the
substance of the thought or matter expressed" (2004, p. 14), which is further
reinforced by another definition that states that style is "[a] kind, sort, or type,
as determined by manner of composition or construction, or by outward
appearances" (2004, p. 22.a.)

   Style is more broadly defined in other O.E.D. entries, however. One states
that style is "[t]he manner of expression characteristic of a particular writer
(hence of an orator) ... a writer's mode of expression considered in regard to
cleanness, effectiveness, beauty, and the like" (2004, p. 13.a.), a definition that,
upon close examination, reveals how broadly and varied the concept of style
can be: in fact, the concept of "effectiveness" indicates the notion of "content"
to some extent, as the author must consider how to gear her message for the
audience in order for it to be effective. Indeed, these "features" are intended to
culminate in an effect on the audience, as style is further defined as "[a] manner
of discourse, or tone of speaking, adopted in addressing others or in ordinary
conversation" (2004, p. 15), as well as the "[m]anner of executing a task or
performing an action or operation ..." (2004, p. 23.c.) These more nebulous
qualities are apparent in "Limits of Grammar in Writing Improvement," when
author Rei Noguchi says that style

58
                                               Rhetorical and Meta-Rhetorical Potential of Transitions

         ... covers such aspects of "mechanics" as verb tense, sentence
         fragments, run-ons, comma splices, and subject-verb agree-
         ment. But it also covers more than mechanics insofar as it
         also deals with options that lead to effective communication
         of content (e.g., the sequencing of linguistic elements, paral-
         lelism, subordination, transitions, and pronoun reference.
         (Noguchi, 1991, p. 11)

All of these various definitions, interestingly, are included in the glossary of the
Harbrace College Handbook, 13th edition, which says that style is "[a]n author's
choice and arrangement of words, sentence structures, and ideas as well as less
definable characteristics such as rhythm and euphony"( Hodges, Horner, Webb,
& Miller, p. G-44). Of course, from all of these definitions, it would seem that
style itself is not particularly definable. Still, it is clear that style operates from
the level of small mechanical units, like diction and punctuation, through the
broadest conceptual levels, like content, making it a much more important
facet of writing and the writing process than many of us acknowledge.
Likewise, imitation has played a role in writing pedagogy, but has also appeared
in myriad forms, much like style has done. Like the notion of "style," "imitation"
can take place at various levels, and can play a key role in learning and creativity.
According to Piaget,

         [I]mitating ... means trying to do something which seems
         to be useful in reality, but which one's own schemata are not
         yet prepared for. But to be able to imitate, one must be aware
         of what is to be imitated and how it can be imitated. Thus,
         imitation is closely connected with observation and analysis
         (Geist, 2005, p. 172).

   Significantly, the most recent usage note for "imitation" in the O.E.D.
points to its pedagogical potential, stating that imitation is "[t]he adoption,
whether conscious or not, during a learning process, of the behavior or attitudes
of some specific person or model" (2004, 1.c.)

   Moreover, the broadness of the definition is illustrated in the ways in which
imitation has been applied historically in writing pedagogy. These applications
can be subdivided into various categories: imitation at the overall organizational
level, and at the sentence level--both in terms of diction and grammatical
structure. At the broadest level of overall paper organization, of course, "teaching
the modes," more widely popular in writing pedagogy twenty or more years ago,
encouraged a kind of fundamental imitation at the essay level. Students would

                                                                                                 59
Stodola

write, for example, comparison-contrast papers following one of two general
organizational patterns: block or point-by-point. In the former, students would
give all the information about one concept in the comparison, and then the
second large chunk would address the other component of the comparison. The
point-by-point comparison would take comparable facets of each component
and develop the discussion accordingly. Of course, many students find out,
very early, that these patterns are not absolute: in other words, one could write
a compare-contrast paper with sections of definition and process, two other
types of modes.

   Imitation has also been used at the sentence level, which may be more
useable in the freshman classroom, although it does not seem to have been as
widely used, disregarded at times, perhaps, due to the research done by those
composition scholars who suggest that students do not transfer the lessons from
grammar exercises into their own writing, but must instead be taught by having
their grammar issues addressed within the context of their own essays. Still,
some have argued for a comeback of sentence imitation, perhaps most notably
in Corbett's and Connors' Classical Rhetoric for the Modern Student, which first
came out in 1965 and which was reprinted in 1971, 1990, and 1999. In this
text the authors suggest that students copy, word-for-word, passages written by
famous authors. The next step is for students to imitate a variety of sentence
patterns. They also include testimonials on the value of imitation by such
famous persons as Winston Churchill, Malcolm X, and Ben Franklin.

   Although sentence imitation may have benefit in and of itself, the Medieval
emphasis on small units of composition and the imitation of figures, just like
the modern-day use of sentence-level imitation, are consistent with some of
our more modern notions about writing pedagogy and potentially quite useful
in the classroom. This is particularly clear in the case of Geoffrey of Vinsauf 's
Poetria nova, a handbook that was extremely popular in the thirteenth century,
having survived in more than 200 manuscripts. In this rhetorical handbook for
verse composition, Vinsauf included specific exercises that students could use,
and which medievalist Marjorie Curry Woods has used in her rhetoric classes
at the University of Texas at Austin. In fact, she has adopted, directly, some
of the Poetria nova's exercises. According to Woods, one of the most rigid and
unexpectedly popular writing assignments requires students to produce a piece
of connected discourse using all of the 35 Figures of Words in their traditional
order, beginning with repetitio, conversio, and complexio. This type of exercise
may be so popular with her students because it

         ... focus[es] on small units of composition (set pieces il-
         lustrating a particular technique or approach) compiled by

60
                                               Rhetorical and Meta-Rhetorical Potential of Transitions

         aggregation from even smaller units (lines or images sepa-
         rable from the work at hand and suitable for re-use in other
         compositions). (Woods, 2001, p. 13)

   While this is not direct imitation of grammatical structure, it does fit in with
the types of imitation I have already outlined, in that students are imitating
linguistic patterns--in this case, in the figures discussed in the Poetria.

   Significantly, Vinsauf 's other treatise, the Documentum de modo et arte
dictandi et versificandi, focuses specifically on prose composition. The insights
it offers into the nature of prose are clearly more pertinent to any discussion
of freshman-level writing courses, where the focus is on prose composition.
In fact, most manuscripts of the Documentum include sections on prosecutio
(how to transition from the beginning of the work to the body), as well as
on the methods of ending a work, neither of which appears in such extended
discussions in the Poetria. This emphasis on transitions suggests that, for
Vinsauf, at least, transitions were particularly important in prose composition.

   Transitions, of course, are forged in a many ways in order to signal a variety
of different conceptual connections between two ideas, whether those ideas
occur at the sentence level, the paragraph level, or beyond. These connections
can be spatial or chronological; they can signal similarity or opposition; they
can signal causality, aggregation, exemplification and intensification. Moreover,
they can occur through repetition of words or phrases, through brief summary,
or through the insertion of transitional phrases.

   Interestingly, though, while transitions hold an important place in a
piece of writing as well as in the writing process itself, many people, students
especially, seem to think of transitions as "only" a matter of style, relegated
to surface appearances, which, as we've seen from the various definitions, is
faulty: transitions involve diction, grammar, organization and content; style, as
such, is really not mere ornamentation, but an important part of the organic
whole message conveyed in any piece of writing. Indeed, any transition involves
juxtaposition of concepts: in order to determine which transition to use in
one's writing, one must decide what the relationship between the two concepts
actually is.

   As such, cognitive psychology can shed some light on the significance of
transitions; in fact, this notion of juxtaposition is at the heart of the research
done by Gilles Fauconnier in his books Mappings in Thought and Language, and
The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and the Mind's Hidden Complexities,
which he co-authored with Mark Turner. In his books, Fauconnier discusses
analogy--more specifically, "analogical counterfactuals"--which involves
juxtaposition of concepts, the "projection of structure from one domain to

                                                                                                 61
Stodola

another" (1997, p. 101). An example of an analogical counterfactual would
be the sentence "If I were you, I would listen to me." Clearly there are two
categories, or domains, at play here: "I" and "you." These are set up as analogous
and therefore separate entities. The relationship is counterfactual, though, in that
"I" is not the same being as "you"; in other words, this subjunctive construction
indicates something that does not exist in fact. This kind of thinking, though,
entails a very sophisticated cognitive move, as it creates a relationship between
two separate categories--a relationship that does not exist in empirical reality.

   At the same time, though, grammatical constructions like this, which
create connections between conceptual categories, have additional potential for
meaning: in Mappings in Thought and Language, Fauconnier cites Langacker
to explain that "grammatical constructions and vocabulary items `call up'
meaning schemas" (1997, p. 11). In other words, concepts and relationships
bring with them attached sets of other concepts and relationships. If this is
true, then transitions may be of particular importance, as they not only call up
specific schemas within sentences but also serve as the explicit linguistic link to
conceptual frames, thereby contributing to the creative process. Furthermore,
grammar and creativity, so important in the invention portion of the composing
process, are linked: Fauconnier suggests that "[t]he mental operations that allow
us to construct meanings for ... simple-looking words and sentences ... are the
same ones at work in what we recognize more consciously as creative thought
and expression" (1997, p. 99). Juxtaposition of concepts can clearly provide the
potential for creative thought.

   Juxtaposition also operates in the notion of concept maps, the use of which
may provide clarity on the cognitive dynamic under discussion. Concept maps
are graphical representations of the relationships between concepts. In other
words, they illustrate knowledge. Writing about these tools for understanding
conceptual relationships, Novak and Cañas define the word "concept" as
a "perceived regularity in events or objects, or records of events or objects,
designated by a label" (2008, p. 1). A concept map of this definition is shown
in Figure 1.

   The boxes contain concepts, while the lines and arrows indicate the conceptual
links between those concepts. These units of boxes and arrows constitute
propositions, which are "statements about some object or event in the universe,
either naturally occurring or constructed ... containing two or more concepts
connected using linking words or phrases to form a meaningful statement"
(Novak & Cañas, 2008, p. 1). The concept map, like Fauconnier's notion of
"analogical counterfactuals," illustrates how important a place comparison
holds in the learning process of the human mind, as the act of placing one idea
or concept next to another invites the mind to establish relationships between

62
                                               Rhetorical and Meta-Rhetorical Potential of Transitions

Figure 1. Concept Map of "Concept"
those two things. This is precisely how transitions work: two phrases, sentences,
or paragraphs are placed in sequence, and the reader's first thought is "How do
these two things connect to each other?"

    Indeed, from the audience's perspective, transitions provide coherence for
the message of any given piece of writing, providing for us, in effect, the steps
comprising the conceptual journey on which the writer wishes us to accompany
her. For the reader, in fact, transitions constitute a window into the mind of
the writer; for the writer, they function not only as a manner of indicating
purpose to the audience, but they also appear at the moments at which she is
cognitively able to see her own reasoning in a reflexive manner. The fact that this
is the point at which her line of reasoning becomes clearest to her--and that
awareness intersects with her awareness of the cues required by her projected
audience--possibly explains why so many of the students I have spoken to
have such a difficult time with transitions. This difficulty is also explainable in
terms of creativity in both the reader's and writer's minds. As Fauconnier states,
"To communicate is to trigger dynamic creative processes in other minds and
in our own ... mappings can be entrenched (as in conventional metaphor and
established grammatical constructions), but ... also operate on-line to yield
novel meanings, construals and interpretations" (1997, p. 182).

    It is this potential for "novel meaning" that connects the medieval emphasis
on prose composition to modern pedagogy--in the form of process theory and
post-process theory--and further reinforces the pedagogical potential of style.
Much of process theory revolves around the notion of "writing process," which,

                                                                                                 63
Stodola

in composition textbooks, moves through the first three rhetorical canons--
invention, organization, and style. Still, it is much more complicated than that:
the recursive nature of writing is apparent in that a writer can have an idea
(invention) and begin to organize it, only to find that the act of organizing
it has changed the underlying focus somewhat--leading the author back into
revision.

   Recursivity also has a place within with post-process composition theory,
which moves beyond process theory by emphasizing how context-dependent
every writing act actually is. As George Pullman suggests, "... the process of
writing is not context invariant. The genre, the circumstances, the subject, and
the whole dynamic of the rhetorical situation influence what process will lead
to what document" (1999, p. 26). In this formulation, the act of writing cannot

      Figures of Thought

      "Figures of thought" are kinds of "building blocks"--strategies for
  conveying your ideas as effectively as possible. Although there are more
  figures of thought than the ones I've included here, and there are other
  kinds of figures catalogued in writing handbooks throughout the various
  historical periods, I've selected the following as those that would possibly be
  more useful to you in technical and business writing situations.

      On your rough draft of paper 2, please select three consecutive sentences
  or paragraphs, and use two or three of the following figures of thought as
  you recast and revise those passages. Be sure to include transitions between
  the figures you use in your text. Once you have accomplished this task, we
  will discuss your experiences in class.

      1) Distribution. Assigns specific roles to various things, people, or
  ideas: In this letter I provide information about the JAVA class, the project
  assignments for the class, and the format of the final exam.

      2) Description. Presents possible consequences for a given situation
  (while describing both in specific detail): This example of a memo's format,
  including the headings and paragraph layout, may help you as you undertake
  the assignment for COMM class.

      3) Division. Distinguishes between and among alternatives,
  accompanying each with a reason and/or possible consequence: My boss is
  not very good at dealing with people: he either doesn't communicate at all, or
  he communicates poorly. Both situations prevent the employees from doing their
  jobs well, and the employees eventually become frustrated.

Figure 2. Assignment Handout

64
                                               Rhetorical and Meta-Rhetorical Potential of Transitions

be distilled into steps, which is precisely what process theory does. In a sense,
post-process theory recognizes how changeable a piece of writing can be when
one considers the various forces that come into play to initiate and carry out
any writing act, forces that change substantively over time. In fact, for the post-
process theoretician, revision is something that, when necessary, is just as likely
initiated by forces external to the writer as by the writer's own impulse to do so.
Indeed, revision may ultimately be even more important for the post-process
theoretician because, if the context is ever-changing, that situation would
require revision as the context changes--even if revision means revising one's
needs in terms of genre and message.

   When any type of revision occurs, however, recursivity plays a significant
role, especially for more experienced writers. As Nancy Sommers suggests,

      4) Accumulation. Gathers up details that had been discussed previously:
  Clearly, poor communication at work can lead to these additional problems:
  misunderstandings between co-workers, frustration with the job, and even the
  production of faulty--or even dangerous--products.

      5) Antithesis. Sets ideas in opposition to each other: You may not have
  enough experience to understand the problems caused by poor communication,
  but my twenty years on the job has shown me the vast array of difficult work
  situations that are only made even worse with poor communication.

      6) Comparison. Draws out similarities between two dissimilar things
  or concepts (an analogy):

      Just as music requires attention to the notes used and the order in which they
  are played, writing well in a professional setting requires attention to the words
  used and the order in which they are presented.

      7) Exemplum. Cites a quote or an action of an authority figure: John
  Smith, expert in business management, asserted during employee orientation
  that "a clear, well organized procedural manual contributes to an efficient work
  environment."

      8) Portrayal. Provides a depiction or portrayal of relevant physical and/
  or visual characteristics: While Mr. Smith spoke, his voiced wavered and he
  couldn't stop shaking: his glasses bounced around on his nose and his unruly
  white hair stood up in all directions.

      9) Conciseness. Compresses a point into the least number of words
  necessary (can be a brief summary of what you've already stated): Thus,
  while Mr. Smith's presentation was informative, his demeanor and appearance
  made him less credible to his listeners.

Figure 2. Assignment Handout, continued

                                                                                                 65
Stodola

novice writers tend to revise by focusing on change at the lexical level, while
experienced writers revise in a way that "confuses the beginning and end, the
agent and vehicle; it confuses, in order to find, the line of argument" (Sommers,
1988, p. 125). To put it more directly, more experienced writers revise as they
compose. Cognitively, of course, when this happens, the writer is forging links
between existing material in her mind while creating new links--conceptual
transitions at the cognitive level, as it were, many of which will appear in the
written text in the form of linguistic transitions.

   Vinsauf 's treatises illuminate the potential pedagogical and psychological
importance of these linguistic transitions not only as a topical focus for
composition teaching, but also as a method. In fact, both the Documentum and
the Poetria discuss the figures while they embody the very precepts they describe,
making them function both as instructional tools and illustrative meta-rhetorics.
Thus, while the Documentum includes a discussion of transitions, it also uses
transitions within the description itself. If we consider the fact that Vinsauf 's
treatises are intended for teaching purposes, we can extrapolate another lesson
from them--one which can be incorporated into a pedagogical approach: the
classroom experience as a meta-rhetorical construct.

   Indeed, this notion of meta-rhetoric can inform classroom pedagogy on many
levels, bringing together stylistic imitation, transitions, and the writing process.
In order to do so, it is clearly necessary to combine the imitation of figures,
which may involve a variety of levels--phrases, sentences, brief passages--with
transitions, and do so within the student's rhetorical purpose (e.g., on specific
class assignments). Instead of the instructor making corrective comments in the
margin to indicate where improvement is needed, this kind of pedagogy would
enable students to strengthen the building blocks of discourse--and to do so in
a way that emphasizes invention. In other words, this type of approach would
allow the student to build a repertoire of cognitive structures and rhetorical
strategies while simultaneously requiring her to build and articulate conceptual
linkages between juxtaposed linguistic units--between phrases, sentences,
paragraphs, and larger passages. At the level of assignments and class activities,
the emphasis would be on imitation of small discursive units--figures as
outlined in Vinsauf 's Documentum.

   In order to determine a strategy for building such a pedagogy, I gave a brief
informal assignment to my Business Communication class, asking my students
to take three consecutive sentences from their drafts and recast them using
three different figures of thought. (See Fig. 1.) In providing the examples of
the various "figures of thought," I selected those that seemed most pertinent
to the assignment at hand, which I explained to them. For example, because
"character development" is not used in business writing, I have omitted it on

66
                                               Rhetorical and Meta-Rhetorical Potential of Transitions

the handout. Indeed, business writing has its own set of stylistic expectations.
The same is true of science writing, as Jonathan Buell points out in his article (in
this volume) entitled "Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum: Teaching
Stylistic Fluency through Science Writing." Once I selected the figures that
would work best for professional writing, I then asked the students to be sure
to include transitions between the newly revised sentences. Of course, we had
been discussing transitions in various contexts throughout the term, but mostly
during the individual conferences I hold with students at least twice during our
11-week term (between the first and final drafts of writing assignments 1 and
2).

   My goals for this assignment, in terms of seeing how successful stylistic
imitation would be for my students' writing, were very basic: essentially, I
wanted to know if they could do it, and what sort of changes it would make
to their drafts. My rationale for having them use this assignment on an initial
draft was to open up the possibility that it would help move them back into
"invention" as they revised, helping them revise more substantially. As a follow-
up, I wanted to get their opinions on how the assignment worked for them, so
I included a couple of questions on it in the teaching evaluation form I give
my students at the end of the term. Surprisingly, the students thought that this
was a difficult assignment, and, even more surprising, they thought that having
this information at the beginning of the paper cycle--during the early stages
of drafting--would be most helpful. More than half went on to say that they
could see this being useful if it were integrated into the course from the first day
of class, as it would help them organize their thoughts more effectively.

   In future courses, I plan to take my students' suggestions, but I also want
to more fully implement the meta-rhetorical potential suggested by Vinsauf 's
treatises within the course structure itself. For example, I not only plan to have
students work on stylistic imitation and figures of thought from the beginning,
as I've already said, but I also want the assignments themselves to "build off of "
each other. By this, I mean that the students will select broad topics for which
they can write perhaps a business letter and a formal report, thus enacting
a kind of conceptual transition that will require them to link mental spaces
in what Fauconnier would call "blends." Their writing assignments will thus
"transition" from one to the other in much the same way as their sentences and
paragraphs will.

   Perhaps even more importantly, I plan on having them engage in a self-
reflexive move, requiring them to become more aware of their own rhetorical,
stylistic choices--by having them perform a rhetorical analysis of their own
work--including an analysis of how and the degree to which their use of figures
and of various factors associated with style effectively convey the content of

                                                                                                 67
Stodola

the message. By doing this, of course, they will enact the same dynamic they
engage in when they must become aware of their own conceptual links in their
construction of transitions between sentences and paragraphs. By performing
this self-reflexive assignment and then having them re-write the paper they have
analyzed, they will also be moving from style to invention.

   Interestingly, in outlining some of my ideas here, I too have moved from
style to invention. Of course, teaching itself is a rhetorical activity--even an
argument, perhaps--one that we make to our students about what sorts of things
are important about writing and how they execute different pieces of writing in
different rhetorical contexts. It is also an ongoing argument we engage in with
ourselves, as we revise and re-think our positions on what and how we should
teach--an argument I've entered meta-rhetorically in this chapter that suggests
the value of stylistic imitation, the significance of transitions, the lessons we
can take and shape from the Middle Ages, the ways in which an emphasis on
transitions is consistent with cognitive psychology, and how we undertake the
act of writing, both in the papers our students write and in the classrooms we
work so hard to compose and revise.

REFERENCES

Corbett, E. P. J. & Connors, R. J. (1999). Classical rhetoric for the modern stu-
   dent. New York: Oxford University Press.

Fauconnier, G. (1997). Mappings in thought and language. Cambridge: Cam-
   bridge.

Fauconnier, G., & Turner, M. (2002). The way we think: Conceptual blending
   and the mind's hidden complexities. New York, NY: Basic Books.

Fish, S. (2005, May 31). Devoid of content. New York Times. Retrieved from
   http://www.nytimes.com/2005/05/31/opinion/31fish.html

Geist, U. (1996). Imitation as a tool in writing pedagogy. In Rijlaarsdam, G.,
   van den Bergh, H., & Couzjin, M. (Eds.), Effective teaching and learning
   of writing: Current Trends in research (pp. 51-60). Amsterdam: Amsterdam
   University Press.

Geist, U. (2005). Stylistic imitation as a tool in writing pedagogy. In Riklaars-
   dam, G., Bergh, H., Couzjin, M. (Eds.) Effective Learning and Teaching of
   Writing: A handbook of writing education (pp. 169-180). Boston: Kluwer
   Academic Publishers.

Geoffrey of Vinsauf. (1967). Poetria nova. (Nims, M. F., Trans.). Toronto: Pon-
   tifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies.

68
                                               Rhetorical and Meta-Rhetorical Potential of Transitions

Geoffrey of Vinsauf (1968). Documentum de modo et arte dictandi et versificandi
   (Parr, R. P., Ed.). Marquette, WI: Marquette University Press.

Hodges, J. C., Horner, W. B., Strobeck Webb, S., & Miller, R. K. (1998). Har-
   brace college handbook (13th ed.). Ft. Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace.

Micciche, L. R. (2004). Making a case for rhetorical grammar. College Composi-
   tion and Communication 55(4), 716-737.

Noguchi, R. R. (1991). Grammar and the teaching of writing: Limits and pos-
   sibilities. Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Novak, J. D. & Cañas, A. J. (2008). The theory underlying concept maps and how
   to construct and use them. Pensacola, FL: Florida Institute for Human and
   Machine Cognition.

Pullman, G. (1999). Stepping yet again into the same current. In Kent, T.
   (Ed.), Post-process theory: Beyond the writing process paradigm (pp. 16-29).
   Carbondale: Southern Illinois.

The Oxford English Dictionary. (2004). (V3.1 CD-ROM). Oxford: Oxford Uni-
   versity Press.

Sommers, N. (1988). Revision strategies of student writers and experienced
   adult writers. In G. Tate & E. P. J. Corbett (Eds.), The writing teacher's source-
   book (2nd ed.) (pp. 119-27). New York: Oxford University Press.

Woods, M. C. (2001). The teaching of poetic composition in the later middle
   ages. In J. J. Murphy (Ed.), A short history of writing instruction: From ancient
   Greece to modern America (2nd ed.) (pp. 123-143). Mahwah, NJ: Hermagoras
   Press.

                                                                                                 69
ARCHITECTONICS AND STYLE

Russell Greer
Texas Woman's University

DEFINING ARCHITECTONICS

   Originally, the word "architectonic" pertained to architecture, specifically
the construction of buildings. It evolved from the Greek architecton, which
means "master craftsman" or someone who controls workers and directs them
in a building project. As Richard McKeon has noted, Aristotle uses the term
architecton to describe a master craftsman "who knows the matter and makes the
product" (McKeon, 1987, p. 3). However, in 1781 Immanual Kant famously
appropriates the term in Critique of Pure Reason as a metaphor, distinguishing
between "technical unity" and "architectonic unity." A unity achieved
architectonically "originates from an idea" (Kant, 1985, p. 655). However, unity
achieved without architectonics, one merely conforming technically to the
requirements of a form, is more limited. In this sense, architectonics began to
appear after the late eighteenth century in English to describe architectural or
artistic elements in accordance with a single design that harmonize.

   In 1919, Russian philosopher Mikhail Bakhtin responded to this Kantian
concept in the first words of his first published essay, "Art and Answerability":

         A whole is called "mechanical" when its constituent elements
         are united only in space and time by some external connec-
         tion and are not imbued with internal unity of meaning. The
         parts of such a whole are contiguous and touch each other,
         but in themselves they remain alien to each other. (1990, p.
         1)

   Because Bakhtin's brief essay appeared in a provincial Russian journal,
his interest in architectonics received no notice until his work began to be
collected and translated after his death in 1975. Even then, critics responded
more strongly to his studies of the novel. His early philosophical reactions to
Kant have only received some attention in recent years because scholars want
to understand the role architectonics has played in helping Bakhtin to develop
dialogism. But some scholars have also been interested in architectonics as a
resource for composition studies.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.05  71
Greer

PARTS AND THE WHOLE

   As a concept, architectonics can help composition scholars understand the
relationship between parts and the whole. However, with coherence we already
have a good term that does that. Joseph Williams defines coherence as "a sense of
the whole" (2010, p. 71): "Think of coherence as seeing what all the sentences
in a piece of writing add up to, the way all the pieces in a puzzle add up to the
picture on the box" (Williams, 2010, p. 72).

   Architectonics goes further, however. As Bakhtin suggests, architectonic
unity implies a greater sense of the whole than merely the whole of the topic.
It implies an understanding of the writer's personal relation to the topic under
consideration. Just as architects consider mass and the forces of gravity that
push and pull on a building, architectonics as a metaphor implies the invisible
social forces, primarily in language, that surround and define us. These forces
push and pull us, and we are attracted to them or repelled away from them.
We become defined by what we like and don't like (as any teenager knows). As
individuals living in the world and as writers, we take a stand about what we
like and what we don't like, arranging the items of the world in our own minds
and creating our own identity by our relation to those items. In the process, we
construct a personal understanding of the relationship of parts to the whole.
These wholes are another word for meaning.

   A simple example occurs in my classrooms when I ask my students to choose
their own topics for writing projects. If students choose their own topics, they
struggle to form architectonic wholes as they struggle to understand their
topic. One essential aspect of this architectonic whole is the struggle itself;
the other essential aspect is their own involvement in the topic. What does
the topic mean to them? Without that self-awareness, the unity formed is
merely mechanical, as Bakhtin calls it, or technical, as Kant describes it. With
that self-awareness, however, students stand in a better position to see the
relationship of parts to the whole. As a teacher, I can guide my students to
that self-awareness or help them in a more practical way see relationships in
the material that they have chosen. Joél Paré articulates the significance of the
personal in architectonics well: "In contrast to traditional writing, architectonic
writing requires the writer to understand her relationship with the subject and
to become personally engaged when writing about it in order to compose an
architectonically sound and thus effective text" (2007, p. 48). I would only
add here, as I have elsewhere, that "Knowledge of individual parts, portions of
information without a clear relationship one to the other and to the entire text,
provides no true understanding" (Greer, 2001, p. 58).

72
                                                                                   Architectonics and Style

Architectonics and Style

   This aspect of the personal in writing is the key to understanding the
relationship between architectonics and style. But this emphasis on the personal
is not typically associated with style. Instead, that traditional emphasis is usually
on clarity.

   Williams, for example, defines style as the ability to write clearly: "it is good
to write clearly" (2010, p. 2). Aristotle also feels that "the virtue of style is to
be clear" (1991, p. 218). Good style, Aristotle believes, uses metaphor to make
persuasion vivid by communicating "actuality" (1991, p. 238): "putting before
their eyes as it has happened" (1991, p. 165). We often talk about "personal
style" in subjects such as fashion or music, and in literary studies we observe
personal styles of authors, but we don't always have a language to describe the
significance of the personal in composition studies, unless we consider theorists
like Peter Elbow and Robert Zoellner who have discussed ways to find "voice."

   Joy Ritchie gives us a starting point to understand the relationship between
architectonics and style when she writes, "Only as they struggle to endow the
words of others with their own intentions do writers progress beyond the level
of functionary or bureaucrat to develop their own style and voice" (1998, p.
135). Here she is elaborating on a point that Bakhtin explores in many of
his writings, particularly "Discourse in the Novel." "Personal" does not mean
merely recounting narratives about our lives or even articulating likes, dislikes,
or opinions (as many first-year writers believe). The "personal" manifests itself
architectonically in the intonations we give to quotations and to words of others
that we embed in our own writing. As we struggle to make sense about how we
feel about something, as we fit that alien language into our own creation, we
create a personal, architectonic, style. Bakhtinan scholars Gary Saul Morson and
Caryl Emerson describe this process in Mikhail Bakhtin: Creation of a Prosaics:

         Different forms and styles of reporting speech might use-
         fully be regarded as different ways of "hearing" another's
         words. When we use indirect discourse, we do not just apply
         a grammatical rule, we must necessarily analyze and respond
         to the reported utterance and show our dialogic relation to it.
         (1990, p. 167)

   That dialogic relation depends upon the "other." Writers need two things to
create intonation, which is the essence of an architectonic understanding of style:
(1) an understanding of their own, personal relationship to reported speech and

                                                                                                 73
Greer

the topic under consideration, and (2) an understanding of their relation to the
"other" in their discourse. Michael Holquist explains in Dialogism:

         Intonation clearly registers the other's presence, creating
         a kind of portrait in sound of the addressee to whom the
         speaker imagines he or she is speaking. A common illustra-
         tion of this tendency is found when we hear someone talking
         on the telephone to another person whose identity we do not
         know, but whose relation to the speaker we can guess from
         his or her speech patterns. Intonation is a material expression
         of the shaping role the other plays in the speech production
         of any individual self ... we always pass judgment on whatev-
         er information is contained in what we say.... " (1990, p. 61)

   When we see judgment, we find intonation. Our goal as writers is to master
intonation so that the attitudes we express about reported speech accurately
reflect not only our relation to the topic but to every part raised in relation
to that topic. When we have full control over these elements, then the parts
relate harmoniously--architectonically--to the whole, and we will express an
effective style.

An Example of Good Style

   Let's review an example of a text that seems to express a harmonious style,
as we have defined it. I choose the professional writer Gore Vidal, who, in
1993, won the National Book Award for his collection of essays titled United
States: Essays 1952-1992. In "Novelists and Critics of the 1940s," we can see a
textbook example of harmonious style. Architectonics gives us a vocabulary to
name what is happening in the text.

   The purpose of Vidal's essay is to criticize critics for their shallow
understanding of contemporary literature. This topic alone, however, does not
provide the essay with its essential unity, although every aspect of the essay
illuminates that topic, even when--at the end of the essay--Vidal begins to
drift into metaphysical speculations on the reasons for such shallow literary
criticism. His ability to achieve this virtuoso sense of a "whole" arises from his
own extremely clear relationship to the material. Such a strong perspective,
something students rarely achieve, allows him to use humor like a sword.
"Bookish men" have a "long historic record of bad guesses" about literary works
(Vidal, 1993, p. 10); affirmative and safe novels give "warm comfort" (Vidal,

74
                                                                                   Architectonics and Style

1993, p. 11); and critics who follow the crowds ignore contemporary writers
to focus on safer, canonical writers "contemplated on the safe green campus of
some secluded school" (Vidal, 1993, p. 14). Vidal's snarky humor amuses as it
slices, a humor made possible by (1) a clear sense of the whole (he knows what
he wants to say); and (2) a clear relation to his material.

   As for his sense of the "other," the intonation he articulates with his reported
speech adds to his topic and reaffirms his personal relationship to that topic.
Clearly, he is judging! Consider the lurking sense of the "other" in this jab at a
nineteenth century critic in Blackwood's Magazine who in 1817 thought little
of Samuel Coleridge:

         Mr. Coleridge conceives himself to be a far greater man than
         the public is likely to admit; and we wish to waken him
         from what seems to us a most ludicrous delusion. He seems
         to believe that every tongue is wagging in his praise ... The
         truth is that Mr. Coleridge is but an obscure name in English
         literature. (1993, p. 11)

   The intonation in this "reported speech" is double-voiced, a complex
relationship to the "other" made possible by Vidal's own, clear perspective on
the topic. On one hand, he is including the critic's comments in a list of three
critics who all spoke ignorantly but with integrity about nineteenth century
authors who then became canonical; therefore, the mere presence of this
quotation damns it. Yet, Vidal scores points for wit by seeming to agree with
the critic's attacks on Coleridge's "preciosity and obscurantism" (when, in fact,
he clearly feels the opposite). We know Vidal's true feelings because the bulk of
the "obscurity" falls on the 1813 critic, of course, not Coleridge. This complex
intonation is exactly the sort of thing readers admire when they admire Vidal's
style--and architectonics can help us see and then articulate what he is doing.

Surplus of Vision

   Another, related concept contributing to good style is "surplus of vision,"
and before we leave Gore Vidal, I want to address it. Because of the typical
emphasis in composition studies on voice (ever since the Dartmouth Conference
in 1966 and throughout the 1970s), I feel the trope of vision (sapheneia) has
been somewhat overlooked when examining style. A special kind of vision with
implications for style forms when we create an architectonic, personal relation
to a topic. This special vision is the result of a self-conscious understanding that

                                                                                                 75
Greer

we exist in a particular and unique place and time. The gift of architectonic
awareness is what Bakhtin calls a "surplus of vision," defined for our purposes
as the ability of an author to see more than the reader can see. As individuals,
we experience a partial vision of the world. Another person, however, can
sometimes see more than we can see because he or she stands in a different place
and time. Bakhtin describes our poor limitations in this way:

         He does not see the agonizing tension of his own muscles,
         does not see the entire, plastically consummated postures
         of his own body, or the expression of suffering on his own
         face. He does not see the clear blue sky against background
         of which his suffering outward image is delineated for me.
         (1990, p. 25)

   On the other hand, someone else--an outsider--can see these things
because he or she has a "surplus of vision." Editors can always see errors and
weaknesses because they are not as close to the text as the writers: they have
"surplus of vision." The best style will arise from a writer who struggles with
his architectonic relationship to his topic and then uses that perspective to see
more than his reader can see. Let's return to Vidal's essay for signs that he has
this "surplus of vision."

   Signs of it exist in the reader that Vidal assumes for this essay, "Novelists and
Critics of the 1940s," which appeared in 1953 in New World Writing #3. This
book was a paperback anthology series featuring literary criticism that Vidal
had helped to found several years earlier. The assumed reader of this article is
educated traditionally, like Vidal himself, and would have known major figures
of the literary canon (George Eliot, Samuel Coleridge, Charlotte Bronte) and
contemporary literary critics (Edmund Wilson, Malcolm Crowley, Lionel
Trilling of the 1940s and 1950s). This reader could have understood Vidal as
he attacks contemporary critics by showing the disparity between the way we
currently value such classics as The Mill on the Floss by George Eliot and the way
reviewers panned it when the novel was first published:

         We do not believe any good end is to be effected by fictions
         which fill the mind with details of imaginary vice and distress
         and crime or which teach it instead of endeavoring after ful-
         fillment of simple and ordinary duty to aim at the assurance
         of superiority by creating for itself fanciful and incompre-
         hensible perplexities. Rather we believe that the effect of such

76
                                                                                   Architectonics and Style

         fictions tends to render those who fall under their influence
         unfit for practical exertion by intruding on minds which
         ought to be guarded from impurity the unnecessary knowl-
         edge of evil. (as quoted in Vidal, 1993, p. 10-11)

   By including this quotation, Vidal expresses a surplus of vision that sees
more than the contemporary reviewer could (presumably because that 1817
reviewer was narrowly constrained by a cultural bias), and Vidal expresses a
surplus of vision to his own reader with his long and profound view on cultural
limitations. He gives this long view to his reader almost as a gift, supremely
confident in his assertions. That confidence is a key part of his style.

An Example of Weak Style

   Now, let's examine a piece of student writing where almost all of these
aspects of architectonics are missing. This is a paragraph from a famous text, a
student essay that appears in "Inventing the University" by David Bartholomae.
It is a placement essay written during a freshman orientation in response to
this prompt: "Describe a time when you did something you felt to be creative.
Then, on the basis of the incident you have described, go on to draw some
general conclusions about `creativity.'" Here's the first paragraph of what that
student wrote:

         In the past time I thought that an incident was creative when
         I had to make a clay model of the earth, but not of the clas-
         sical or your everyday model of the earth which consists of
         the two cores, the mantle and the crust. I thought of these
         things in a dimension of which it would be unique but easy
         to comprehend. Of course, your materials to work with were
         basic and limited at the same time, but thought help to put
         this limit into a right attitude or frame of mind to work with
         the clay. (Bartholmae, 1985, p. 624)

   Bartholomae explains this essay's weaknesses in terms of limited writer
agency. This student, he believes, "doesn't have the knowledge that would make
the discourse more than a set of conventional rituals and gestures" (1985, p.
625). The assumption that underpins Bartholomae's position is that discourses
can inhabit and control individuals. He takes that position largely from Roland

                                                                                                 77
Greer

Barthes and concludes, "A writer does not write ... but is, himself, written by
the language available to him" (1985, p. 631).

   From a Bakhtinian perspective, Bartholomae is entirely correct when he
argues that in this paragraph we can see the student struggling with language
and losing. Bartholomae concludes that the student has not been inhabited
by the discourses that create an "insider position of privilege" (1985, p. 645).
I would differ with Bartholomae's analysis, based upon Bakhtin's concept of
architectonics, in this way: Yes, we struggle with language to form architectonic
wholes of meaning, but we must win that battle and not lose it to a discourse.
We must make the discourse our own.

   Like Lev Vgotsky, Bakhtin believes in inner speech. We appropriate elements
of discourse to create intonation, accepting some and rejecting others. This
acceptance and rejection can pertain to any discourse, including a dominant
discourse. We are not appropriated; we gain mastery. One sign of this mastery
is surplus of vision; another is intonation. We take from discourses the parts
that we need to form a whole of meaning, and we communicate that clarity to
our readers and listeners by telling them things they cannot see or understand
themselves, given our difference in time and space.

   Let's reconsider this paragraph in terms of architectonics and style in three
ways:

   1. Lack of a Sense of the Whole. No clear sense of the whole exists in
this student paragraph--which makes it impossible to communicate a clear
meaning. The prompt has provided no clear audience, so the student stumbles
in his syntax with language. Without a clear audience in mind, the writer doesn't
know how to form a whole for that audience, resulting in phrases such as "was
creative was" and "but thought help to put." The concept of "creativity" does
not guide all three sentences. It appears at the beginning of the first sentence
("an incident was creative"), but creativity as a topic is only implied in the other
two sentences, leaving the reader to wonder about the sense of the whole. The
author loses any chance of communicating meaning without that sense of the
whole.

   2. Lack of personal relation to the topic. The nonstandard word order
reveals that the reader isn't communicating with anyone specifically and only
weakly communicating with himself. This topic is not personal to the student.
As a result, he has no strong perspective.

   3. Lack of "surplus of vision." The author doesn't have information to
communicate that the reader doesn't already know, although the reference to
"mantle and crust" is promising. He doesn't follow through, however, and
discussing materials that are "basic and limited at the same time" fails to advance
the discussion. This lack of confident assertion is a lack of surplus of vision.

78
                                                                                   Architectonics and Style

Conclusion

   Before we can be persuaded that something is true, we need to feel that
we have all the facts before us. F. H. Bradley, in his 1907 essay "On Truth and
Copying" explains:

         Truth is not satisfied until we have all the facts, and un-
         til we understand perfectly what we have. And we do not
         understand perfectly the given material until we have it all
         together harmoniously [the italics are mine], in such a way,
         that is, that we are not impelled to strive for another and a
         better way of holding it together. Truth is not satisfied, in
         other words, until it is all-containing and one. (as quoted in
         Magee, 2008, p. 61)

   Here, Bradley summarizes key ideas related to architectonics and style. A
strong style needs to impart an understanding of a whole, and the parts of that
whole must work together harmoniously. That harmony occurs when writers
relate personally to that sense of the whole and communicate a clear perspective
based upon this personal relationship. Of course the sense of the whole itself is
only possible because the writer believes she has a "surplus of vision" and wants
to communicate it.

   The actual mechanism by which a student can obtain surplus of vision
and architectonic harmony resembles some form of proximal development, as
described by Lev Vygotsky. First the student must be good at one thing before she
can be good at other things, including style. The teacher must lead the student
through a series of steps to first see a sense of the whole, and then relate to it,
and then relate to the parts with intonation, and then revise to insure a surplus
of vision. Sociocultural theorists would call these steps a form of scaffolding in
which the student develops greater and greater stylistic competence.

   One composition scholar in this collection who describes this movement
towards stylistic competence is Tom Pace in "Language Instruction at St. Paul's
Grammar School and Today's Stylistic Classroom." In his article, he offers an
intriguing discussion of a pedagogical approach that aligns with architectonics
well. Built on Erasmus's stylistic textbook De Copia, and following precepts
articulated by Cicero, this approach attempts to fuse wisdom with eloquence.
Whether that stylistic competence is created with the traditional exercises
associated with the progymnasmata and declamatio, or modern versions built
on templates from They Say/I Say, Pace describes a methodology that demands
self-awareness for the purpose of public expression. His emphasis on exercises

                                                                                                 79
Greer

that look at issues from multiple perspectives could almost certainly create the
surplus of vision discussed by Bakhtin, and the emphasis on public expression
is worthy of further exploration in terms of architectonics.

   Whichever exercises are used, at each step in the process, the student should
stand in the position of authority or competence, creating a history of success.
This success will help develop a degree of self-awareness about his or her place
in time and space. Style is the registration in writing of this architectonic
understanding.

REFERENCES

Aristotle. (1991). The art of rhetoric. London: Penguin Books.
Bakhtin, M. (1990). Art and answerability: Early philosophical essays by M. M.

   Bakhtin. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Bartholomae, D. (2003). Inventing the University. In V. Villanueva, Jr. (Ed.),

   Cross-talk in comp theory: A reader (2nd ed.) (pp. 623-653). Urbana, Illinois:
   National Council of Teachers of English.
Greer, R. (2001). Toward a theory of generative rhetoric. CCTE Studies: 54-64.
Holquist, M. (1990). Dialogism (2nd ed.). London: Routledge.
Kant, I. (1985). The critique of pure reason. Houndmills: MacMillan
Magee, G. A. (2008). Architectonics, truth, and rhetoric. Philosophy and Rheto-
   ric. 42(1), 59-71.
McKeon, R. Rhetoric: Essays in invention and discovery (Backman, M., Ed.).
   Woodbridge, CT: Ox Bow.
Morson, G. S. & Emerson, C. (1990). Mikhail Bakhtin: Creation of a prosaics.
   Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Paré, J. (2007). Writing architectonically: Applying Bakhtin's architectonics to
   composition. CCTE Studies: 47-53.
Ritchie, J. (1998). Beginning writers: Diverse voices and individual identity.
   Landmark essays on Bakhtin, rhetoric, and writing. Mahwah: Hermagoras
   Press.
Vidal, G. (1993). Novelists and critics of the 1940s. In United States: Essays
   1952-1992 (pp. 10-22). New York: Random House.
Williams, J. & Colomb, G. G. (2010). Lessons in clarity and grace (10th ed.).
   Boston:Longman.

80
    MAKING STYLE PRACTICALLY

    COOL AND THEORETICALLY

    HIP

      Keith Rhodes
      Grand Valley State University

   Style still has an image problem in composition, despite substantively strong
restoration efforts like those of Paul Butler, T. R. Johnson, and Tom Pace.
Certainly, scholarly interest in style has been expanding, but this expansion
has had limited range. While composing this chapter, I reviewed the last four
years' worth of articles in College Composition and Communication, finding
only two regular articles directly engaged with style: Ian Barnard's "The Ruse of
Clarity," and Steve Lamos' "Language, Literacy, and the Institutional Dynamics
of Racism: Late 1960's Writing Instruction for `High-Risk' African-American
Undergraduate Students at One Predominantly White University." Lamos, in
an argument few style advocates would dispute, demonstrates the racist effects of
"emphasis on the supposed superiority of white mainstream language practices"
(2008, p. 49). Certainly, any responsible approach to style will need to consider
such effects and account for them. Barnard's article more directly presents the
problem facing style scholarship. Barnard positions Williams, Lanham, and
other advocates of "clarity" as simply old-fashioned types left behind by the
postmodern, social turn. Rather than turn his advocacy for more complex
writing into a vision of what "style" might be in that light, he simply claims
victory for the right to defy clarity advocates, then leaves the field. Apparently,
advocates of "style," reduced to being advocates of clarity, become simply stodgy
enemies to be vanquished and left to our nostalgic reveries. That popular view,
however, is a severe mischaracterization. Effective work on style connects with
invigorating classroom practice, and theoretical work on style directly engages
contemporary and progressive work on matters such as cultural boundaries and
multimodal composing, as this article will demonstrate.

   Nevertheless, style advocates bear the onus of changing these common
misperceptions by clarifying the nature of our progressivism and making style
hip and cool once more. I use "hip and cool" playfully here and throughout
this article, but being hip and cool is a serious matter, and increasingly so.
As Richard Lanham argues, we have entered an age of information overload,
so that the ability to draw attention to a message in the first place becomes
a much larger part of designing effective messages. Whether we understand

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.06  81
Rhodes

the shaping of opinion as "rhetoric," or as a matter of framing (Adler-Kassner
& O'Neill), or even of marketing and "branding" (Rhodes), there will be no
broad revival of interest in style scholarship unless style scholars and teachers
can make style practically "cool" as classroom work and theoretically "hip"
as a scholarly subject. If we are to fulfill the prospects of style as the core of
composition, style advocates need to recognize that style scholarship, despite
capable intellectual efforts in recent years, has remained something like a stale
brand or passé fashion, a message that too many potential audiences think they
know fully and no longer need to hear--even when they do. Style needs re-
framing, rebranding, and more eye appeal--in short, to become hip and cool
among composition and rhetoric scholars once more. Without sharp focus on
the hipness and the cool of style, whatever it is that style advocates have to offer
will not gather the level of attention that increasingly becomes the key to the
rhetorical effect of any message--even scholarly publication.

   Thus, I first want to focus attention on what is fresh, new, and exciting
about contemporary style scholarship. It can be tempting simply to wrangle
with critics like Barnard, to unpeel their reliance on the ironic hegemony
of postmodernism as a silent "foundation" for their views, to examine their
failure to point out what exactly is wrong with clarity of expression, when it
can be achieved, to interrogate their unwillingness to engage carefully Joseph
Williams' thoughtful arguments on the ethics of clarity in the final chapter of
Style. More productive, however, would be to generate a new frame for style
by harking back to the original senses of the word--the interestingly complex
concept, beautifully explained in Lawler's article-length definition of the term
(an etymological tour de force), of an impression that we intentionally hold out
to the world to enhance our image (2003, p. 233-34). Or, in short, we need
to think of style in composition in ways more like what "style" means in other
contexts--the very art of the cool and the hip. Style scholars badly need to give
"style" some style--or, as Victor Villanueva put it in his review essay on recent
scholarly books on style, some "stylin" (2011, p. 727).

   In the end, that effort might be surprisingly easy, and not merely because
the groundswell has already started--or, as Villanueva notes (citing Butler), re-
started, given style's hidden importance during the recent heyday of "invention"
scholarship (2011, p. 736). We simply need to tap into the style that "style"
still has and has always had as classroom work with students who are eager for
it. My regular teaching rotation Grand Valley State University's writing major
often includes a course titled "Writing with Style." Invariably, most students,
innocent of our scholarly wrangling and new to the "brand," enter the class
hoping that we will be wearing berets, smoking dark oval cigarettes, and writing
vivid, daring prose. And indeed, at least part of the agenda for the course--a

82
                                                                   Practically Cool and Theoretically Hip

foundational course for our writing major, taken by students on both creative
and professional tracks--is writing vivid, daring prose. As Crystal Fodrey
explains, the rise of creative non-fiction as a form of "creative," journalistic,
and academic writing brings issues of style into particular focus (this volume).
More than ever, style is not, to its practitioners, a simple matter of sitting up
straight and behaving well. Stylefocused practices like imitation are not, to
most style advocates, slavish copying, or even earnest emulation. Indeed, at
its best, imitation is ironic, playful, even carnivalesque, as in Gregory Roper's
imitation-based textbook (2007), a paradoxically postmodern take on classical
imitation. As our students--particularly our writing majors--know, style is
inherently cool. As a cool craft, it has its own instruments, like the variations
in tone arising from variations in "psychic distance" between the writer and
the topic (Ellis, this volume)--that is, changes in how much I am feeling the
heft and texture of my own words, right now, while I write about language
(to show a couple of variations on that distance). Style advocates should not
have great trouble getting that message about the freshness of style out to our
several audiences--even fellow scholars. In the first part of my argument, I will
examine our prospects for doing that. Then I will return to how work on style
with our students amply demonstrates that a progressive theoretical hipness is
style's real stock in trade.

   In sum, "style" needs a fresh style. Writing scholars have learned a great
deal in recent years about the role of linguistic "frames" and other non-rational
influences on decision-making. Such frames pre-dispose audiences to decide
in certain ways rather than others. Led by prominent figures like Linda Adler-
Kassner (The Activist WPA) and her co-author Peggy O'Neil (Reframing Writing
Assessment), writing scholars have urged us to use the concept of frames in
efforts to argue for better methods of both writing instruction and writing
program administration. Of course, for even longer, writing scholars have used
postmodern thought to urge that we must make the "social turn" in scholarship,
acknowledging that discourse communities frame and shape our judgments
about writing, language, and reality itself. We can usefully summarize much of
this advice as asking us to take fashion sense seriously--to consider the hip and
the cool as having weight and substance, and to consider the tactic of being a
fashion leader as a part of any effort to encourage changes in practice. While few
have come right out and argued for an end to rationality in writing scholarship
(and fewer still have acted consistently with any such implicit faith), we must
certainly grant that any argument for a significant change in view must attend
to its own frame and set what is in essence a new fashion trend. Advocates
of style would do well to attend to the larger issue of framing--to examine
the current "stodgy" frame for style, avoid reinforcing that frame, and look for

                                                                                                 83
Rhodes

ways to reframe the discussion of style. Style advocates should invest deeply in
seeing style as a progressive force in writing pedagogy, writing scholarship, and
ultimately, as Paul Butler has explained so fully and well (2008, pp. 114-41),
writing pedagogy's public image. I will open this section by tracking the style
trends that have created our current, largely regressive, frame for discussing
style. Then, I will address the kinds of new, progressive work that style advocates
can use to refresh that frame and make style work stylish again.

THE OLD FRAME: STYLE GOES DOWN WITH GRAMMAR

   Particularly from the viewpoint of style, we can rehearse the familiar
narrative of writing education in short strokes. As Berlin usefully summarizes,
the study of literature and the teaching of writing emerged in rough synchrony
in the late nineteenth century, part of an impulse to teach a new wave of lower-
class students the ways of the upper classes. Upper-class readers mainly noticed
the grammatical error in the writing of these new students. Thus, in the spirit
of the Industrial Revolution, then in full swing, colleges set about industriously
to call out those errors in written "themes" and correct them. The new class
of literature scholars, whose expertise included close reading of language,
became the natural leaders of those efforts. But quickly the sheer volume and
repetitiveness of the work generated an intermediary class of labor to do the
actual work, managed by the most accomplished (or simply most advantaged)
of the literature scholars (Berlin, 1987, pp. 20-57).

   As we now know, the entire idea was mostly a construct of its times. Studies
questioning the effectiveness of the approach appeared almost immediately
and have persisted ever since (Daniels), culminating in Hillocks' pithy chart
graphically showing grammar as the least effective of "treatments" for teaching
writing (1995, p. 220). Even so, pockets of resistance and better ideas rose
and faded like niche species in evolutionary charts. For decades, no other
approaches seemed to have any power against the larger narrative that the
"right" way to teach writing was to teach grammar and mark up all the errors.
While it nominally focused mostly on the "style" of student writing, it converted
concern for effective style almost entirely into concern for grammatical editing.
In hindsight, the whole plan seems quite preposterous; faculty trained to apply
interdisciplinary vision to the most challenging and exalted texts were then
somehow supposed to improve the writing of every new first-year student, using
the never-tested, never-proven method of grammatical study and critique. Of
course, those who needed this treatment least were most likely to thrive in those
circumstances, and so they became those who applied the treatment to the next

84
                                                                   Practically Cool and Theoretically Hip

round of students. This grammar-based model survived for a very long time
on a combination of wishful thinking, neglect, and cheap labor; nevertheless,
it never had any genuine pedagogical foundation, and it could not withstand
close study.

   Supposedly, a new paradigm started as far back as the early 1960s and
transformed collegiate writing education. In short strokes, writing scholars
finally got the news about grammar's failure, learned the benefits of writing
processes, made the rhetorical turn and the social turn, professionalized writing
program administration and writing teacher preparation, and grew a substantial
new field of composition and rhetoric. That whole movement purported, at
least, to leave "grammar" behind. While all along there has been criticism of
the research opposed to teaching grammar, there has not been positive research
in its favor. Furthermore, the most effective model of teaching writing requires
no grammar study (Hillocks, 1995, pp. 54-57). In the new paradigm, sentences
mostly take care of themselves while teachers focus on developing the rhetorical
and scholarly abilities that produce the most highly valued writing.

   Supposedly. In truth, a review of almost any public evidence about writing
teaching shows that the grammarian paradigm has never died. Handbooks replete
with correction codes have massive markets. Every composition administrator
of any experience has observed that grammatical correction remains a large
portion of teacher response to student writing, even in the most "enlightened"
program. Anyone who spends any time, as I do, considering and ruling on
transfer equivalencies knows that vast numbers of colleges have preliminary
"grammar" courses for the least prepared students--despite a complete lack of
evidence that these courses do more good than harm for those who take them.

   This entire scuffle has had the marked effect of diminishing the role of style
in talk about writing. What grammarians practiced had little if any focus on the
rhetorical appeal of language, and opponents of teaching grammar tended, to
paraphrase Robert Connors, to erase the sentence as a visible area of any focus.
Certainly, most teachers of all kind nevertheless attended to style all along,
but in mostly invisible or misunderstood ways. As a result, very little writing
scholarship addresses style issues any more, and much of that which does mainly
laments that we even have such concerns. Thus far, the scholarship urging the
revival of style has had little impact on the larger conversation.

   Despite the grim story of grammar, there has been an alternative story about
style. Nobody seriously contests the stylistic advantages of sentence combining,
imitation and Francis Christensen's generative sentence rhetoric, at least not
since Connors' "Erasure of the Sentence" re-established that such approaches
remained effective in first-year composition. As Connors reported, all of
these methods have backing in our theoretical and experimental scholarship.

                                                                                                 85
Rhodes

No mainstream textbooks make much use of them, but teachers can find
well-informed niche textbooks for all of them. Somewhat like bowties, such
approaches to style always seem fashionably permissible, even if never truly
chic. Like a good warm parka, fleece boots, or high-function rain gear, such
approaches win favor by proposing methods that simply work. Even so, such
results sound mundane and weak. Sentence combining, imitation, and adding
trailing modifiers will help students win higher evaluations of their writing, but
they sound oldfashioned, and partial--and they probably are.

   Work with written style actually does much more than just work with
grammar and manipulate sentence parts. Done fully, work with style challenges
boundaries of grammatical convention, genre expectation, standard usage,
effective expression, aesthetic form, and the ethics of expression, all at once.
As Butler has explained, style has always also been part of advanced work with
invention. As my students eagerly anticipate upon entering the class entitled
"Writing with Style," nothing could be cooler than style, for a writer. We already
know how to start this work. Mainly, what we need is a plan, one that reframes
style as a part of the progressive work of composition.

THE NEW FRAME: MAKING COOL STYLE A HOT TOPIC

   Paul Butler concludes Out of Style with a summary plea that "compositionists
redefine style in a way that is meaningful to the field and that makes the
study consonant with our disciplinary vision" (2008, p. 157). I would like to
expand Butler's call by pointing out three specific areas in which a rhetoric
of style connects directly with very current and vital threads of composition
scholarship. Loosely speaking, we can, and should, explore style through the
lenses of art, philosophy, and technology, all fully informed by the social
and pragmatist epistemologies to which the best-received composition
scholarship currently resorts. As I will address at the end, we might also usefully
connect style more visibly with the burgeoning, cutting-edge scholarship on
intercultural, international, and interlingual writing. It may well be that forging
this somewhat complex connection between style and culture simply requires a
revival of interest in style.

   No current writing scholar can step into aesthetics without recognizing
that artistic impact is culturally situated, problematized by concerns about the
conserving and regressive power of monologic forms of art. Yet we should also
be past the naïve notion that anyone can escape the ways in which art exerts
influence. The aesthetic appeal of written style remains pervasively influential.
In some ways, the obviousness of this point hides it. Kate Ronald bravely

86
                                                                   Practically Cool and Theoretically Hip

addresses this dark secret openly in "Style: The Hidden Agenda in Composition
Classes or One Reader's Confession." When she gets to the heart of that
personal confession, she admits to student readers, on behalf of all writing
teachers, that "we are still influenced by your writing style more than we admit,
or perhaps know" (2003, p. 197)--and that ""I worry that I'm responding to
something in my students' writing that I'm not telling them about--their style,
the sound of their voices on paper" (2003, p. 197). Indeed, as Derek Soles
demonstrates, writing teachers do in fact respond to particular kinds of style
in first-year composition classes, in ways that we can explain in familiar and
concrete terms--no matter what we might think about the ultimate wisdom
of those largely unexamined results, or their likely perpetuation of social
norms we might also wish to challenge. As Nora Bacon explains, the path to a
genuine response, even from a writing teacher, is not "plain" style, in itself "a
disappointingly anemic conception"; instead, it is the ability "to arrange words
artfully, striving for beauty, wit, grace, eloquence" (2010, p. 123).

   Certainly, we will find it difficult and contentious to examine which
particular aesthetic aspects of written style we might emphasize in the writing of
our students--or work to de-emphasize in our own evaluations. Yet prominent
composition scholars have been doing similar work in closely related areas that
are not as fully within the range of our direct expertise. For instance, writing
scholars and teachers have heard many calls for working with visual imagery
(see, e.g., Fleckenstein). As such authors stress, writing scholars need to expand
our horizons to include nonlinear and affective thinking--particularly, as
Fleckenstein demonstrates, if we mean to help our students take genuine social
action. It should make perfect sense, then, also to work with the nonlinear and
affective aspects of written style. If composition scholars can be held to the
challenge of addressing visual rhetoric, we can certainly be expected to address
the similarly aesthetic rhetoric of style in language, and to generate work as
smart as Fleckenstein's to theorize and implement our approaches. That kind of
work with language is our more natural expertise, an expertise we already have
by preparation, inclination, and feel. As Butler points out, the generative work
of composition scholarship in the 60s and 70s was actually intrinsically involved
with this rhetoric of style, a matter misrepresented in much of the re-telling of
that history within the "epistemic" narrative--as if treatments of style in those
days were all about either "Romantic" voice or "current-traditional" correctness
(2008, pp. 56-85). Style and invention can instead work together as the work
Berthoff joins together as "forming," an act of intelligent imagination (1981, pp.
61-67). Composition scholars have already developed a thorough background
in culturally informed approaches to issues of aesthetic rhetoric. Against this
entire background, the dearth of intelligent, current developments in "stylistic

                                                                                                 87
Rhodes

rhetoric," the art of shaping language for effect, seem almost appallingly
negligent--or at best, just downright odd. Style advocates can re-frame style
as part of a fully problematized art of writing, addressing in particular ways the
complex aesthetics of style.

   In addition to the art of style, style scholarship should address the philosophy
of style. I am using the word "philosophy" here to grab hold of a large and
furiously active body of concerns that we might call epistemology, theory,
literary criticism, cultural study, or any of the words scholars use to attempt
to find some ground for metanarrative--here, metanarrative about language
itself. This kind of thought that I call philosophy has been, for at least two
decades now, the most compelling area of exploration in current composition
scholarship. To ally style with philosophy, then, would be a powerful move
toward making work with style compelling. Further, the trick is easily done.
The choice of language and its forms is always entirely bound up in philosophy
and never comes free of it. As Rebecca Moore Howard articulates in promoting
a socially aware "contextualist pedagogy" of style, "style can become a tool
for defining, analyzing, and problematizing cultural forces" and "become
a way for students to understand their own stylistic choices and options" in
their "sociocultural contexts" (2005, p. 55). Everything that I have lumped
into "philosophy," encompassing all the most fashionable authorities used in
rhetoric and composition scholarship, can legitimately be brought to bear on
the careful and precise turns of style.

   Perhaps nobody illustrates the philosophical possibilities of style better than
critical linguist Rob Pope, whose extraordinary textbook Textual Intervention
invites students to explore the cultural meanings of small changes, or
"interventions," in the style of texts. For example, in one exercise, students
reconstruct the opening of a chapter in Robinson Crusoe that begins with the
title, "I call him Friday." The introduction to the exercise asks students to think
about "who is represented as saying, seeing, and perceiving" (1995, p. 101).
Pope invites a wide variety of changes in perspective, each closely tied to specific
changes in language--such as the indications of power roles in the simple use of
"I" in the title sentence "I call him Friday," or the use of the name for a day of
the week as the name for the "othered" human being. As Pope's work displays, it
should really be a commonplace that the philosophy of a text is entirely bound
up in the details of its style, and that those details are themselves philosophically
interesting. To do such work is to work with what Russell Greer more fully
explains elsewhere in this collection as the "architectonics" of style. Too often,
despite knowing better, composition scholars instead unthinkingly recreate
the philosophically defunct metaphor of style as fancy dress put on meaning,
escaping talk about full architectonic style to focus on the "larger" political or

88
                                                                   Practically Cool and Theoretically Hip

philosophical issues to which style becomes connected--discussing students'
"right to their own language" rather than engaging deeply with the actual details
of that language, how it works and what it does. As Frank Farmer notes, writing
about Mikhail Bakhtin's own pedagogy, ambitious teachers might instead wish
to explore how students gain a sense of "when and why ... one stylistic choice is
preferable to another," and ask, "How can they understand the circumstances,
or contexts, that dictate the fitness of one substitution over any other?" (2005,
p. 340). At bottom, a fully philosophic approach to style pedagogy would be
remarkably hip in our current theoretical contexts.

   Then, of course, there is technology. Richard Lanham's The Economics of
{Attention} begins its remarkable exploration of our still-emerging information
age with an interesting cascade of points that respond to his seemingly simple
question about what changes when communication moves from the page to the
screen. Lanham argues most centrally that, with information overly abundant,
attention to information becomes the scarce commodity, the real currency
of the emerging economic paradigm of the information age (2006, p. xi). In
simpler terms, it's all about the eyeballs. Lanham notes the primacy of style in
this economics of attention: "The devices that regulate attention are stylistic
devices. Attracting attention is what style is all about" (2006, p. xi). That is,
those who best understand the rhetoric of style in emerging media will construct
our increasingly virtual worlds--and control their material roots. Like many
academics, Lanham wrestles with the downright sophistic implications of such
powerful knowledge. What is entirely clear, however, is that rhetoric and style
will have extraordinary roles in what comes next.

   While one could argue that much of the emerging rhetoric will be visual,
language is always completely bound up in any form of meaning-making.
Those who understand the idea of manipulating language to create changes in
attention will have a strong role to play in the emerging economy of attention--
as perhaps illustrated by the fact that a leading thinker about this complex
economics of attention happens to be a leading stylist who has chosen to write
an engaging, but extended, print book (albeit with digital ancillaries). Style is
the part of rhetoric where we think about why someone should attend at all to
what we have written. As the world becomes increasingly awash in competing
messages, it becomes clearer that whether someone will read what we write--
will spend attention on our words--becomes increasingly important relative
to whatever else might be better or worse about the message. In an age of
information overload, a message without style is not just a bad message; it
is no message. A scholarship of progressive style can explain how to drive
eyeballs to words themselves, a critical matter in this emerging economics of
attention.

                                                                                                 89
Rhodes

MAKING STYLE COOL FOR SCHOOL

   In the writing department at Grand Valley, "Writing with Style" has
become arguably our most central course, bringing together professors with
backgrounds in academic, creative, and professional writing. I must note first
that my understanding relies mostly on work done by my colleagues Roger
Gilles, Chris Haven, and Kay Losey, as well as discussions with many other
members of our Department of Writing, though of course I have had the
chance to hone my impressions with my own teaching of the course. "Writing
with Style" is the one course in our curriculum taught by professors from all
backgrounds; it is the most central course for our majors and minors, the one
that serves best as an introduction to the field of writing as a whole. Teaching
the class requires all of us to stretch, to think about style in ways that will at
the same time help students to write a poem, a memo, a hyperlinked menu,
even a scholarly argument--and more pointedly, to write the unfolding kinds
of writing we can as yet barely imagine. While that course clearly goes beyond
the normal concerns of composition and rhetoric, it helps us examine several
key points about the role of style in writing education. I must avoid trying to
claim too much based on our experience, since much of what we are learning
is still emergent and raw, consisting largely of our intuitive answers to the
problem posed by claiming to teach such a course. Yet it seems very clear that
our experiences point us in the direction of style as a progressive and emerging
part of writing education, rather than a regressive and merely historical one.
Indeed, what is most fascinating about the course is the way in which it seems
to be opening up new pedagogical territory.

   As to the aesthetics of style, we have found that attention to style from the
viewpoint of writing differs subtly but importantly from the kind of analysis
that students do in traditional literature courses. In the words of the title of
one of the core textbooks for the course, we find ourselves attending to "the
sound on the page" (Yagoda, 2004), the ways in which turns of language--and
the invention of contexts for that language--evoke the senses in support of
aesthetic and rhetorical appeals. We also become quite fascinated by both the
craft of small passages and the ways in which authors situate certain structures
in larger bodies of work. As a result, we have decided to create more detailed
and advanced versions of this foundational style course, focusing in greater
depth on particular authors' work at both the "micro" level of passages and the
"macro" level of establishing contexts for the reading of their work. While we
do introduce various schematics for analysis--for instance, Williams' concepts
of character, action, and modification, or the classical rhetorical figures--we
find ourselves increasingly drawn to a more direct sensory description, of a kind

90
                                                                   Practically Cool and Theoretically Hip

closer to the work of art studios than literature or linguistics classes. We pore
over sample passages from a wide variety of sources, try our hands at imitating
the most intriguing of them, and break out by inventing our own, entirely new
styles based on experimental premises and guesswork. Especially in imitation
work, students regularly find themselves intuitively drawn to visual aspects of
the page, a critical move that at first caught me by surprise but that I have
since learned to feature prominently. The analysis of style in purely lexical
terms simply doesn't cut it, doesn't get down to what makes style passionately
compelling for writers or effective for readers. Even Yagoda's title does not go far
enough; not just sound, but all the senses and the visceral experience of reading
have a role to play in establishing the context in which readers respond to style.
A writer who focuses only on turns of phrase and fails to consider all the rest
considers too little of the craft.

   Turning to the philosophy of style, we find ourselves directly involved in
practical work with prominent theoretical contentions. Students come to us
with a fascinating and diverse mix of hopes and fears. Some hope to develop
something they unproblematically call "their own" style, and come prepared to
fear and loathe anything that would seem to be culturally conforming. Others
hope to find exactly the right formula by which to meet cultural expectations,
and fear anything that smacks of interpretive uncertainty. Many seek to become
stylistic chameleons, able to adapt to any writing ecosystem. But as we explore a
wide variety of schemes and examples of style, students increasingly notice that
this tension between the personal and the cultural has no tidy resolution. Authors
whose styles had seemed Romantically individualized appear also to have been
shaped by history and circumstances; formulaic visions of genre and usage turn
out to depend very heavily on particular, even unique circumstances (does your
boss think you can split infinitives?). We routinely find students duplicating the
insights of critical theory before having read it. To become seriously immersed
in style is to become acutely aware that language is most essentially interpretive,
a never-ending negotiation between vast cultural constructs on the one hand
and, on the other, the particular and often unsettling viewpoint of a writer
with one unique cultural and linguistic location. "Writing with Style" becomes
essentially our most central course in rhetorical theory--not mainly because we
"teach" it, but because we end up living in it.

   The impacts of technology get shorter shrift in our particular class because
we know our majors and minors will learn a great deal more about that in
other classes on document design, writing for the web, and composing for
multimedia. Yet we routinely teach the class with half or even two-thirds of
the sessions taking place in computer lab classrooms, and our aesthetics and
philosophies of style come to be entirely infused with our awareness that much

                                                                                                 91
Rhodes

of the writing our students will do next will need to integrate visual design and
information theory. To a very large extent, the strong interest some students
take in a vivid, unique style has little to do with Romantic notions of voice and
very much to do with the intensifying competition for attention that marks
online communication. Web sites, Facebook pages and Twitter accounts gain
status by attracting eyeballs, and the dull and mundane will not cut it. Current
media demand concise, vivid prose in ways little has before. As Folk explains
more fully, they also demand a "writing" ability that crosses symbolic and visual
boundaries, a truly multimodal sense of style (this volume). A very thorough
command of style, both as technique and concept, has enormous value in
working with new media, in adjusting to their new blends of constraint and
opportunity. Our course in style undoubtedly commands more cultural capital
than we have yet considered using, opening up onto the full practice of "cultural
performance" advocated and explained by Holcomb and Killingsworth. I find
myself wondering whether my own aesthetics and philosophy of style would
let me advertise the course ethically as the best preparation for writing effective
tweets, but it probably is. Ultimately, thinking about technology is what brings
thinking about aesthetics down to earth, making the sound and vision on the
page a compelling topic for our most committed of professional and technical
writers.

   Certainly, "Writing with Style" goes beyond what we do currently in our
own first-year composition program. Yet as we move forward with the more
advanced course, I find myself increasingly moving the simpler parts of what I
do there into my composition courses. If, as it seems to me, "Writing with Style"
is something of a laboratory for enhanced work in writing, then it might well be
that style can center an approach to composition that leaves behind nothing else
of importance in a composition class. After all, style invokes rhetoric, culture,
politics, philosophy, and technology, not to mention offering a way to consider
conventions that is anything but merely mechanical.

   I will raise one more such issue somewhat by way of an epilogue. Of
course, the richest and most productive work on style in composition should
take place in the context of what a reviewer of this article aptly expressed as
"cross-cultural and cross-national concerns that surface in the contemporary
classroom, particularly among ESL writers." It could not be more clear that
in such discussions were are responding to what is, most fundamentally and
practically, a question of style. For people concerned with writing, the rubber
hits the road on intercultural matters when the style of a student's writing does
not fit the expectations of readers. But that transaction also is never simply
about style; scholars in the field of writing rightly address the entire context of
that transaction in our scholarship. In what I see as work closely related to the

92
                                                                   Practically Cool and Theoretically Hip

teaching of style, I have begun examining whether the most productive literacy
work in the area of intercultural rhetoric might not be educating readers to take
on more of the work of intercultural translation, to see such translation as a
normal part of any communicative process, and not merely a "problem" for the
writer. That is, I see it as consistent with the discussion so far to suggest that in
matters of intercultural writing, the relationship between current scholarship
and style is reversed. Rather than win favor for connecting style with other
scholarship for the benefit of style, as I attempt here, in intercultural rhetoric
the argument must be instead to connect this other scholarship with style for
the benefit of that scholarship. There is likely to be little advantage in working
from the perspective of style and opening up within it a full consideration of
intercultural rhetoric. The connections and interactions are simply too complex
and expansive to fit under the heading of "style" itself. Rather, the vast amount
of current scholarship on intercultural rhetoric would be greatly improved if its
scholars had the vision to include matters of style and the teaching of style as
a normal, nearly inescapable part of their own inquiry. That they typically do
not I see as mainly a consequence of style's undue exclusion from the rest of our
scholarly discussions. I do see that resulting deficit as a highly regrettable result,
but not one much in need of complicated critique. The absence of practical
approaches to teaching style in such scholarship is remarkable, but I would
hope that it is a problem easily remedied simply by encouraging writing scholars
generally to be thinking, more often and more prominently, about the problems
of teaching style as a general topic. The connections between intercultural
rhetoric and style should naturally grow much vaster if more of us, more often,
think to ask, "Now, how will I teach students how to approach style in light of
this problem?" Ultimately, I see this very promising, very underdeveloped area
of complex research as a place where a greatly expanded study of style would
converge productively with ongoing research. But that would be metaphorically
a kind of running that we may well do better once they study of style itself is
up and walking.

CONCLUSION

   In the end, informed composition scholars teachers need to drive a simple but
profound change toward framing style as progressive. Doing so will pay multiple
and profound benefits, and it makes substantive sense. Those who overstress
traditional concerns like "clarity"--both approvingly and disapprovingly--
grossly underestimate the full concerns of style scholarship and pedagogy.
Style, we need to urge, does indeed have vitality--in fact, potentially far more

                                                                                                 93
Rhodes

than any other concern in writing. Such changes in the frame for thinking
about style could well have explosive potential, and style advocates should have
faith that changes in the conditions in which writing is taught and studied
increasingly support such a change in the best ways. A discipline of writing
should not mainly look backward at what writers have done; it should look
forward, toward what writers might do. At every moment of actually doing the
work of writing, of going forward with both the text and the underlying ability,
a writer applies concepts of style. As a discipline, we should want to offer the
best advice we can about approaching that aspect of the work. Style, after all,
like coolness and hipness, is always about the next big thing--not the last one.

REFERENCES

Adler-Kassner, L. (2008). The activist WPA: Changing stories about writing
   and writers. Logan: Utah State University Press.

Adler-Kassner, L., & O'Neill, P. (2010). Reframing Writing Assessment to im-
   prove teaching and learning. Logan: Utah State University Press.

Bacon, N. (2013). Style in academic writing. In M. Duncan & S. Vanguri
   (Eds.), The centrality of style. Fort Collins, CO/Anderson, SC: The WAC
   Clearinghouse/Parlor Press.

Barnard, I. (2010). The ruse of clarity. College Composition and Communication
   61(3), 434-451.

Berlin, J. A. (1987). Rhetoric and reality: Writing instruction in American col-
   leges, 1900-1985. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.

Berthoff, A. E. (1981). The making of meaning. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Butler, P. (2008). Out of style: Reanimating stylistic study in composition and rhet-

   oric. Logan: Utah State University Press.
Connors, R. J. (2000). The erasure of the sentence. College Composition and

   Communication 52(1), 96-128.
Daniels, H. A. (1983). Famous last words: The American language crisis reconsid-

   ered. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Duncan, M., & Vanguri, S., (Eds.) (2012). The centrality of style. Fort Collins,

   CO/Anderson, SC: The WAC Clearinghouse/Parlor Press.
Ellis, E. (2013). Toward a pedagogy of psychic distance. In M. Duncan & S.

   Vanguri (Eds.), The centrality of style. Fort Collins, CO/Anderson, SC: The
   WAC Clearinghouse/Parlor Press.
Farmer, F. (2005). On style and other unremarkable things. Written Communi-
   cation 22(3), 339-47.

94
                                                                   Practically Cool and Theoretically Hip

Fleckenstein, K. S. (2010). Vision, rhetoric, and social action in the composition
   classroom. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.

Fodrey, C. (2013). Voice, transformed: The potentialities of style pedagogy in
   the teaching of creative nonfiction. In M. Duncan & S. Vanguri (Eds.), The
   centrality of style. Fort Collins, CO/Anderson, SC: The WAC Clearinghouse/
   Parlor Press.

Folk, M. (2013). Multimodal style and the evolution of digital writing peda-
   gogy. In M. Duncan & S. Vanguri (Eds.), The centrality of style. Fort Collins,
   CO/Anderson, SC: The WAC Clearinghouse/Parlor Press.

Greer, R. (2013). Architectonics and style. In M. Duncan & S. Vanguri (Eds.),
   The centrality of style. Fort Collins, CO/Anderson, SC: The WAC Clearing-
   house/Parlor Press.

Hillocks, G, Jr. (1995). Teaching writing as reflective practice. New York: Teach-
   ers College Press.

Holcomb, C., & Killingsworth. J. M. (2013). Teaching style as cultural perfor-
   mance. In M. Duncan & S. Vanguri (Eds.), The centrality of style. Fort Col-
   lins, CO/Anderson, SC: The WAC Clearinghouse/Parlor Press.

Howard, R. M. (2005). Contextualist stylistics: Breaking down the binaries in
   sentence-level pedagogy. In T. R. Johnson & T. Pace (Eds.), Refiguring style:
   Possibilities for writing pedagogy (pp. 42-56). Logan, UT: Utah State Univer-
   sity Press.

Johnson, T. R., & Pace, T. (2005). Refiguring prose style: Possibilities for writing
   pedagogy. Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.

Lamos, S. (2008). Language, literacy, and the institutional dynamics of racism:
   Late 1960's writing instruction for "high-risk" african-american undergradu-
   ate students at one predominantly white university. College Composition and
   Communication 60(1), 46-81.

Lanham, R. (2006). The economics of {attention}. Chicago: University of Chi-
   cago Press.

Lawler, J M. (2003). Style stands still. Style 37(2), 220-37. Retrieved from
   http://www.umich.edu/~jlawler/style.pdf

Pope, R. (1995). Textual intervention: Critical and creative strategies for literary
   studies. London: Routledge, The INTERFACE Series.

Rhodes, K. (2010). You are what you sell: Branding the way to composition's
   better future. WPA: Writing Program Administration 33(3), 58-77.

Ronald, K. (2003). Style: The hidden agenda in composition classes or one
   reader's confession. In W. Bishop (Ed.), The subject is writing: Essays by teach-
   ers and students (3rd ed.) (pp. 195-209). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Roper, G L. (2007). The writer's workshop: Imitating your way to better writing.
   Wilmington, DE: ISI.

                                                                                                 95
Rhodes

Sledd, J. (1991).Why the Wyoming Resolution had to be emasculated: A his-
   tory and a quixotism. JAC 11(2), 269-81.

Williams. J M., & Colomb, G. G. (2010). Style: Lessons in clarity and grace (10th
   ed.). Boston: Longman-Pearson.

Yagoda, B. (2005). The sound on the page. New York: HarperResource.
Villanueva, V. (2011). Reflections on Style and the love of language. College

   Composition and Communication 62(4), 726-38.

96
    JIM CORDER'S GENERATIVE

    ETHOS AS ALTERNATIVE TO

    TRADITIONAL ARGUMENT,

    OR STYLE'S REVIVIFICATION

    OF THE WRITER-READER

    RELATIONSHIP

      Rosanne Carlo
      The University of Arizona

   Traditional argumentation, with its privileging of logos and its emphasis
on reasoned judgments delivered with speed, clarity, and efficiency in order to
persuade an audience, is valuable in some rhetorical situations. One situation
in which traditional arguments are valued is academic writing. I want us to
imagine, though, a scholarly approach that values the presence of persons in
argument. Imagine practicing a rhetoric and writing that asks for time, for care,
for listening and understanding, a rhetoric that has the potential to be applied to
scholarly writing, but more broadly, to intimate rhetorical situations which rely
on person-centered appeals for identification rather than persuasion. As Richard
Young has argued, rhetoric scholars need to begin to investigate and theorize
dyadic and other intimate rhetorical situations in order to create a new rhetoric
of argumentation, one that "breathe[s] new life into the ancient concepts of ethos
and pathos and ... position[s] them within an enriched conception of rhetoric,
which, like its ancient counterpart, addresses the question of how one invents
arguments under the constraints of actual situations" (1992, p. 118). Many
scholars in rhetoric and composition are interested in how writers and speakers
invite readers and listeners into their inventive universe, especially when readers
or listeners hold an opposing viewpoint and can be considered antagonistic;
how writers and speakers create and foster empathy; how writers and speakers
respond to informal scenes of rhetoric (e.g., among family and friends); how
writers and speakers expose inquiry to readers and listeners through provisional
reasoning; how writers and speakers can frame of an argument and the strategies
they can use to minimize the potential threat for readers and listeners; and how
writers and speakers utilize narrative in rhetorical situations.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.07  97
Carlo

   When we begin to emphasize and value the various functions of ethos and
pathos in argumentation, we realize how essential a well-theorized canon of style
becomes to scholars of rhetoric and composition. We cannot begin to answer
inquiries into non-traditional argument without understanding the styles that
speakers and writers enact in these rhetorical situations.

   This essay explores the work of Jim Corder as issuing a call to the scholarly
community to value the presence of persons in making arguments. This call
foregrounds ethos as fundamental and asks practitioners of rhetoric to create and
embody a generative ethos, one that attempts to build time and understanding
into discourse as a way to reach out and embrace audiences. This call also asks
us to return to theorizing the writer-reader relationship. This relationship is
fraught with complication, especially by factors such as identification and its
lack, but as scholars and audience members we can begin to seek the traces of
the author in his or her work; one way to do so is through stylistic analysis.
Because of his focus on theorizing ethos, Corder's work opens a space in the field
for a renewing interest in the teaching and learning of stylistics. It is through
this type of inquiry and analysis that one's very personhood is fore-grounded as
meaningful and relevant. The canon of style is connected in concrete ways to
the recognition of sentence-level concerns that are essential to understanding
and creating a rhetoric that closes the distance between readers and writers in a
process Corder terms "enfolding." The idea of enfolding audience is a beneficial
form of idealism that rejects speed, clarity, and efficiency as antithetical to
generative ethos.

   Enfolding, in many ways, is a performative act. As Holcomb and
Killingsworth discuss in their chapter, stylistic performance is "not only [a
vehicle to] present a self " but also is "an orchestration with readers, subject
matters, and texts" (2010, p. 92). The authors believe that these elements,
features in the rhetorical situation, relate through three arenas of interaction:
the textual, the social, and the cultural. Although the framing of my essay is
not organized through these three arenas, the reader can see in my analysis how
Jim Corder understands his choices in unfolding his argument (textual), how
he relates to his readers through his words and structures (social), and how he
signals to his audience, the academic community, both his membership in, and
critique of, its traditional discourses (contextual).

   When scholars refocus attention on the sentence and word choice (as
Holcomb and Killingsworth ask their students to do), it provides another
dimension to rhetorical analysis which revives the long-lost, often-neglected
canon of rhetoric: Style. Stylistics is an analytical framework that heightens
scholars' awareness of language and allows us to talk about a writer's ethos in
more concrete rather than impressionistic ways. Knowledge of style allows the

98
                                                                            Jim Corder's Generative Ethos

teacher-scholar and her or his students to see the writer's varieties of choice
in prose, the intersections of content and form, and how invention and
arrangement play out before us in compositions. Style, then, is one intersection
between rhetoric and composition as the writer chooses the form through which
to best communicate to an audience. Richard Young, Alton Becker, and Kevin
Pike's Rhetoric: Discovery and Change supports this claim as they define rhetoric
as "a creative process that includes all the choices a writer makes from his earliest
tentative exploration of a problem ... through choices in arrangement and
strategy for a particular audience, to the final editing of the final draft" (1970,
p. xii). Young, Becker, and Pike's discussions of writer and reader relationships
provide a lens through which to view Jim Corder's theory of enfolding and also
his stylistic choices in writing.

   Young, Becker, and Pike and Corder were all trying to define and create
a New Rhetoric: one that emphasized the importance of communication
among people as being essential for social change. Rhetoric: Discovery and
Change was not merely a transactional textbook for its writers asked readers
to discover and collaborate in the creation of a rhetoric that held cooperation
at its center and asked practitioners to reach out to "people whose beliefs
are radically different from our own and with whom we must learn to live"
(Young, Becker & Pike, 1970, p. 8). These scholars all understood that
confrontations often manifest between the readers of texts and the authors
of texts. Style, as Corder and other New Rhetoricians believed, is a method
writers use to invite readers into their inventive universes. Young, Becker,
and Pike devote five chapters specifically to the writer-reader relationship;
most importantly, they encourage writers to minimize any sense of threat to
a reader by acknowledging opposing views and addressing the reader "as if
he were intelligent, curious, honest, sincere--in short, as if he possessed the
same qualities that the writer attributes to himself " (1970, p. 208). They also
emphasize that the writer has a responsibility to make their image of the world
visible for the reader. Corder describes writing as a process of emergence that
shows a love and willingness between the reader and writer to "see each other,
to know each other, to be present to each other, to embrace each other" (1985,
p. 23). Style becomes essential as it is the only way for the writer to develop an
ethos to be "present" to the reader, to enfold a reader into his or her inventive
universe. The real magic is that the words on the page leave traces of the
author who wrote them.

   In this chapter, I hope to demonstrate that Corder creates a discourse that
enfolds its audience through his enactment of a personal, performative style. I
will explore Corder's notion of the author leaving "tracks" for readers in texts,
a concept that he articulates in "Notes on a Rhetoric of Regret." Corder speaks

                                                                                                 99
Carlo

to the writer's presence and permanence as he acknowledges that his thoughts
will be referenced in future style scholarship. He admits "that if I exist, I exist
over yonder, not in my own endeavors, but in other people's perceptions of my
endeavors" (1995, p. 97). Although he sometimes expresses concern for the
potential for his work and himself to be misread by others, Corder articulates
that he is leaving his traces for future scholars to find, if we only have the
patience to look hard enough.

   In this sense, I agree with Wendy Bishop when she says that the end
of Corder's writing is "personification" to create "a text with a real body"
concluding that, "Jim Corder's essays are performative" (2003, p. 95). Corder
is fully aware of his performance for readers, painfully and deliberately aware
that every word he writes is in the spirit of cultivating a voice. As a speaker,
he is accessible and inviting. In this same way, I am writing this chapter with
an invitational tone, using the intimate pronouns "I," "you," "we," and "us"
throughout. It is not my intention to interpellate and coerce you into my
argument. Rather, I mean to allow for moments of identification between
reader and writer, you and me; in this way, I mean to practice the style of
enfolding that Corder envisioned and practiced. Corder's performative ethos,
I argue, is an alternative epistemology to traditional argument that we can
explore in writing; it is a way of knowing that is generative as he enfolds his
audience in a discourse of his reflections.

   To be effective rhetorical scholars, I believe, we must interact with the
author's mind at work through a stylistic analysis of the body of the text,
an analytical method I will demonstrate later in this chapter. First, though,
a discussion of Corderian rhetoric is in order, one that attempts to consider
his oeuvre as teaching us to see an alternative to traditional argumentation.
Corder's theory of enfolding is essential in creating an alternative way to write
discourse as he asks us to be cognizant of a reader of our texts; to create a
space for a reader to enter a text; to create moments of identification with that
reader; to hold that reader's perspective wholly in mind as we write. Corder
attempts to accomplish the tasks of enfolding (no small order) through his
stylistic techniques, specifically through his use of repetition, enumeration, and
narrative. I then take a closer look at Corder's text "Notes on a Rhetoric of
Regret;" this final section was written to both show the elements of a stylistic
analysis and to further demonstrate my argument that Corder's performative
style is a means through which he conveys his theory of enfolding. It is here
that we see Corder's work as an answer to Young, Becker, and Pike's call for a
writer who reveals his or her process of inquiry in order to create the conditions
for cooperation and social change; Corder sees this exposure of his process of
inquiry as paramount to his theory of enfolding.

100
                                                                            Jim Corder's Generative Ethos

WHEN THE STARS ARE RIGHT: THE THEORY OF
ENFOLDING THROUGH GENERATIVE ETHOS

   Jim Corder confesses a desire of displacement from traditional styles and
structures of argument. In his book chapter, "Tribes and Displaced Persons:
Some Observations on Collaboration," he lays bare his vision for a "scholarly
sort of work but to write in a personal sort of way" that engenders a hope that
his writing style would "perhaps even help to stretch out the possibilities of
prose" (1993, p. 281). His lyrical repetition of "I want to be displaced" in one
passage is a refrain that reinforces his conviction in a "fanatic eclecticism," a
belief that through writing styles that allow for complexity and choice rather
than rigidity and credo we can create voices that invite our audiences into our
discourses (1993, p. 278). Many of us already practice forms of writing beyond
traditional styles of argumentation, many of us want to be able to write beyond
traditional styles of argumentation, some have yet to be convinced. I am of the
opinion that many aims for writing are necessary--we need scholarly work that
is referential and makes traditional arguments but we could also benefit from
work that compliments that paradigm. And by extension, Corder's work, and
his theory of enfolding in particular, reminds us that as scholars we have the
opportunity to invent ourselves through our writing.

   In an effort to legitimize and rapidly professionalize the discipline of rhetoric
and composition, some scholars recall and bemoan the loss of persuasive
qualities in our writing that were hastily dropped, particularly moves in writing
that establish personal ethos. This decision can be seen as ironic for a discipline
almost entirely based on studying the available means of persuasion (Warnock,
2003, p. 204). Corder returns us to our disciplinary roots as he writes with the
intention of expanding Aristotelian concepts of ethos. Corder, like Aristotle,
understood that the character of the speaker is just as important as the content
of the speech:

          It is not true, as some writers assume in their treatises on rhetoric,
          that the personal goodness revealed by the speaker contributes
          nothing to his power of persuasion; on the contrary, his character
          may almost be called the most effective means of persuasion he
          possesses. (Aristotle, trans. 1926, Book 2)

   Corder's focus on ethos stems from his desire to understand it as the central
rhetorical appeal; he also understands ethos as Aristotle does in the sense of
establishing character to induce belief through "good sense, good moral
character, and goodwill" (Trans. 1926, Book 2). Corder's writing; however, is

                                                                                                101
Carlo

moving beyond persuasion to identification with his readers, as he searches to
create a real connection that shows an openness to change one's perspective after
listening to another. Hunting for ethos, both enacted through his theorizing of
the term and also through his reflections of his own presence in the text as a
writer, appears to be an obsessive quest for him. I think it's what draws me and
others to his writings. His writing is like the speech of the prophet, Amos. It
is as Corder wrote: "To own and guarantee one's words, I take it, means to be
fastidiously and meticulously aware of their background, keenly thoughtful of
your consequence and future; it entails giving one's words the backing of such a
history of search and thinking as will stand scrutiny" (1972, p.8). His writings
mirror his own philosophy of rhetoric, and this aim is to present himself as a
writer who is aware of his stylistic choices in the process of creating meaning
for audiences.

   The desire to represent yourself for a reader is a part of the process of
enfolding, a concept in rhetoric that Corder so wanted to encourage us to begin
theorizing and performing; this concept is one that is only possible through a
knowledge and awareness of stylistic choices. Corder's representation of self,
though, is not one that assumes that a whole self can possibly be communicated
through text; no matter how conscious an author is in his style, she must still
slog through the imperfect medium of language. Instead, Corder shows his
audience a self that is not fixed or whole; he is as an author that unfolds his
personality. Unfolding is the means through which a writer can begin to enfold
an audience, and style gives the author agency to begin a process of unfolding.
As readers of Corder's work, for example, we learn something new about his
personal life and gain a clearer understanding of his theories of rhetoric in each
piece. The ideal ethos for Corder is a person who "lives in a space large enough
to house contradictions" 1978, p. 79). The fragmentary self is not easy to grasp
nor is it ideal. I do not know Corder the man, but Corder as an author is
constructing an ethos for me as a reader. I think Tilly Warnock defines Corder's
ethos succinctly and insightfully when she writes: "Through his personal,
cultural, creative, critical, and ideological discourse, Corder teaches us to live
with the messiness, uncertainties, and ambiguities of life [...] without denying
them to make sound decisions about our choices of language" (2003, p. 205, my
emphasis). Jim Corder is taking a risk through his presentation of self that is not
"ideal," and he opens a space in scholarship where this way of being is validated
and, in fact, it can be argued that it is closer to the reality of our lives.

   The written act of unfolding a perspective, and by this I also mean exposing
our process of inquiry for readers, through performative ethos is the raison d'être
for Corderian rhetoric; he is risking himself before us because he believes so
strongly in the possibility of one mind embracing another, even if this requires

102
                                                                            Jim Corder's Generative Ethos

a person to hold two contradictory ideas at once, equally valuing both. There
is vulnerability in this subjectivity, a vulnerability which is not appropriate to
expose in all rhetorical situations,1 but one that can be effective in terms of
speaking across to an audience member who is relatively equal in terms of power
dynamics to a writer. Corderian rhetoric is idealistic in this sense as it engenders a
feeling of hopefulness that our words can "reach and stretch for a new Jerusalem,
while we reach and stretch to make a new language, a language that will let us
define ourselves, speak ourselves fully into existence and into relation with the
other" (Corder, 1977,p. 482). Our rhetoric can lead us to identification with
the other and toward creating better interpersonal relationships, and perhaps
even to a better social reality. We can see Corder's construction of an ethos that
houses contradictions as allowing for a collaborative process between his readers
which he calls enfolding.

   Enfolding a reader requires that the writer take a risk by unfolding his values
and narrative to others and a willingness to begin a dialogue, even if the writer
experiences resistance from her audience. It is part of a recognition that we
are standing in a narrative, in a rhetoric, and that we are trying to speak out
across an ideological divide to another. In perhaps his most well-known article,
"Argument as Emergence, Rhetoric as Love," Corder defines enfolding when he
writes: "Argument is emergence toward the other. That requires a readiness to
testify to an identity that is always emerging, a willingness to dramatize one's
narrative in progress before the other; it calls for an untiring stretch toward
the other, a reach toward enfolding the other" (1985, p. 183, emphasis added).
Emergence, as Corder describes, is a state of becoming; in the case of writing,
he means to aim for the creation of an ethos that is developing on the page
for a reader. A presentation of self as an emerging identity, in Corder's view,
minimizes the potential threat that a confident, dogmatic ethos might impose
on a reader. Enfolding is about vulnerability of self, a demonstration of mutual
respect for the other, a coming together that is not coercive, but welcoming.
One point that can be missed in "Argument as Emergence, Rhetoric is Love"
is the critique that Corder is developing in response to practitioners in the
field of Rhetoric and Composition who view and teach argument as a clinical,
"neat" process with linear steps. Corder is challenging that anaesthetized view of
argument because it often does not account for potential harm. This sentiment
appears in his earlier works where we see him working toward his seminal essay.
In both "Varieties of Ethical Argument" and "From Rhetoric to Grace" he
includes the same passage:

         it is possible for any of us--if the stars are right and we work
         to make ourselves human--to enfold another whose his-

                                                                                                103
Carlo

         tory we have not shared. In this act of enfolding, the speaker
         becomes through speech; the speaker's identity is always to
         be saved, to emerge as an ethos to the other, whose identity is
         also to be cherished. Then they may speak, each holding the
         other wholly in mind. (1978, p. 98; 1984, p. 26)

   This is a call for making inquiry visible to a reader, of exposing the process
through which one thinks and writes. This quote also asks us to envision what
it might look like to emerge as an ethos, an idea that I will later discuss in
terms of stylistically analyzing Corder's writing choices as a means to emerge to
readers and enfold them in his history. Some of Corder's first-time readers may
find his repetition infuriating, his "hedges" on offering an opinion or argument
exhausting, his conflicting, schizophrenic identity to be maddening, and his
personal narratives to be leading us down a path in the middle of the night
without street signs. But really, these stylistic moves are intentional; they are
connected to exposing his process of inquiry. Corder's stylistic techniques of
repetition, enumeration, and narrative story-telling, I argue, try to accomplish
this visible inquiry for readers.

   Stylistic choices help an author speak and write themselves into existence;
for example, Corder's use of repetition is connected to his development of ethos
and presence for audiences. He writes, "I have wanted to leave tracks so that
another might know where I imagine I am; for that reason, transitional passages
and sections may be heavy-handed and repetitive" ( 1995, p. 94). Corder's
repetition (sometimes of sentences, whole paragraphs and pages from one text
to another), though irritating to some of his readers, is a part of his style and
essential to his creation of ethos. Although Jim Corder says, "I don't expect to
have too many ideas; I hold on to those I have, and repeat them" to display
humility, he is fully aware that the repetition is connected to his thoroughness
as writer (1993, p. 278). He wants his repetition to mirror the thorough ethos
that he so admires in the prophet, Amos. He desires to make an impression on
his readers, and to speak in a language that encourages understanding.

   The stylistic choice of repetition can be performative; in the case of Corder's
laments, he repeats lines about vanishing identities and memories in almost
all his major works in order to emphasize this motif 's importance. I sense that
Corder is keenly aware of society rapidly changing around him, evidenced
by his often nostalgic love for things past, such as the fountain pen and the
typewriter. He felt that "the volume [of language] crowds our living space and
our time, sometimes generating frenetic speed, sometimes a paralysis" (1978, p.
93). This paradox of speed and stasis often hinders our ability to communicate
with each other, and certainly leaves little time for reflection.

104
                                                                            Jim Corder's Generative Ethos

   Corder's awareness of the problem of time, or lack thereof, offers one way in
which he can see a critique of his own theory of enfolding. He recognizes the
failures that are often experienced in our communication with others. He seems
to be asking in his works: What if we can't find love for another? What if all we
have is really a self-love, a love that we think we feel for another but is merely a
projection of ourselves onto the other? The biggest failure of communication is
our inability to really hear each other, he believes. Again, this is illustrated by his
repetition of the passage: "we may hear ourselves, not another; the other's words
may act only as a trigger to release our own, unlocking not the other's meaning,
but one we already possessed. When this happens, we are bound in space,
caught tightly in our own province" (1978, p. 94; 1982, p. 134). When we
do not listen to another's words, we are not able to reflect on what that person
has said to us. We are not enfolding when we do not hear the other; instead,
enfolding asks us to create situations in which people consciously, willingly, and
trustingly allow themselves to be enfolded. This requires us to both talk across
and out to another in explaining ourselves and listening to the other when they
talk. In writing, since we cannot listen to our readers, we try to imagine their
perspectives and to write with them in mind. As Corder says, "we have the habit
of diminishing each other's words" (1978, p. 63). We not only diminish, but we
ignore and talk over the other. Perhaps Corder feels the need to repeat himself
because he understands our contemporary issues with listening and reflection
in a world that often paralyzes us by its rapid speeds.

   Another way in which writers can create ethos through their stylistic choices is
through the use of enumeration in writing; in Corder's case, he uses enumeration
to demonstrate his principles of enfolding. "From Rhetoric to Grace," "Asking
for a Text and Trying to Learn It," and "What I Learned in School" all contain
lessons that he wishes to impart to us about what he has learned as a teacher-
scholar. These lessons, though, are often only parts of a whole, as he confesses
to us that "there are yet other propositions I have not found" (1999, p. 57). By
making his points on rhetoric tangible to readers, he offers "fragments" of truths
that we can hold and reflect on about the nature of learning and life. Again,
Corder argues that he cannot give us a whole, cohesive body of knowledge
because such a product is an impossible ideal. He believes that "[l]anguage itself
is synecdoche: we're always naming parts of things because we cannot at any
given moment name the whole" (1984, p. 18). This microcosmic example of the
synecdoche of language leads us to think about synecdoche in our disciplinary
knowledge, and more broadly, in our self-identities. Corder is giving us parts
of himself, leaving tracks and traces on the page that we need to piece together
as readers. The whole, idealized body of knowledge and the whole, idealized
"authentic" Jim Corder do not exist. He writes, "I have published a little about

                                                                                                105
Carlo

rhetoric and hope to publish more, but the rhetorics of the world swirl around
me, do not come together, and I am lost. I can't find my own inventive world;
it is in parts, and some escape me" (1986, p. 36). Again, Corder repeats the last
line in this passage later in the paper (1986, p. 37) for emphasis. Feelings of
displacement, fragmentation, loss, and lonesomeness pervade Corder's works;
we can see these themes as Corder expressing his process of coming to terms and
accepting that the world is synecdochic.

   The re-telling of narratives also makes a writer's ethos emerge toward readers;
Corder creates his narrative universe through his story-telling (the inclusions
of his idiosyncratic rituals, his failed memories, his attempts to describe his
relatives and the past, his humility and hedges, and his Texan sensibility).
There is an epistemology of self as text happening in Corder's writing as he
interrogates his memory and first lessons learned. He often explains his use of
the personal as the only epistemology truly available to him: "Besides, the self
is the only center I have, and I think I must use the best evidence available to
me, my own experience, however I manage to misinterpret it" (1989, p. 211).
There is a real (dare I say) hunger behind these statements to search through
the evidence of experience and yet to be able to admit that the construction
of self through memory is always a "slippery" undertaking with room for
misinterpretation. Again, he often repeats the sentiment that as he writes his
memories they are vanishing from him and he is also vanishing in the process:
"Souls disappear. I disappear. Not all at once: we are whittled away. I diminish
before my own eyes" (1995, p. 97). This lack of closure and wholeness can
certainly be frustrating to a reader who is seeking an ideal self in the writings
of Corder. And yet, Corder as a character is endearing, he fascinates us; he is
addressing and enfolding us as readers. We learn from him and about him in
the traces and the tracks, as he "manifests his own humanness" in the hope of
showing us a way (1982, p. 129).

   Exposure to the other through enfolding, even if this involves emerging as
an ethos in texts, is a complex and ambiguous phenomena: it is loaded with
difficulties. Enfolding is problematic in the sense that when we risk ourselves to
emerge toward another person, as writers or readers, we open ourselves to the
possibility of change. Change can be transformative and wonderful for some,
but change can also be painful, hard, and for some people, unwanted. We can
feel lost, unsure of our own narrative. Young, Becker, and Pike also comment
on this aspect of change when they write that a writer and reader who seriously
wish to practice Rogerian rhetoric, or for our case a rhetoric that values this
idea of enfolding one narrative with another, the prerequisite is a willingness
to change. The degree to which change affects us is subjective as our authors
acknowledge: "Other changes, however, may be strongly resisted, for they affect

106
                                                                            Jim Corder's Generative Ethos

values that we regard as essential to our identity, even to our survival. Values
are hierarchically structured; some are more significant, more eminent, than
others" (1970, p. 219). When two people, two families, two countries are in
a conflict that spans over years for one reason or another (sometimes we often
forget why we are in conflict), it may be hard to reconcile these differences,
it may be too painful to approach the other, to try to understand the other.
Reconciliation, in some cases, cannot be achieved for one reason or another;
contrary to Corder's description of enfolding, sometimes the stars are not right
and being human to each other is too complicated.

   My experience reading Corder has, at times, been one of discomfort and
sadness, especially reading his book, Yonder: Life on the Far Side of Change.2
Yonder is a hybrid piece of writing, part autobiographical, part literary, and
part scholarly, it is in this piece that Corder tries to write an account of what
great change does to our psyche. Change, for Corder, is a battlefield that can
herald great joy but also has the potential to harm. He writes, "Change is
inevitable and necessary to life, but it also entails a continuous destruction and
loss of worlds, great and small, a combat of old habit with new need. Identity is
always about to vanish as old worlds go and new worlds come" (1992, p. 23).
Corder is tackling both the changes that have happened in his personal life: a
divorce, a conflict with his daughter, addiction, cancer, and public life in the
twentieth century: the "dying" of Western culture, the Holocaust, the women's
movement, technological advances, and so forth. This book is very difficult for
me to read; it is difficult to see a mind suffering on the page; it is difficult to hear
about how he lost time and memories in treatment; it is difficult to hear him
give witness to the diminishing relationship between his children and his first
wife. Sometimes, disclosure can be painful for a writer and a reader.

   Yet, Corder's concept of enfolding is one that builds new possibilities.
Its more positive facet constructs a rhetorical theory that allows scholars to
practice critical reflection of self in their works, and it teaches us to reach out,
enfold, and love others through our writing. We can read Corder as radical
for espousing a theory of love in relation to argumentation. These writings
are about compassion and reaching out to the other through encouraging
an exposure to the narrative/rhetoric/argument that people compose (albeit
imperfectly) through life experiences. Transparency is important to Corder,
and ethos is one vehicle that we have in written expression by which we can
represent ourselves (albeit imperfectly) to the other. Corder defines rhetoric as
a process of love-making: "I'll still insist that argument--that rhetoric itself--
must begin, proceed, and end in love" (1985, p. 185). An epistemology of
inventing the self through language, risking the self through language, hearing
and enfolding another through language, and perhaps even loving through

                                                                                                107
Carlo

language is a hopeful, ideal endeavor. We can also see this epistemology as one
that offers us an alternative to traditional argumentation.

   In fact, this cycle of invention and structure through language invites us to
be more reflective about our ways of being and knowing, to be more subjective.
An epistemology such as Corder's allows us to talk about the things we value
and how we came to value them through a personal ethos in writing. Corder
explains, "Ethical argument appears to be contingent upon a presence emerging
in discourse, the real voice of a genuine personality that becomes understandable
to us as a style, a characteristic way of moving through and among experiences"
(1972, p. 7). One way Corder's theory of emergence through discourse can be
discovered and explained is through a close, stylistic analysis of his work.

HUNTING PROFESSOR FOG: A STYLISTIC ANALYSIS
OF "NOTES ON A RHETORIC OF REGRET"

   We can be critical of Corder's writing in part because his voice is often
contradictory, self-effacing, and thus his work has the potential to be read as
a confession of epistemological and moral failure (Yoos, 2003, p. 123). Yoos
and other readers make excellent points about Corder's writing and style. At
the same time, Corder's work may also be read as an example of Young, Becker,
and Pike's "Provisional writing" which is writing that "focuses on the process
of inquiry itself and acknowledges the tentative nature of conclusions," a style
that minimizes the threat to the reader and allows her to both understand and
critique Corder's prose (1970, p. 207).

   In Corder's "Notes on a Rhetoric of Regret," I find that he is working
towards developing a theory for writing, one that emphasizes the affective
experiences of everyday lives and celebrates personal recollections of "domestic
particulars," uniting writers and readers (1995, p. 104). Corder's writing style
in this piece, more importantly, is an experiment or application of his theory of
enfolding. In this same vein, it is also significant to note that his article captures
a spirit of inquiry, and willingness to explore personal experience that Young,
Becker, and Pike so valued in Rhetoric: Discovery and Change. They argue that
"[t]o become an effective inquirer, it is essential that you develop sensitivity
and receptivity to problematic situations... . It is the best student who sees the
limitations of human understanding and the need for inquiry in every aspect of
human affairs" (1970, p. 91). In this piece, Corder inquires into the definition
of personal writing, and explores whether or not a writer really can present
his narrative to readers, more accurately, what it would look like to emerge
as an ethos to readers. Corder, I think, is unsure what this means as he finds

108
                                                                            Jim Corder's Generative Ethos

clashing viewpoints on the nature of personal writing and rhetoric. Because
of this acknowledgement of a problematic situation, "Notes on a Rhetoric of
Regret" has a feeling of contradiction in the opening as he asks questions about
the rhetoric in which he inhabits and offers no definitive answers. Corder asks
the reader: "Is there a luechocholic style?" and responds, "I expect that style can
only by found by others, not declared" (1995, p. 94) and again asks, "Is there an
audience for a rhetoric of regret?" surmising, "I don't know" (1995, p. 95). The
uncertainty of his voice can lead the reader to think that he is tentative about
his ideas, even when he describes the claiming of a self as a "chancy ground,"
(1995, p. 97) an interesting choice of colloquial diction for an academic essay.
Yet, these moves of "tentativeness" can be seen not as a fault in argument, but
as a means of identification with audiences--a presentation of ideas that is not
dogmatic, but rather inviting; in other words, these are all stylistic gestures that
comprise Corder's application of his theory of enfolding.

   Although this chapter does not reproduce the full text of Corder's article, I
encourage you to read this essay in its entirety. Indeed, there were many pieces
of Corder's I could have chosen for this analysis; this is not, in fact, one of
his well-known or oft-quoted works like "Argument as Emergence, Rhetoric
as Love," for example. But this article has a different quality than the others
in his oeuvre; I can only venture to explain this difference through a series of
suppositions. Perhaps it is his desperate need to recover what might (and will)
vanish. Perhaps it is his defense of personal writing that he categorized as self-
serving and sinful. Perhaps it is his admission of the futility of capturing people
with words. Perhaps it is his lovingly detailed descriptions of the lives of those
that were long gone: his grandmother, his mother, and his father. Perhaps it
is because, as a reader, I knew that he wrote this article in 1995 and he would
die of cancer three years later. For all these reasons, the piece elicited a strong
emotional response in me. And, perhaps, this was because Corder envisioned
this piece to be one where he specifically applied his theory of enfolding. I begin
my stylistic analysis, in section V, where I believe that Corder recognizes how
readers, like myself, may appropriate his words for their own uses, that this
appropriation was "all right: troping, I'm troped" (1985, p. 102). As a scholar
sensitive to the potential for being misread in conversations and writing, Corder
in his own way is telling me it is okay to hold his prose under the microscope.

   Corder begins section V with a story of his mother who often represents, for
him, the self-effacing attitude encouraged by the Southern Christian tradition.
The assertion of the personal is identified as a sin; for example, when he asks
his mother what color his hair is, Mrs. Corder tells her son it is the color of
feces. He tells his audience, "It was her way of reminding me that I shouldn't
be occupied with my own existence" (1985, p. 102). We know that Corder sees

                                                                                                109
Carlo

section V of the essay as a blasphemous assertion as he opens contradicting a
preacher that his mother is with the Lord, the first simple sentences appear here
puncturing the audience with self-assertion: "That may be. I think she dwells in
my memory" (1985, p. 102). The argument that memory and the re-telling of
experience becomes a central theme for Corder, a way of self preservation and
survival in a world where we are constantly in the throes of change.

   The complex sentence that follows to end this paragraph is repeated at the
end of other paragraphs in variation: "If I don't remember her, and try to get
her down right, she will vanish" (1985, p. 102); and when he writes of his
father, "If I don't remember him, and try to get him down right, he will vanish"
(1985, p. 102); and when he writes about various towns in West Texas, "If I
don't remember them all, try to get them down right, they will vanish" (1985,
p. 102); and when he writes of his grandmother, "If I don't remember her, and
try to get her down right, she will vanish" (1985, p. 103). This repetition draws
the reader to the urgency of his writing project as he begins these complex
sentences with a dependent "If " clause, and completes them with an affirmative
independent clause of certain extinction unless he is able to avoid their fate by
completing the dependent clause of "get[ting] them down right." The brevity of
these clauses also makes the reader more aware of the need to speak his relatives
into existence and the stake that this section holds to his overall argument on
personal writing.

   Corder's real metaphor for invention and writing begins with the story about
his grandmother's quilt-making which he feels scholars have misinterpreted--
this stance is similar to the one he adopts toward theories of deconstruction as
they view the self in writing as a fiction. A strong periodic sentence positions the
reader for his critique of both sets of scholars, art historians and English: "They
argue that the image of the poor needlewoman painstakingly constructing
quilts out of scraps left over from important projects and stumbling upon a
pleasing visual effect is a fiction" (1985, p. 103). Corder will continue to use
his grandmother's quilt-making as a metaphor for the writing process as writers
are often piecing together scraps of their life's experiences to form a beautiful
whole.

   In the following paragraphs Corder's sentences are deliberate and planned
but they read in a way that seems natural and spontaneous, as if he is really
speaking to us. Firstly, Corder uses an elaborated complex sentence as a stylistic
device to speed the rhythm of his grandmother's life so that we will remember
the image of her more: "She lived on another twenty years, lost in a world that
no longer made much sense to her, entirely dependent on her children, with
whom she lived, moving from one family to another every six months or so"
(1985, p. 103). The next sentence is its own paragraph and slows the reader

110
                                                                            Jim Corder's Generative Ethos

down through the repetition of the word quilt: "But she made quilts, stunning
quilts" (1985, p. 103). And the next paragraph is also one sentence in which
Corder uses the stylistic device of anaphora and an elaborated complex sentence
as he strings together clauses repeating the phrase "to be sure that." Here he
emphasizes that although these scholars believe they are empirically correct,
they had no hand in the artwork of his grandmother: "She did so without the
aid of authors who want to be sure that the world gets corrected, to be sure
that we know how artistic artists of the quilt were, to be sure that we define the
quiltmaker's art in their way" (1985, p. 103). He contextualizes these scholars
as antagonistic interlocutors who only want to define his grandmother's art
(literally) and personal writing (metaphorically) in one way--theirs. Yet, Corder
wants to offer us an alternative to the dictates of scholarly thought on personal
writing and he does so in the next paragraph through his honest, detailed, and
loving description of his grandmother's quilt-making process.

   The following paragraph on his grandmother is perhaps one of the most
poignant in "Notes on a Rhetoric of Regret." Here he builds the prose from
simple sentences to a sentence that uses the stylistic technique of asyndeton as
he describes his grandmother: "She was mostly silent, withdrawn into herself,
often ill-tempered" (1985, p. 103). He balances this rhythm with sentences that
slow the reader down through the use of conjunctions, or polysyndeton: "She
salvaged scraps of all colors and shapes and sizes," and "Then one day she'd get
out her bundles of scraps and feel of them and look at them" (1985, p. 103).
These sentences stylistically mirror his grandmother's process; the reader can
almost feel her biding her time and rifling through the scraps and searching for
the quilt that would emerge. And then, his grandmother has that moment where
invention cycles into structure and she begins to work the scraps into a larger
idea--a beautiful quilt. Moreover, in Corder's extended metaphor on personal
writing, we can think of her work as drafting toward a beautiful composition.
In fact, Corder stylistically brings us through her creative process with more
elaborated complex clauses: "Then after a while, she'd start cutting, though she
had no pattern. After a while, she'd start sewing. And then there would be a
quilt of intricate design, beautifully rendered, lovely to see" (1985, p. 103).
After that, we get three simple sentences that are arresting: "Without design,
she made design. Without art, she made art. Her children are all dead" (1985,
p. 103). I believe the repetition of sentence structure (from negative to positive)
and words ("Without," "design," and "art") in the first two sentences adds to
their affective quality (especially since they follow so many complex sentences!).
We are compelled to stop and see the quilt--the completed composition--as
if Corder is holding it up to the reader as a model of his theory of personal
writing.

                                                                                                111
Carlo

   If the subtextual metaphor was not enough for some readers, in the
following paragraph, Corder lays bare his opinions on personal writing. He
uses a complex-compound sentence to admit that although he is aware of the
then "new" and various theories of post-structuralism, just as he is aware of
the scholarship on quilt-making; yet, he wants to continue to think of both
his grandmother and his writing in his own way. He writes, "I know that there
are other ways of thinking about personal writing and the recollection and
rendition of ourselves [another example of polysyndeton here as well], and I try
to honor these other views, but I'll go on thinking in this way as well" (1985, p.
103). Here, we see Corder's ethos as one that houses two thoughts on personal
writing: a contradiction, but this also reveals an acknowledgement of other
perspectives. Perhaps this confession can be seen as an admission that Corder
was set in his ways of thinking and unable to see another perspective. But, his
inclusion of the qualifier "as well" at the end of this sentence shows how he is
indeed holding all these perspectives in his mind at once. In this paragraph we
also experience a tone shift from first to second person when he begins to ask
rhetorical questions: "Who else will tell what you remember and try to make
it real but you?" (1985, p. 103). I believe these choices were made as a way to
identify with the audience, to turn the essay from his familial recollections to a
conversation with the reader; indeed, this is a move of enfolding his reader into
his discourse.

   As readers, I think we can identify Corder's position as one that is born
of much reflection, and as such, we are likely to listen to his voice that speaks
from experience, even if that voice is one of a maverick. In fact, he has built
so much credibility in his argument thus far that his "radical individualism" is
not necessarily a threatening project for us as readers. Corder is not afraid of
his opinion, embracing his own heresy as he flippantly absolves himself of the
sin of individualism when he utters: "I was planning to go to Hell anyway"
(1985, p. 104). Yet, the note of regret creeps into his discourse just after such
a brazen declaration, "I know that in trying to hold things, I too will vanish. I
had hoped to be real, but I am only a vacancy in the air" (1985, p. 104). These
positive-negative complex sentence constructions can be seen as undermining
the previous comment about hell-fire; yet, it is not so much a subversion of the
original sentiment but a way of housing contradictory feelings in one speaker,
in one composition. The reader is left with a feeling of sadness as our author's
hopes are not realized.

   But, just as Corder has taken away any hope, he has to work to build the
audience's morale to carry us to the end of the piece; the truth is, he has not
yet "vanished" from the page. The following paragraphs turn into vignettes of
daughters and fathers that he sees on his weekend visits to the public library.

112
                                                                            Jim Corder's Generative Ethos

Both these paragraphs are very descriptive as they contain a majority of complex
and compound-complex sentences. Yet, he uses simple sentences to close these
paragraphs such as, "She had made it" (1985, p. 104) when the girl climbs the
small hill. And when he reflects on these experiences he writes a one sentence
paragraph, "Not bad for early on a Saturday evening" (1985, p. 104). We get the
distinct feeling from Corder that he wants to value these stories as significant,
that his experience of viewing these parent-child relationships is something to
be valued in writing. He implores his readers that "[we] ought to look at them.
They ought to go on their way. The domestic particulars of their lives ought
to be examined" (1985, p. 104). The repetition of "ought" and the string of
simple sentences force the reader to slow down. His words, like a ritual on a
Saturday morning, create a feeling of comfort and care--the complete opposite
of hopelessness. The simple sentences that end the stories, too, offer a sort of
satisfaction for the reader; they convey the message that the affective experiences
of our lives are precious.

   And then, Corder wants to set us right as readers; he wants to complicate our
notions of authorship. He writes: "We won't, however, trap them in their words,
and I won't be caught, either" (1985, p. 104). Just when we think we "know"
Corder in these passages, he again wants to vanish from the page; he insists that
no matter how much we analyze his words, he will never be "caught."

   Corder is preparing for the conclusion; it is here where he feels he needs
to reiterate his vision for the future of personal writing. Corder asserts his
argument through a compound-complex periodic sentence that also has a
three-part serial comma and a negative-positive construction. He writes, "The
de-centering project of our time that will find us re-located after a curious,
glorious, disastrous five-hundred-year journey at the center of things might lead
to a new collective in which we are lost, but it needn't" (1985, p. 105). Corder
establishes a tone for the reader that piques our curiosity as we wait to hear his
alternative world for personal writing. Again, Corder shows us what the writing
of the future will not be like: "The epic of our time, the drama, the story, the
song, will not, I hope, tell of war and of the hero's triumph with the spear or gun;
and surely it's unlikely that it will begin with fallen angels" (1985, p. 105). In a
way, Corder is tentative about his conclusions at the beginning of the sentence
entering the caveat of "I hope" but he seems more confident in the second half
of the semi-colon with the qualifier "surely." Milton's fallen angels, those who
are exiled or banished from heaven, could relate to his earlier references of hell
and blasphemy. Corder's rebellion against the gods of academia perhaps is an
unforgivable sin, and I think in a way, he understood that the revolution for
personal writing and non-traditional argumentation may not be fully realized
in his own work or readily accepted by academia in his time--perhaps this

                                                                                                113
Carlo

realization is one note on a rhetoric of regret for Corder. He reiterates his
statements on the essential project of recording the present, of bearing witness
to the everyday. Again, he uses polysyndeton: "We sing or tell or show or chant
in the languages of the echoing past, shaped and transformed now to our uses
in the forms that we can make or learn to make" (1985, p. 105). The article
before us is Corder's attempt to expose the memories and the languages of his
"echoing past," this dramatization before the reader is Corder's way of emerging
to us in his discourse, of showing us the ways in which we can begin to view,
understand, and perform the genre of personal writing. By including us in his
statement, Corder reminds readers that his project extends beyond him and his
thoughts on rhetoric--it is a project of inclusiveness, a project of enfolding.

   Corder chooses to end the last four sentences with anaphora as he repeats "It
will tell" at the beginning of each sentence. The stylistic effect is one of prophesy
as he leads us to his culminating idea on writing and rhetoric. Yet, his last
sentence certainly reads as a final confession as he writes: "And it will tell how,
at last and after all, we came to vanish" (1985, p. 105). This prophesy leaves us
with an eerie feeling as he repeats his earlier motifs of his relatives vanishing,
only now he posits the idea in relation to all of us (1985, p. 105). Corder, too,
has vanished but these notes remain. They are one side of the conversation
Corder invites us into through his personal, performative style. He asks us to see
his process of inquiry; to see how he collected scraps to create a quilt, sentences
to create a whole, canons to create a rhetoric of regret.

SOME CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
ON INVENTIVE UNIVERSES

   Academic writing, both our own scholarship and the work we ask of
students, can have many ends. One of them, as displayed in the life works
of Jim Corder, is to enfold the reader into our discourses. This end is only
accomplished when we work in our writing to expose the rhetoric on which we
stand, where we stood, and where we hope to stand. Corder encouraged our
discourse community to poke and prod at traditional writing styles because
"when we set out to talk or to write about anything--about rhetoric, about
writing, about anything--we are already inside a rhetoric and in fairness, we
ought to show that rhetoric, even if it is sometimes as hard as learning to see
and to show the back sides of our own eyeballs" ( 2003, p. 37). The process
of enfolding is one in which we make a disciplinary rhetoric that is personal,
visible, and a work in progress through writing that invites the audience to
follow and collaborate in our meaning-making.

114
                                                                            Jim Corder's Generative Ethos

   Unfortunately, I do not know Jim Corder. However, I think we have been
able to speak to each other across texts largely because of his generative ethos.
His voice that we as readers hear as we read; his words that translate so well into
a dialogue, a commodious conversation.3 "Generative language," Corder writes,
"seeks to shove back the restraints of closure, to make in language a commodious
universe, to stretch words out beyond our private universes. Extension in time
and space seems to be one effort that makes this possible" (1978, pp. 94-5).
Style is the means through which a writer can create this commodious universe.
For a brief moment, Corder and I inhabit the same universe, enfolding toward
the other, trying to work out the ideas of what it means to practice and to
write in a style that creates a rhetoric of spaciousness: a place where writers and
readers can think and live together.

NOTES

1. See Lassner, Phyllis. "Feminist Responses to Rogerian Argument." Rhetoric Review
8(2), 220-32. She provides a valid critique of a rhetoric that exposes vulnerability in the
case of women speaking out against patriarchal oppression. Rogerian rhetoric, and it
revised form Corderian rhetoric, would perhaps not suit a speaker or writer in a posi-
tion where a power differential between audience and writer is wide as this may create
a larger potential for manipulation on behalf of the dominant speaker or group. I am
sure there are many other examples of critique beyond the one that Lassner forwards,
and it is important to be aware of these critiques in understanding the limitations of
this theory of rhetoric in action.

2. When George Yoos critiques Corder in his article, "Finding Jim's Voice: A Problem
in Ethos and Personal Identity," I believe he is really concerned with the ways in which
the process of enfolding can sometimes be problematic for audiences. Yoos only cites
Corder's Yonder as evidence for his claims, asserting that Corder's style and ethos are
ineffective ways of knowing. He writes, "To question one's own personal identity, to fail
to find it, to lament not having it, to me is an epistemic failure of sorts. And it is also a
kind of moral failure" (2003, p. 123). Yoos' fault-finding with Corder may be a result
of the book's confessional qualities that draw the reader into a discourse that can elicit
emotions of sadness and despair.

3. See Theresa Enos's "Voice as Echo of Delivery, Ethos as Transforming Process" for
a discussion of ethos in relation to the rhetorical concept of delivery. She claims that
ethos is dialogic in nature as it allows for role-playing and audience identification with
the speaker; its dialogic qualities also wed it to delivery (1994, p. 188). Enos wishes to
show through case study a modern-day transformative ethos: one that relies on stylistic
technique to relate to their audience. She uses the writing of Jim Corder to discuss
how a writer can achieve identification without sacrificing conviction through voice

                                                                                                115
Carlo

(1994, p. 194), and she claims that Corder has a dialogic voice that, "is talking to us,
an audience that he believes is committed to the speaker / writer's values, to his logos
and pathos" (1994, p. 189).

4. I thank Theresa Enos for introducing me to Corder's work in her seminar class,
"Beyond Post-Process and Post-Modernism: A Rhetoric of Spaciousness," and I am also
grateful for her kind mentorship and thorough feedback.

REFERENCES

Aristotle (n.d.). Rhetoric. (Freese, J. H., Ed.). Retrieved from http://www.per-
   seus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus:text:1999.01.0060 (Aristotle in 23
   Volumes, Vol. 22, translated by J. H. Freese. Aristotle. (1926). Cambridge
   and London. Harvard University Press; William Heinemann.)

Barthes, R. (1977). The death of the author. Image-Music-Text. 1977. 49-55.
Bishop, W. (2003). Preaching what he practices, Jim Corder's irascible and ar-

   ticulate oeuvre. In T. Enos & K. Miller (Eds.), Beyond postprocess and post-
   modernism: Essays on the spaciousness of rhetoric (pp. 89-101). Mahweh, NJ:
   Erlbaum.
Corder, J. W. (1972). Ethical argument in Amos. The Crescent. 35: 6-9.
Corder, J. W. (1977). Outhouses, weather changes, and the return to basics in
   English education. College English 38.5.: 474-482.
Corder, J. W. (1984). From Rhetoric to Grace: Propositions 55-81 about rheto-
   ric, propositions 1-54 and 82 et seq. being as yet unstated; or, getting from
   the classroom to the world. Rhetoric Society Quarterly 14(5), 15-28.
Corder, J. W. (1992). Lessons learned, lessons lost. The Georgia Review 46, 15-28.
Corder, J. W. (1992). Yonder: Life on the far side of change. Athens, GA: Univer-
   sity of Georgia Press.
Corder, J. W. (1993). At last report, I was still here. In W. Bishop (Ed.), The
   subject in writing: Essays by teachers and students (pp. 261-66). Portsmouth,
   NH: Boynton/Cook.
Corder, J. W. (1993). Tribes and displaced persons: Some observations on col-
   laboration. In L. Odell (Ed.), Theory and Practice in the teaching of writ-
   ing: Rethinking the discipline (pp. 271-88). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois
   University Press.
Corder, J. W. (1995). Notes on a rhetoric of regret. Composition Studies/Fresh-
   man English News 23(1), 94-105.
Corder, J. W. (1999). What I learned at school. In L. Ede (Ed.), On writing
   research: The Braddock Essays, 1975-1998 (pp. 43-50). New York: Bedford
   St. Martin's.

116
                                                                            Jim Corder's Generative Ethos

Corder, J. W. (2003). On argument, what some call "self-writing," and trying to
   see the back side of one's own eyeballs. Rhetoric Review 22(1), 31-39.

Corder, J. W. (2004). Argument as emergence, rhetoric as love. In J. S. Baumlin
   & K. D. Miller (Eds.), Selected essays of Jim W. Corder: Pursuing the personal
   in scholarship, teaching, and writing (pp. 170-201). Urbana, Illinois: NCTE.

Corder, J. W. (2004). Hunting for ethos where they say it can't be found. Rheto-
   ric Review 7, 299-316. Reprinted in J. S. Baumlin & K. D. Miller (Eds.),
   Selected Essays of Jim W. Corder: Pursuing the personal in scholarship,teaching,
   and writing (pp. 202-220). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Corder, J. W. (2004). Studying rhetoric and teaching school. In J. S. Baumlin
   & K. D. Miller (Eds.), Selected essays of Jim W. Corder: Pursuing the personal
   in scholarship, teaching, and writing (pp. 102-38). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Corder, J. W. (2004). Varieties of ethical argument, with some account of the
   significance of ethos in the teaching of composition. In J. S. Baumlin &
   K. D. Miller (Eds.), Selected essays of Jim W. Corder: pursuing the personal in
   scholarship, teaching, and writing (pp. 60-101). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Corder, J. W., & Baumlin, J. (1986). Lonesomeness in English studies. ADE
   Bulletin 85: 36-39.

Enos, T. (1994). Voice as echo of delivery, ethos as transforming process. In W.
   R. Winterowd & V. Villespie (Eds.), Composition in context: Essays in honor
   of Donald C. Stewart (pp. 180-195). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois Uni-
   versity Press.

Lassner, P. (1990). Feminist responses to Rogerian argument. Rhetoric Review
   8(2), 220-32.

Warnock, T. (2003). Bringing Over Yonder Over Here: A personal look at ex-
   pressivist rhetoric as ideological action. In T. Enos & K. D. Miller (Eds.),
   Beyond postprocess and postmodernism: Essays on the spaciousness of rhetoric (pp.
   203-216). Mahweh, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Yoos, G. E. (2003). Finding Jim's voice: A problem in ethos and personal iden-
   tity. In T. Enos & K. D. Miller (Eds.), Beyond postprocess and postmodernism:
   Essays on the spaciousness of rhetoric (pp. 117-28). Mahweh, NJ: Erlbaum.

Young, R. E. (1992). Rogerian Argument and the Context of the Situation:
   Taking a closer look. In N. Teich (Ed.), Rogerian Perspectives: Collaborative
   rhetoric for oral and written communication (pp. 109-121). Norwood, New
   Jersey: Ablex.

Young, R. E. Becker, A. L., & Pike, K. L. (1970). Rhetoric: Discovery and change.
   New York: Harcourt.

                                                                                                117
TEACHING STYLE AS
CULTURAL PERFORMANCE

Chris Holcomb and M. Jimmie Killingsworth
Texas A&M University

   Definitions of style generally come in two versions--one narrow, the other
broad. The narrow version identifies style with verbal style and considers a
writer's choices at the level of word, phrase, and clause, although more recently
it has come increasingly to include features beyond the sentence, including
point of view, discourse structure, and genre. The other version defines style
more broadly as "ways of doing" and takes within its purview virtually any
artifact or practice that has communicative potential: fashion, music, electronic
and digital media, deportment, food, and so on. The narrow definition of
style, despite its recent revival in some quarters, is often associated with the
outmoded formalism of New Criticism (literary studies) or with the product-
oriented pedagogy of Current-Traditional Rhetoric (composition). Meanwhile,
the broader definition is more positively received in English studies because it
opens wider vistas onto social and cultural criticism. Apart from a few notable
exceptions, these two conceptions of style rarely overlap. Scholars working with
verbal style, although they might consider stylistic features in their immediate
contexts, often stop short of fully considering style's cultural dimensions.
Reciprocally, those working within the broader conception of style seem eager
to leave verbal form behind in order to get on to the supposedly more serious
and exciting business of analyzing fashion, music, and so on, and to protect
themselves from the accusation of formalism and lack of theoretical depth.

   While the narrow and broad definitions of style influence the way we think
about and teach style, the distinctions upon which they are based are ultimately
artificial, products of disciplinary interests and specializations rather than a
viable description of style's nature and operation. In questioning the dichotomy,
this essay emphasizes the continuity between the two versions of style, and in
doing so, it answers Keith Rhodes's call (delivered earlier in this volume) to
connect scholarship and classroom work on style to broader cultural practices.
Toward these ends, we offer two frameworks for teaching students to explore
relationships between verbal style and culture.1

   The first framework encourages students to begin with the particularities
of verbal form and, from there, explore broader meanings and functions in
terms of three "arenas" of interaction: the textual, social, and cultural. Here

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.08  119
Holcomb and Killingsworth

we focus primarily on the cultural arena, arguing that words and especially
patterns of words are cultural forms just as surely as elements of fashion, music,
architecture, and food are. Seeing them as such invites students to consider how
their verbal styles (whether in written academic work or everyday interactions)
work in concert with these other cultural elements to perform various identities.

   The second framework turns the approach around and begins with cultural
forms in matters like fashion and food as an entrée into the study of principles
such as convention and deviation, which apply as surely to "broader" cultural
practices as they do to a "narrow" interest in sentence-level matters of prose
style. The suggestion is that, whichever framework the study of style employs,
the important thing is to bridge the study of language and the study of the
wider cultural context, or better yet, to teach students that language is one
cultural practice among many, all of which can be approached together with
the right conceptual tools. The frameworks, in other words, are temporary and
provisional. They momentarily accept the artificial distinction of language and
culture on the way to dismantling it. Before examining those frameworks more
closely, we first situate them in other discussions of verbal style and culture.

STYLE AND CULTURE

   Connections between verbal form and performative culture run throughout
treatments of style in ancient rhetorics. Their doing so suggests just how
thoroughly interdependent style and culture were in ancient rhetorical thought.
Aristotle, for instance, had no technical terms, such as "figure of speech"
(Kennedy, 1991, p. 242), for grouping stylistic devices or characteristics, so he
improvised ones by borrowing terms either describing cultural phenomenon or
carrying powerful cultural resonances. Metaphor, antithesis, and energeia (or
vivid expression) he grouped under the more general term asteia or "things of
the town" (Aristotle, trans. 1991, p. 244), a word that identifies these verbal
forms with the elegance and refinement of the cultural center in contrast to
the rusticity of geographic and cultural backwaters. Cultural resonances
are also conveyed by those four qualities of style that are typically translated
into English as "clarity, correctness, ornamentation, and propriety." What are
their cultural associations? The tipoff is the term under which Aristotle (and
his imitators) gathered them: the aretai or "virtues" of style. By classifying
them as such, Aristotle suggests that the "virtues" do not simply describe the
technical merits of a completed oration, but are instead guides to performance
and action, prodding the orator to fashion his stylistic behaviors in ways that
match (or at least aspire toward) criteria defining cultural excellence. The

120
                                                                  Teaching Style as Cultural Performance

virtue of correctness is particularly revealing. The term "correctness" is a poor
translation of the original Greek and Latin terms, Hellenizen and Latinitas,
because it neutralizes the cultural resonances the original terms carried. Better
translations--or at least, more historically accurate translations--might be
"good Greek" and "good Latin." Translated as such, these phrases reveal the
cultural stakes involved--that is, pitting one culture's language against those of
all outsiders, incursions of which were labeled as the ultimate stylistic "vice":
babarismos or "barbarism."

   Cultural and stylistic categories also mix and overlap in the rhetorics of
Cicero and Quintilian. For instance, in their discussions of jests (many of which
secure their effects through stylistic devices), both authors insist again and again
that the orator only use forms of joking that "befit" a liberalis or gentleman
and avoid the gross humor of the stage clown and lowly street entertainer.2
Their advice suggests that certain verbal forms (such as irony and oblique
punning) were part of a gentleman's repertoire for expressing his social and
cultural identity, while other forms (such as obscenities or overly aggressive
jokes) bespoke a more lowly status. With such advice, Cicero and Quintilian
present verbal style as a medium for cultural performance. Elsewhere, they
use non-verbal elements of culture as metaphors for thinking about style.
Quintilian, for instance, draws on several cultural practices and artifacts and,
through a series of analogies, uses them to mark a difference between a natural
verbal style and an overly affected one. The natural style is like a healthy body
that, through wholesome exercise and training, acquires grace through such
physical adornments as a "healthy complexion, firm flesh and shapely thews"
(Quintilian, trans. 1972, 8.Pr.19). The affected style, however, is like a man
who "attempts to enhance these physical graces" by the use of "depilatories and
cosmetics" or through "effeminate and luxurious apparel" (Quintilian, trans.
1972, 8.Pr.19-20). Notice how Quintilian discusses the virtue of naturalness in
verbal style by calling upon another area of culture--in this case the care of the
body through exercise versus artificial beauty created via cosmetics and dress
(an analogy which echoes Socrates' famous dismissal of rhetoric as cosmetics
and cookery in Plato's Gorgias)--thus suggesting that language is one cultural
practice among many, joined together by general principles of style (such as
naturalness).

   In more recent discussions of style in rhetorical and composition studies,
this intimate relation between style and culture is often either ignored or
underappreciated. In A Rhetoric of Style, for instance, Barry Brummett is primarily
concerned with the role that style plays in the formation and reproduction
of cultures, but he has very little to say, beyond a few generalizations, about
how verbal style participates in these processes. Instead, he adopts what we

                                                                                                121
Holcomb and Killingsworth

characterized earlier as the broad definition of style and focuses, not on verbal
style, but on clothing, music, cosmetics, visual media, deportment, and so on.
In fact, he makes it clear early in his study that he wants to move beyond
"limited view[s] of style" (2008, p. 2)--including those which identify it with
"linguistic style" (2008, p. 1)--to other modes of stylistic expression: "I want
to think of style as socially held sign systems composed of a wide range of
signs beyond only language, systems that are used to accomplish rhetorical
purposes across the cultural spectrum" (2008, p. 3, emphasis added). We agree
that style should encompass the full "cultural spectrum," but we suspect that
Brummett underestimates the importance of language and, more specifically,
"linguistic style" as a force in cultural production. As the passage above suggests
(particularly the modifiers "limited" and "only"), the role language plays within
Brummett's conception of style is a minor one. In the book's middle chapters,
that role becomes even more marginal. In other words, language ceases to be
part of style altogether and, instead, serves as a metaphor (or simile) for style.
Again and again, we come upon formulations like the following:

   · "Style ... is like a language" (2008, p. 33);
   · "Style ... is a kind of language" (2008, p. 45);
   · "[S]tyle ... functions as does a language" (2008, p. 32);
   · "A fruitful way to think of style [is] as a language ..." (2008, p. 99).
We understand what Brummett is doing here: he's taking a page from the
playbook of structuralism and making a case for examining clothing, music,
visual images, etc., as a system of relations (just as language is). But for those
of us who study verbal style, the formulation style is like a language sounds
profoundly odd because it suggests that the only meaningful link between style
and language is, at best, a metaphorical or analogical one.
   Towards the book's end, in a chapter devoted to American "gun-culture
style," Brummett does consider verbal form in his discussion of the speaking
style of American gun enthusiasts. But the analytical vocabulary he deploys
to describe this style seems too general and impressionistic. For instance, he
characterizes the speech of those who frequent gun shows and firing ranges as
"plain," "reserved," and "direct and pointed" (2008, p. 159), but apart from not-
ing that a word like "aesthetics" would be out of place in gun culture talk and
that the honorifics "sir" and "ma'am" serve as markers of politeness (2008, pp.
159-160), he fails to specify what it is about their language that suggests such
qualities or effects. He also fails to quote samples of their speech so that readers
can either confirm or challenge his general characterization of it as "plain," "re-
served," and "direct and pointed." Shortly after delivering this characterization,
Brummett does include a sentence-long sample of gun talk, but it actually un-
dercuts his previous claims about gun talk's general characteristics. The sample

122
                                                                  Teaching Style as Cultural Performance

comes from a poster at rec.guns who is chiding another newsgroup member for
taking offense from someone who was carrying a handgun. That poster writes,
"you might have been a little too curious for his temperament" (Brummett,
2008, p. 160). Given its understated, euphemistic, and Latinate diction, this
comment is hardly "plain" and "direct." Rather, it's a model of indirection. It's
as if Brummett's earlier claims about the limits of linguistic style and about style
being like a language were self-fulfilling prophesies. For the analysis here stops
short of moving beyond its impressionistic labels to specific verbal features, and
if it fails to do that, then it cannot identify connections between those features
and their cultural uses and meanings.

   A more promising approach to exploring relations between verbal form
and culture appears in Fiona Paton's "Beyond Bakhtin: Towards a Cultural
Stylistics." In this essay, Paton draws on a mostly Bakhtinian vocabulary of
analysis (heteroglossia, dialogism, parody) to argue that language is "materially
embedded in its cultural moment" (2000, p. 170). To illustrate, Paton
offers an extended analysis of Jack Kerouac's novel Dr. Sax, arguing that its
style internalizes, and re-inflects, the languages and even media formats of
various cultural forms contemporaneous with the novel's production (such
as pulp fiction, comic books, jazz, literary fiction, popular cinema, and street
vernacular). The strength of Paton's analysis lies in its effort to work from the
particularities of verbal form toward the broader concerns of cultural criticism,
ultimately situating the novel's style in the context of Cold War discourses on
nationalism and debates among American intellectuals of the 1950s over high
and low culture. But where Paton could have pushed her analysis further is in
understanding the stylistic features she identifies as cultural forms in their own
right. Instead, she treats them in one of three ways:

   1. as compositional elements borrowed from other cultural forms: for ex-
       ample, onomatopoeia from comic strips, or phrasings and idioms from
       pulp fiction or nursery rhymes (2000, p. 189);

   2. as vehicles for imitating the formats of other media: for example,
       parataxis mimics the "sequential narrative panels of a comic strip"
       (2000, p. 186);

   3. as instances of Bakhtin's more abstract categories: for example, parenthe-
       sis contributes to the dialogic style of the novel (2000, p. 186).

   These categories certainly call attention, at least in a general sense, to the
social and cultural dimensions of verbal form, but what Paton might have
also noted is that devices such as onomatopoeia, parataxis, and parenthesis are
themselves cultural forms. In other words, they (together with hundreds of
other verbal devices) are ritualizations of language at the level of word, phrase,
or clause that circulate widely, while accumulating, carrying, and shedding

                                                                                                123
Holcomb and Killingsworth

"cultural values and meanings independent of the content they may be used [in
any given instance] to convey" (Holcomb, 2007, p. 80).

   An analyst of style who does recognize such verbal patterns as cultural forms
is sociolinguist Penelope Eckert. In her studies of adolescent speech at a high
school in the suburbs of Detroit, Eckert charts stylistic variations within and
across the school's two primary social networks: jocks and burnouts. What she
finds is that features of verbal style work alongside of, and in concert with,
other cultural products and practices and that, collectively, they form a richly
expressive repertoire for performing identity. In other words, students perform
identity by drawing on elements from both verbal style (variations at the level
of phonology and syntax) and nonverbal style (variations in "clothing, posture
and body movement, makeup, hair, territory, substance use, [and] leisure
activities" [Eckert, 2005, p. 11]). Together, these verbal and nonverbal elements
of style blend seamlessly in the everyday interactions of the students Eckert has
observed. Theoretically, then, Eckert's study suggests that distinctions between
narrow and broad definitions of style will not hold--that analyses of style (and
its uses in performance) must consider verbal form working alongside (and
together with) other cultural elements. Pedagogically, her study invites us to
look for new ways to present and teach style to our students.

ARENAS OF STYLE: FROM TEXT TO CULTURE

   To help our students explore relationships between verbal form and culture,
and thus to construct a more comprehensive understanding of style, we offer
two pedagogical frameworks. The first (considered in this section) moves from
the textual features of verbal style through its social and rhetorical uses to its
cultural meanings and values. The second framework (considered in the next
section) reverses this movement and starts with stylistic activities more familiar
to students (such as fashion, music, and food), activities whose social and
cultural uses are more readily apparent to students.

   The first framework serves as a model for helping students understand style
as performance--that is, as a vehicle by which writers not only present a self, but
also orchestrate relationships with readers, subject matters, and contexts. At the
heart of this model is the notion of interaction. As Richard Schechner claims,
"To treat any object, work, or product `as' performance ... means to investigate
what that object does, how it interacts with other objects and beings" (2002,
p. 24). Building on this claim, we consider style in terms of three arenas of
interaction: the textual, social, and cultural.

124
                                                                  Teaching Style as Cultural Performance

   1. Within the textual arena, students examine how all the words on the
       page interact with one another to form patterns and meanings. Here stu-
       dents gain practice in applying different vocabularies of analysis (those
       from traditional grammar, linguistics, or rhetoric), and they become
       more accustomed to following closely the word-by-word choices of an
       author as they unfold in a given text.

   2. With the social arena, attention turns from interactions among words
       and structures to interactions between writers and readers through those
       words and structures. Here we have in mind something along the lines of
       Rosanne Carlo's contribution to this volume where Carlo examines the
       interplay between a "performative ethos" and "enfolding a reader." Along
       similar lines, students might consider how writers use style to construct
       roles for themselves and their readers, to position themselves in relation
       to those readers (above, below, equal, familiar, or distant), and to invite
       readers into participatory relationships with a text, relationships that in-
       clude enacting all the various rituals of social interaction (joking, flirting,
       sparring, instructing, and so on).

   3. With the cultural arena, students consider how a word or pattern has,
       independent of the content it might express, a particular value or mean-
       ing to some larger community of language users. To borrow an example
       from Eckert, consider "negative concord," or the use of double, triple, or
       even quadruple negatives, as in "I ain't never done nothing to nobody."
       Although this feature is stigmatized in most professional and institution-
       al contexts, among burnouts it carries the positive value of performing
       an "anti-school stance," and among male jocks it performs "ruggedness."
       (Eckert, 2005, p. 19)

   A good place to start is with patterns with which students are already
familiar--at least, intuitively. We're thinking here of such powerhouse tropes and
schemes as metaphor, anaphora, antithesis, and tricolon. Because these figures
are so ubiquitous, so much a part of our culture's repertoire for performance,
students will already have at least a tacit sense of some of their cultural meanings
and values. Take tricolon, for instance. It's a scheme involving a series of three
words, phrases, or clauses in parallel form:3

   · We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal,
       that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights,
       that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness. (The
       Declaration of Independence, 1776)

   · There's never enough bread, never enough olives, never enough soup.
       (Simic, 2005, p. 85)

                                                                                                125
Holcomb and Killingsworth

   · Our campaign was not hatched in the halls of Washington--it began in
       the backyards of Des Moines and the living rooms of Concord and the
       front porches of Charleston. (Barak Obama, "Election Night Victory
       Speech," 11/4/08)

   · It concludes that The Daily Show can be better understood not as "fake
       news" but as an alternative journalism, one that uses satire to interrogate
       power, parody to critique contemporary news, and dialogue to enact a
       model of deliberative democracy. (Baym, 2005, p. 261)

   Students will probably have little trouble identifying the textual features
shared across all of these examples (parallel series of three). They might also
observe some of the social uses of this pattern--that is, how the speakers or writers
in these examples are interacting with their listeners or readers through tricolon.
In the fourth example, President Obama uses tricolon (a staple of presidential
oratory) to reassure listeners that his goals are thoroughly democratic, springing
not from the interests Beltway insiders, but from the people--the demos--in
their most familial settings. In the final example, Baym uses tricolon to perform
another kind of ritual, one common to academic discourse: previewing the
organization of his article for readers.

   Where students might have trouble, however, and thus need more explicit
guidance, is in teasing out the cultural meanings of tricolon. We begin by asking
students, "Why three items in each series? Why not two, or four, or five?" If
this question doesn't ring some bells, we ask them about other patterns, objects,
or activities that have three parts. If one of our students doesn't volunteer it
first, we recall one of the short educational cartoons from the 1970's series
Schoolhouse Rock!: "Three Is a Magic Number," which celebrates the virtues
of three while teaching its viewers some of its multiples ("Three, six, nine ...
Twelve, fifteen, eighteen ..."). Other examples we use come from Alan Dundes,
an anthropologist who documents the pervasive role three plays not only in
ritual, myth, and folklore but also in everyday American culture:

   · Folklore (three wishes, three little pigs, three blind mice).
   · Games and spectacles (tick-tack-toe, three strikes and you're out, three

       ring circus).
   · Product sizes and appliance settings (small, medium, and large; low, me-

       dium, and high).
   · Eating rituals and food (three meals per day; coffee, tea, or milk; rare,

       medium, and well-done).
   · Common or well-known sayings ("Beg, borrow, or steal"; "Lock,

       stock, and barrel"; "Ready, willing, and able"). (Dundes, 1968, pp.
       404-09)

126
                                                                  Teaching Style as Cultural Performance

   To Dundes' list, we might add religion and philosophy (the Holy Trinity
of Christianity; the triadic semiotics of Charles Sanders Peirce; the thesis,
antithesis, and synthesis of the Hegelian dialectic).

   Having established the cultural pervasiveness of three, we return to tricolon
and ask students what cultural meanings and values it might have. Even if
they respond, "It just feels right," that's a start because it speaks to the cultural
power of three and suggests just how thoroughly this number structures our
expectations and behavior. We've probably all had the experience of drafting
something and jotting down two items, when a voice in our head calls to us,
"You need to add one more." Apparently, Captain Jack Sparrow from Pirates
of the Caribbean felt the same compulsion when he said, "I think we've arrived
at a very special place. Spiritually, ecumenically, grammatically." His three-part
list, especially the last two items, doesn't make much propositional sense, but
it makes symbolic sense: he needs the three items, regardless of their semantic
sense, to complete this little stylistic ritual. In fact, as Max Atkinson observes
about conversational discourse, "Lists comprising only two items tend to appear
inadequate and incomplete--so much so that there are various phrases that can
be slotted in whenever we are having difficulty in finding a third item for a list,"
phrases such as "and so on," "somethingorother," and "etcetera" (1984, p. 57).

   Part of what drives this compulsion towards tripartite structures has to be
that, in our culture, three means stability, completeness, and (in some instances)
finality. Tricolon, with its items cast in parallel form rather than dispersed over
varying and irregular structures, serves as the stylistic crystallization of those
meanings.4 Thus, writers often use tricolon to deliver a well-rounded description
of a person, thing, or event:

   · [Colin Duffy] is four feet eight inches, weighs seventy-five pounds,
       and appears to be mostly leg and shoulder blade. (Orlean, 1995, p.
       99)

   · I require three things in a man. He must be handsome, ruthless, and
       stupid. (Parker, 2009, p. 19)

   · Carlo, the counterman, unwrapped a Mars bar, dunked it in the uni-
       versal batter, and dropped it in oil. When it floated, golden brown,
       on the surface, he removed it, sprinkled a little powder sugar on
       it, and handed it over. "Careful," said Simon. "Inside it's bloody
       napalm."Mmmm. I like grease. I like chocolate. And I like sugar.
       (Bourdain, 2002, p. 253)

   Writers also use tricolon to present a representative sample of some
phenomenon or class (just as Obama's tricolon [quoted above] is representative
of the citizenry):

                                                                                                127
Holcomb and Killingsworth

   · He kept scraps of wood in a cardboard box--the ends of two-by-fours,
       slabs of shelving and plywood, odd pieces of molding--and everything
       in it was fair game. (Sanders, 2008, p. 134)

   · Many of us had suspended the connections to the world we had estab-
       lished back home--the part-time job in the library, the graduate pro-
       gram, the circle of supportive friends--and we resented the loss. (Gor-
       don, 1998, p. 121)

   In all of these examples, the tricola work something like triangulation, the
technique by which astronomers calculate the distance of celestial objects from
the Earth and navigators determine the position of their vessels. The tricola
fix and thus offer what seems a reliable description of, or sampling from, their
targets. Similarly, in academic discourse (even in the humanities), we often hear
of "triangulating" data--that is, confirming some observed phenomenon by
finding at least three instances of it, or examining a single phenomenon from
three methodological perspectives.

   In public oratory, tricolon often serves the performance function of cuing
listeners to applaud (Atkinson, 1984, pp. 57ff.). Stephen Colbert capitalized on
this power in a comedic segment, way back when he was just a correspondent
on The Daily Show with Jon Stewart.5 In the segment, Colbert is supposedly on-
the-scene in D.C., reporting on the previous night's State of the Union address,
and while anchor Stewart is trying to get Colbert to report on the substance of
the speech, Colbert's responses keep culminating in tricola delivered in tones
and rhythms of presidential oratory. These tricola are followed by cut-shots to
file footage of the House floor with members standing and applauding--as if
Colbert were the President. Here are several of Colbert's tricola (reinforced by
anaphora):

   · The State of the Union is a celebration of democracy, a night when Wash-
       ington and the entire country can reaffirm their faith in the nation--not
       as Democrats, not as Republicans, but as Americans.

   · If we do go to war, there's no one I'd rather have defending me than the
       brave men and women of the armed forces. We're proud of you. We be-
       lieve in you. And we will prevail. (Holcomb, 2007, pp. 71-75)

   Finally, when the exasperated Stewart asks if Colbert can "tell us about the
actual substance of the speech," Colbert responds, "Why, Jon? That won't get
applause."

   This segment implicitly confirms tricolon's status as a cultural form
(Holcomb, 2007, p. 74). The humor wouldn't work if viewers failed to recognize
as such. It wouldn't work, that is to say, if listeners failed to register how Colbert
was using tricolon (along with other elements of performance, such as vocal
tone and pacing, the cut-shot to the House floor, etc.) to signal a shift between

128
                                                                  Teaching Style as Cultural Performance

performing (and comedically confusing) two cultural identities--journalist and
politician.

   The three-arenas framework can be applied to other verbal devices--not
only to the figures of speech, but to any pattern or feature whose meanings
exceed the subject matter that, on any given occasion, it might express. For
instance:

   · The intentional misspellings and typos of geeks and gamers ("teh suc,"
       "pwned," and "pr0n").

   · The heavily nominalized and jargon-filled prose of academics.
   · Passive voice in scientific writing.
   · The esoteric (and overworked) diction and metaphors of wine connois-

       seurs ("with notes of honeysuckle and a strong, oaky finish").
   All of these features (and so many more) are little rituals of language that
circulate relatively widely, get rehearsed again and again, and assembled (along
with other non-verbal elements) into fresh combinations as writers and speakers
orchestrate their interactions with audiences and perform various selves.
Exploring these possible functions requires students and teachers to treat verbal
form as an object of serious (and deep) cultural analysis.

PRINCIPLES OF STYLISTIC PERFORMANCE:
FROM CULTURE TO TEXT

   In Performing Prose, we introduce stylistic principles like convention and
deviation, voice and footing, tropes and schemes, through the close study of
language--that is, to use the terms in the last section, we begin with the textual
arena and work toward the cultural arena--finishing in our last chapter by
showing how, once these concepts are worked out in language, they can be
demonstrated as evident in all strata of cultural activity. Our point is that the
concepts of culture and language are thoroughly interdependent, and that
language itself is one of many such activities. Unlike the search for food, water,
and habitat, the primary activities of existential life, or even sex, on which
the perpetuation of species depends, language is a secondary activity that, by
facilitating social interchange, supports and enlivens the primary work of survival
and reproduction. The same trends found in linguistic style--convention and
deviation, for example--are at work in other stylistic performances: in fashion,
food, art, sport, technology, and other areas that are partly rule-governed and
partly based on decisions, whether by individuals or groups. More significantly
for the study of style, concepts like convention and deviation can help to form
bridges between the understandings of style in various cultural activities. Here,

                                                                                                129
Holcomb and Killingsworth

we'd like briefly to consider a second approach or framework for studying style.
Instead of moving from language outward to the larger cultural arena, with the
help of these conceptual bridges, we might well turn things around and begin
with an area more familiar to the average student--fashion, for example--
thereby applying the old premise of behaviorism in education: always move
from the most familiar to the least familiar material (see Zoellner, 1969).

   In matters of clothing, as in cultural practices, people depend partly on rules
or laws, partly on conventions, and partly on personal choices. In the west,
required clothing includes a top (shirt, blouse, etc.), a bottom (pants, skirt,
etc.), and footwear (shoes, boots, sandals). At some public places, like the beach
or the swimming pool, the rules are more relaxed unless you want to go into the
snack bar for a hot dog ("No shirt, No shoes, No service"). Even at this most
basic level, however, culture intervenes. In hot, moist climates like the tropical
rain forest, some cultural groups wear nearly nothing (the rules are more like
a perpetual trip to the beach), while in many desert climates, more elaborate
rules for covering prevail--full-length robes and head scarves and veils, for
example, many of which elements have been codified in religious law, such as
that of Islam. Covering in one way or another becomes a matter of religious
duty--and a matter of identity politics in global society, where requirements
for dress become issues of confrontation and legislation. For any given society,
the law becomes the foundation of required behavior. The law says what must
be covered and to what extent. Despite the so-called sexual revolution and the
vaunted freedom of expression in American life and art, laws against indecent
exposure remain on the books. It is against the law for women to go topless
on most U.S. beaches, for example, but not on most European beaches; and
at least one well known political commentator on the European scene has
expressed wonder over the prudery and hypocrisy of Americans on this score
(see Zizek, 2010, pp. 121-22). The law may also require uncovering, as in the
case of some European countries that have tried to institute anti-veiling laws on
the argument that public safety depends upon the police being able to identify
the faces of citizens.

   Beyond the law, dress is governed to some extent by conventions. We "dress
up" for weddings and funerals and "dress down" for ball games and college
classes. The occasions for dressing up have changed over the years--people used
to dress up for air travel, for example, and Sunday church--as has the meaning
of dressing up. (Do men dress up in tuxedo, dark suit with necktie, or just slacks
with ironed shirt; must women wear a full-length gown, "little black dress,"
or skirt and blouse with low heels?) Along with historical shifts, regional and
national customs cause variation in the definition of dressing up--the relaxed
west coast versus the more formal east coast in the U.S., for example.

130
                                                                  Teaching Style as Cultural Performance

   Finally we come to style--deviations from, or personal variations within,
dress codes and conventions. East-coast businessmen might express themselves
with a colorful tie, or businesswomen with a bright scarf, while still following the
convention of wearing a dark suit to work. The daring may flaunt convention
entirely, leaving off the tie or jacket, and thereby engendering expectations of
rebelliousness or special creativity (that they better live up to).

   Students can bring plenty of their own examples along these lines. The key
is to make the transition to language via the conceptual bridges to the more
familiar cultural practice. Once the concept of rule-governed, conventional,
and deviant behavior is established, we can get at some key definitions in the
basic study of language:

   · Grammar is the set of rules by which a language functions. The rules
       change over time, but are relatively stable.

   · Style comprises the choices a writer makes within that system. Style is
       often defined as deviation from a norm.

   · Convention is the shifting ground of linguistic restriction between
       grammar and style, between definite rules and clear choices.

   A great place to begin working with these distinctions is the kind of
restrictions that often get codified as rules when they are in fact matters of
choice or community preference. An injunction that every student will
recognize, for example, is never use the first-person pronoun. What grammar (the
law) actually says about use of the first-person is that, like all pronouns, it must
agree in person, number, and case with its antecedent and with any verb to
which it serves as subject. Avoiding the use of the first-person I or we is not a
law or a rule, but a convention. For one thing, it is a convention of formality,
like wearing a tuxedo to the prom. Drawing attention to oneself--whether by
the use of I or by the wearing of flamboyant clothing--can be considered bad
manners in some situations or in some cultures. One must become a student
of the culture to know the conventions and codes, the manners and mores.
Avoiding the use of the first-person I or we can also be a badge of identity--
like the businessperson's dark suit, the head scarf of Moslem women, or the
uniform of the soldier. Writers in science and engineering avoid the first person
to suggest the objectivity and reproducibility of their work. It doesn't matter
that I get one result in my lab; by following these procedures, anyone can get
such a result. The emphasis thus falls on the methods and the findings rather
than on the interpretations of any individual. In forthrightly using we in the
famous paper announcing the structure of DNA, Francis Crick and James
Watson flouted convention and emphasized the originality of their discovery
and the daring quality of their interpretation (see the discussion in Holcomb &
Killingsworth, 2010, pp. 50-53).

                                                                                                131
Holcomb and Killingsworth

   Students may grasp the analogies between language and other cultural
practices quite quickly, but still have trouble crossing the bridge between them.
Ultimately they must be convinced that it is in their best interest to know the
inner workings of language as well as they know the intricacies of fashion, sports,
or music. To that end, we rely on performance. Performance is the moment
when language goes into action, when the writer puts the stylistic repertoire
to use with a rhetorical awareness of audience and context. Good performance
finally requires mastery of rules (grammar), knowledge of conventions (norms,
audience expectations), and the informed practice of style (good decisions
about deviations).

   Performance will also reveal continuities (and thus bridge the divide)
between the two definitions of style with which this chapter began: narrow
definitions which identify style with verbal style, and broad definitions which
identify it with fashion, music, food, etc. Narrow definitions often fall short
because they measure style in terms of its efficiency in transmitting information
(for instance, the whole prescriptive tradition on clarity and concision), or
because they are too invested in the representational function of language (style
may depict behavior--may even enhance depictions of behavior--but is not a
form of behavior itself ). In either case, style is defined (sometimes exclusively)
as a relation to content and usually as content's subordinate partner. As a
result, narrow definitions leave style vulnerable to charges of formalism. Broad
definitions, by contrast, often ignore or underestimate the role verbal style plays
in the production and reproduction of culture, and their selection of objects
of analysis seem driven by a misguided assumption: if you want to examine
relations between style and culture, you can't get there through verbal form.

   If, however, we approach style as performance--as a medium for social
and cultural interaction--then doing so will dismantle distinctions between
narrow and broad definitions by treating the objects each traditionally analyzes
as belonging to the same set. Reconfiguring them as such invites us (and
our students) to consider patterns at the level of word, phrase, and clause
as performative set-pieces--that is, as ritualizations of language that work
alongside of (or sometimes in tension with) ritualizations in deportment,
dress, food, visual design, sport, etc.--all of which play a role in structuring
and orchestrating interactions not only between style and content, but also
(and more importantly) among performers, audiences, and the contexts they
inhabit. More generally, this reconfiguration invites students to marshal the
strengths of both linguistic and cultural analysis in developing a practice of
composition that addresses the deep motives of writers and readers in the widest
possible context.

132
                                                                  Teaching Style as Cultural Performance

NOTES

1. These frameworks originally appeared in our textbook Performing Prose: The Study
and Practice of Style in Composition. Here we elaborate on their pedagogical uses and
explore their theoretical implications more fully.

2. See, for instance, Cicero's De Oratore (2.60.244; 2.60.247; 2.61.251-52; and
2.67.270) and Quintilian (6.3.17-18; 6.3.29; 6.3.46-47; and 5.3.83).

3. The following discussion of tricolon is based on our analysis of the same scheme in
Performing Prose (pp. 151-154).

4. Our thinking here is influenced by Jeanne Fahnestock's Rhetorical Figures in Sci-
ence where she argues that several key figures exemplify or "epitomize" particular lines
of reasoning (pp. 23-24).

5. The following is based on Holcomb's analysis of the same segment (pp. 71-75).

REFERENCES

Aristotle. (1991). On rhetoric: A theory of civic discourse. Trans. George A. Ken-
   nedy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Atkinson, M. (1984). Our masters' voices: The language and body language of
   politics. London: Routledge.

Baym, G. (2005). The Daily Show: Discursive integration and the reinvention
   of political journalism. Political Communication. 22: 259-76.

Bourdain, A. (2002). A cook's tour: Global adventures in extreme cuisines. New
   York: Harper Perennial.

Brummett, B. (2008). A rhetoric of style. Carbondale: Southern Illinois Univer-
   sity Press.

Cicero. (1977). De oratore. (E. W. Sutton & H. Rackam, Trans.). Loeb Classical
   Library 349. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Colbert, S. (2003). Live from D.C. The Daily Show with Jon Stewart. Comedy
   Central. 29 Jan.

Declaration of Independence. (1776). National Archives. Retrieved from http://
   www.archives.gov/exhibits/charters/declaration_transcript.html

Dundes, A. (1968). The number three in American culture. In A. Dundes (Ed.),
   Every Man His Way (pp. 410-24). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Eckert, P. (2005, Jan). Variation, convention, and social meaning. Paper present-
   ed at the Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America, Oakland,
   CA. Abstract retrieved from http://people.pwf.cam.ac.uk/bv230/lang-var/

                                                                                                133
Holcomb and Killingsworth

   eckert%202005%20variation%20convention%20and%20social%20mean-
   ing.pdf
Gordon, E. F. (1998). Faculty wife. In P. Lopate (Ed.) The Anchor Essay Annual:
   Best of 1998 (pp. 115-32). New York: Anchor.
Holcomb, C. (2007). "Anyone can be President": Figures of speech, cultural
   forms, and performance. Rhetoric Society Quarterly 37, 71-96.
Holcomb, C.& M. J. Killingsworth. (2010). Performing Prose: The study and
   practice of style in composition. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Obama, B. (2008). Election night victory speech. Grant Park, IL. 4 Nov. 2008.
Orlean, S. The American man at age ten. In N. Sims & M. Kramer (Eds.), Lit-
   erary journalism. New York: Ballantine.
Parker, D. & S. Y. Silverstein (Ed.). (2009). Not much fun: The lost poems of
   Dorothy Parker. New York: Scribner, 2009.
Paton, F. (2000). Beyond Bakhtin: Towards a cultural stylistics. College English
   63: 166-93.
Quintilian. (1972). Institutio oratoria. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
   Press.
Sanders, S. R. (2008). The inheritance of tools. In R. Atwan (Ed.), Best Ameri-
   can essays: College edition (5th ed.) (pp. 131-139). Boston: Houghton.
Schechner, R. (2002). Performance Studies: An Introduction. London: Rout-
   ledge.
Simic, C. (2005). Dinner at Uncle Boris's. In L. Gutkind (Ed.), In Fact: The best
   of Creative Nonfiction. New York: Norton.
Zizek, S. (2010). Living in the end times. New York: Verso.
Zoellner, R. (1969). Talk-write: A behavioral pedagogy for composition. College
   English 30, 267-320.

134
INVENTIO AND ELOCUTIO:
LANGUAGE INSTRUCTION AT
ST. PAUL'S GRAMMAR SCHOOL
AND TODAY'S STYLISTIC
CLASSROOM

Tom Pace
John Carroll University

INTRODUCTION

   Ever since the publication of Robert Connors's 2000 article "The Erasure
of the Sentence," compositionists have reconsidered that "dirty" word of post-
process writing instruction--style. This reconsideration is a good thing, in part,
because near the end of his essay, Connors was pessimistic about the teaching of
stylistics as a part of the field's future:

         Many people still professionally active today have deep
         background as generative rhetoricians or imitation adepts
         or sentence-combining pioneers, but they have lost most of
         their interest; they do not do that much anymore. They have
         cut their losses. We all must. (2000, p. 122)

   This pessimism appears to have been short-lived, however, as the last decade
in composition studies has witnessed a mini-renaissance of interest in stylistics.
Two of the emerging issues in this resurgence of style include, one, style's role
in public debates about writing instruction, and, two, the role of style as a
tool of invention. In his 2008 book, Out of Style: Reanimating Stylistic Study in
Composition and Rhetoric, Paul Butler argues that that the loss of stylistics from
composition in recent decades left it alive only in the popular imagination as a set
of grammar conventions. Additionally, Butler uses Michael Warner's argument
about counterpublics--publics, e.g., the discipline of composition studies itself,
which are defined in tension with the larger public sphere--to contend that it
is through style that scholars in the field can find a needed entry into public
discussions about writing, stressing that the field of composition and rhetoric

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.09  135
Pace

should re-energize stylistic study in a concerted effort to dislodge popular public
perceptions of writing instruction. In doing so, Butler also stresses the importance
of style as a tool of invention to help students generate ideas for these public
audiences. Butler's work suggests that the book has not closed on style, that
there is much more to be done in re-establishing style as a subject of inquiry
in composition, particularly in its role to prepare student writers for public
audiences and to explore the inventional possibilities of style. Ultimately, this
focus on public audiences and the interplay between style and invention suggests
that the teaching of style is often synonymous with teaching composition.

   In this chapter, I argue that the teaching of style, often discarded variously
as prescriptive, decorative, and intellectually deadening, can and should be
reconfigured as a vital element of current rhetorical instruction on the historical
grounds that stylistic considerations are integral both to rhetorical invention
and to rhetoric's public function. As the editors of this collection suggest in
their introduction, style "creates and reflects knowledge, and allows us to access
the ideology and cultural values of a text" (Duncan & Vanguri, this volume).
Indeed, while the recent research in style has argued that style is an inventive
canon tied to the public turn in composition, style as a source of invention
historically been tied to public writing. Here, I explore the teaching of style in
early modern England, making specific connections between the canon of style
and its role in providing access to dominant forms of discourse in early modern
English society. Specifically, I focus on the curriculum at St. Paul's grammar
school in London and the role Erasmus played in developing its curriculum. I
focus on St. Paul's because it is arguably the most important preparatory school
in early modern England, educating generations of scholars who later exercised
a profound effect on English culture and society through literature, the law,
politics, commerce, and the clergy. By revisiting some of the pedagogical
practices in early modern England, we can gain useful insights about how to
teach style today.

   St. Paul's Grammar school became the model for almost every subsequent
English grammar school for the next two hundred years, and at its educational
core was the teaching of style based largely on Desiderius Erasmus's stylistic
textbook De Copia. Early modern writing curricula, as exemplified by St. Paul's
incorporation of De Copia, was infused with the study of style as a source of
invention and as preparation to write for the public sphere. As a review of
Erasmus will explain, a dialectic exists in early modern rhetoric between the
understanding of style as decoration and style as a tool to help rhetors invent
arguments. Style in this period, therefore, was not just a simple matter of adding
words to ideas--far from it. The canon of style during the early modern period
emerged as a division of rhetoric that allows the ideas themselves to take flight

136
                                                                                      Inventio and Elocutio

and affect the way knowledge was constructed for both listeners to a speech and
readers of a text. The teaching of style at St. Paul's, then, acts as an important
site for this chapter because the curriculum did not divide style from other
areas of writing instruction, notably the invention of ideas and the preparation
of students for the public sphere. By reminding ourselves of this important
moment in the history of style, we can begin to see the pedagogical possibilities
of style as a tool of composition instruction that prepares students to write for
public audiences as well as a site for the discover of ideas.

   This chapter is divided into three parts. The first part explores the role of
stylistics in the curriculum at St. Paul's grammar school in London, a curriculum
developed by humanists John Colet and Desiderius Erasmus that linked the
teaching of style with the teaching of invention. The chapter's second part shows
more specifically how style and invention were taught together in Renaissance
grammar schools via the progymnasmata and the declamatio, exercises designed
to train rhetors the art of invention and style. Finally, the last section of the
essay describes a first-year composition course I teach that draws on some of
the stylistic work from early modern England, including using imitation, using
style as a source of invention, and other stylistic pedagogies. This style-based
first-year writing course, at its core, uses Gerald Graff and Cathy Birkenstein's
They Say/I Say to teach students how to use elements of style to create rich,
sophisticated prose for public academic audiences. Specifically, Birkenstein
and Graff's book offers writing teachers a kind of mini-progymnasmata and
declamatio, reinforcing for students the interplay of style and invention.
Although they never talk overtly about style and invention in their book, Graff
and Birkenstein teach students to use numerous sentence-level and paragraph-
level conventions designed to assist students to develop and generate ideas for
writing. They stress as much in their introduction, suggesting that focusing on
stylistics help students lead to discovery of ideas:

         Our templates also have a generative quality, prompting
         students to make moves in their writing that they might
         not otherwise make or even know they should make. The
         templates in this book can be particularly helpful for stu-
         dents who are unsure about what to say, or who have trouble
         finding enough to say, often because they consider their
         own beliefs so self-evident that they need not be argued for.
         (2010, pp. xx-xxi)

   Much like the early modern grammar school classroom that used style as a
tool of invention, the templates and lessons from They Say/I Say are designed to

                                                                                                137
Pace

use style as a generator of ideas. As such, using style as a generator of ideas allows
students to develop their prose style for various public audiences. Indeed, Graff
and Birkenstein reinforce for students the public function of style in They Say/I
Say, noting that "Working with these templates can give you an immediate
sense of how to engage in the kids of critical thinking you are required to do at
the college level and in the vocational and public spheres beyond" (2010, p. 2).

   Ultimately, this chapter shows how style is not a reductive, rigid, surface-
only concern. Rather, style forms the very heart of rhetorical education and
reinforces the connection between elocutio and inventio. Early modern
grammar schools, like St. Paul's, act as a historical precedence to reimagining
style as a core feature of the composition classroom, one that plays a central role
in a student's rhetorical training.

ERASMUS AND THE RISE OF ST.
PAUL'S GRAMMAR SCHOOL

   The teaching of style in early modern England fostered a humanist education,
including preparing students for the public sphere. Even if the broader goals
of an early modern rhetorical education were humanistic, using language in
public contexts was very much on the minds of Renaissance educators. Many
of these educators, of course, were heavily influenced by the Greek and Roman
education models and used those models in their own early modern classrooms.
As Teresa Morgan argues in her book Literate Education in the Hellenistic and
Roman Worlds, most of the language instruction in the earlier periods focuses
more on training bureaucrats rather than teaching stylistics as preparation
for the public sphere (1998, p. 198-226). Likewise, Wayne Rebhorn reminds
us in his book Renaissance Debates on Rhetoric that Renaissance writers see
rhetorical training in the early modern period as preparation for the public
realm. Rebhorn insists that, "Renaissance writers about rhetoric characterize the
orator a ruler, label him a prince or king or emperor, and identify the audience
he controls in a complementary manner as being his subjects" (2000, p. 4).
Here, Rebhorn argues that rhetorical education in the Renaissance, and hence
the textbooks on rhetoric that were produced during this period, was designed
to prepare students for careers in which they would interact with the public on
public matters. In other words, students who studied rhetoric in early modern
grammar schools did so under the assumption they would use their training for
public ends.

   The most important grammar school in England to develop this type of
curriculum was St. Paul's of London. Indeed, St. Paul's Grammar School

138
                                                                                      Inventio and Elocutio

became the model on which almost every other grammar school in early modern
England would be based. T. W. Baldwin points out that "anyone who wishes to
understand the principles upon which the sixteenth-century grammar school
was founded in England would be very unwise to begin anywhere else than
with Erasmus" (1944, p. 77). Humanist John Colet, who was Dean of St. Paul's
Cathedral and a close friend of Erasmus, wanted to apply classical-influenced
education to his new school at St. Paul's. In 1504, Colet became Dean of St.
Paul's Cathedral in London, and a year later inherited his father's fortune, a
fortune that enabled Colet to expand upon and re-build the school at St. Paul's,
which had been in disrepair for several years. It also gave Colet the impetus
he needed to apply Erasmus's ideas about rhetoric and education to his own
grammar school. In a letter to Erasmus, Colet envisioned starting a grammar
school based on Erasmus's methods of teaching eloquence, expressing fondness
for his friend's "genius, art, and learning, and copiousness, and eloquence,"
going so far as to express his desire for Erasmus to teach at his own school
(Nichols, 1962, p. 94). Colet never did get Erasmus to teach for him, but he did
start his own grammar school in London establishing, as the school's curricular
foundation, Erasmus's ideas about teaching eloquence as preparation for the
public sphere.

   St. Paul's School in London opened in 1511 and became a place where
style formed the centerpiece of a young student's education. This education
did not just focus on eloquence for the sake of artifice only--although that did
occur--but rather teaching the public function of style. Specifically, students
at St. Paul's learned eloquence to help them gain access to careers in the law,
politics, the clergy, and other early modern professions. In his study of John
Milton's education at St. Paul's, John Milton at St. Paul's, Donald Lemen Clark
outlines the curriculum at St. Paul to show how the education in style students
like Milton learned there went beyond mere artifice to prepare students for
public careers. Clark insists that "the whole of grammar school education was
devoted to language and literature, not as sciences to be known, but as arts to
be practiced" (1942, p. 130). By practice, Clark means that an education in
style went beyond rote memorization and was designed specifically as rhetorical
training for public careers in politics, law, and clergy.

   Consequently, the main educational thrust of Colet's school, indeed of
English grammar schools in general, would be the acquisition of style, based
primarily on Erasmus's De Copia. In his statute on "What shalbe taught" in
his grammar school, Colet clarifies this focus on eloquent expression, noting
that the teaching of style does not just mean artifice but rather a marriage
of eloquent expression and public function, based on the Roman model
of preparing students to use rhetoric publically, "as have the very Roman

                                                                                                139
Pace

eloquence joined with wisdom specially" (Colet, 1909, p. 278). Here, Colet
echoes Cicero's declaration of the role of the true rhetor found in Cicero's De
Inventione: "wisdom without eloquence does too little for the good of states,
but that eloquence without wisdom is generally highly disadvantageous and
is never helpful" (Cicero, trans. 1949, p. 3). Humanists such as Colet and
Erasmus took Cicero's argument about eloquence and wisdom and designed
grammar school curricula intended to teach eloquence for public careers, so
that students were taught to use eloquence not just for artifice only but to use
eloquence in public functions. Erasmus's rhetoric, as outlined in De Copia, is
a reaction to ornamentation for mere artifice. He argues that the good style
should not be ostentatious and grandiose for its own sake, but rather it should
have a rhetorical purpose.

   For Erasmus, as with most sixteenth-century humanists, this purpose meant
persuasion within the public realm. Of course, he does not shun stylistic polish
and rhetorical decoration. Rather, he believes that the most accomplished and
useful rhetorician was one who could turn from amplitude to terseness as the
situation required, an understanding of figurative language that is echoed by
William FitzGerald elsewhere in the collection. Erasmus, for instance, argues
in De Copia that education in eloquence prepares students for various public
audiences, and thus, he is concerned with the characteristics that enable success
in that public function:

         To take compression of language first, who will speak more
         succinctly than the man who can readily and without hesita-
         tion pick out from a huge army of words, from the whole
         range of figures of speech, the feature that contributes most
         effectively to brevity? And as far as for compression of con-
         tent, who will show the greatest mastery in setting out his
         subject in the fewest possible words if not the man who has
         carefully worked out what are the salient points of his case,
         the pillars so to speak on which it rests, distinguishing them
         from the subsidiary points and things brought in merely
         for embellishment? No one in fact will see more swiftly and
         surely what can be omitted without disadvantages than the
         man who can see where and how to make additions. (Eras-
         mus, trans. 1978, p. 300)

   Here, Erasmus spells out for his reader the usefulness of an education in
style as a tool of invention, especially in pubic contexts. He points out the
necessity for learning the figures of speech in order to "pick out from a huge

140
                                                                                      Inventio and Elocutio

arm of words" those linguistic features that lead most to brevity. Erasmus also
points out how stylistic education helps students summarize material quickly
and efficiently, pointing out "the salient points of his case." In other words,
Erasmus assumes that being able to use brevity and to point out the important
points of a case are meant to be used in the public sphere and, as a result,
showcase the public function of style.

   Since so many of the grammar school students would use their education as
stepping stones into the arenas of politics, law, commerce, or clergy--all social
realms in which they would be asked to argue public issues--their education
in eloquence would have a decisive political bent. Erasmus would articulate
his vision of rhetorical education for the public sphere further in De Ratione
Studii. In this text, Erasmus proposes a course of study that would serve as the
foundation of the English grammar schools. In De Ratione, Erasmus takes his
ideas about rhetoric and style that he developed in De Copia and applies them
to pedagogy. Erasmus begins De Ratione with a discussion of epistemology,
arguing that knowledge is "of two kinds: of things and of words" (trans. 1978,
p. 666). For Erasmus, the knowledge of words comes prior to the knowledge of
ideas, yet ultimately the knowledge of ideas is more important: "a person who is
not skilled in the force of language is, of necessity, short-sighted, deluded, and
unbalanced in his judgment of things as well" (trans. 1978, p. 666). Ideas can
only be truly created or conveyed to an audience if they are accompanied by
eloquent, precise language. In other words, Erasmus maintains that whatever
figures of speech the rhetor uses, whatever trope or scheme a speaker employs,
it must be done in conjunction with the rhetorical constraints that the situation
demands. More often than not, those rhetorical demands were made in the
public sphere. Ultimately, Erasmus's theory of rhetoric, the application of
eloquence to wisdom for a public audience, would be adapted by Colet and
applied wholesale in his grammar school at St. Paul's.

THE PROGYMNASMATA AND DECLAMATIO

   Elocutio at St. Paul's was taught in conjunction with inventio. Donald L.
Clark writes that schoolboys at St. Paul's were "taught the same arts of eloquence
as if [their] masters had chosen to call it all rhetoric instead of calling part of it
rhetoric and the other part logic" (1942, p. 15). Students did not study these
subjects separately, but rather they intersected and built upon one another in
the schoolboy's course of study and were seen as one process of mental action.
In other words, the teaching of logical arguments went hand-in-hand with the
teaching of language. St. Paul's used Erasmus's ideas about copia and brought

                                                                                                141
Pace

it together with the traditional divisions of classroom practice: One, the
elementary level was known as the progymnasmata and, two, the advanced level
was known as the declamatio. Again, these two levels come from Greek and
Roman educational methods which had changed little over the centuries.

   The progymnasmata refers to the exercises designed to train rhetors in
the art of invention. Specifically, at St. Paul's and at other grammar schools
in early modern England, the progymnasmata was used to teach students to
invent arguments for public functions. In "The Very Idea of a Progymnasmata,"
David Fleming insists that one of the primary virtues of the progymnasmata
was how prepares students to a wide variety of rhetorical elements, most
specifically for a public function: "some are deliberative, others are forensic or
epideictic; some practice the student in introductions and epilogues, others
in proof and refutation" (2003, p. 116). Fleming reminds the reader that the
exercises in the progymnasmata train students for the whole of public rhetoric:
the three purposes of public discourse: forensic, deliberative, and epideictic,
as well as how to support arguments and refute others. In his essay on the
uses of the Greek progymnasmata for teaching invention in modern classrooms,
John Hagaman points out that "The exercises are based on analyses of prose
passages, memorization, imitation, and students' own compositions" (1986,
p. 24). Hagaman stresses that the teaching of the progymnasmata took into
consideration the context of discourse, and not just mere rote memorization, and
as such trains students to explore ideas from various perspectives, ultimately for
public purposes. These exercises were not used simply as prescriptive measures
to teach a young rhetor how to formulate an argument. The exercises in the
progymnasmata were used as a teaching heuristic to explore the tensions between
the instructor's desires for the student and the student's own desire for freedom
of learning. For instance, Richard Enos points out that the progymnasmata was
designed by classical rhetoricians not to be used in a prescriptive, rigid manner.

          One of the most important tasks for historians and theoreticians
          of classical rhetoric is to introduce, refine, and possible modify the
          heuristic ... process of classical rhetorical theory for the resolution
          of contemporary communication problems so that the benefits of
          rhetoric, which have been evident for centuries, can continue to be
          made apparent through scholarly research. (Enos, 1983, p. 30)

   In other words, the progymnasmata was used as a tool for students to learn
how to eventually create arguments on their own, based on the rhetorical
constraints they encountered. Indeed, early modern rhetoricians adapted the
progymnasmata to fit their needs.

142
                                                                                      Inventio and Elocutio

   At St. Paul's, for example, school masters used the progymnasmata as a site
where instruction in style was used as a tool of invention, designed to train
students to develop their style for a variety of public roles. The progymnasmata
was in fact aimed very squarely at public use. For example, the narrative sequence
involved a retelling of a story from poetry or history and was aimed not so much
at eloquence--although that was the goal as well--as it was at knowledge. Thus,
as schoolboys retold a tale from history, they practiced how a story was told:
point of view; what was accomplished; the time when it was accomplished; the
place; how it was done; and the cause. Another example involves the chreia, in
which students drew from a proverb and amplified it. For example, students
might take a saying such as "Socrates said the root of learning is bitter, but the
fruit is pleasant" and develop an essay based on its theme. Thus, such a saying is
a rhetorical trope in which students would learn how to craft a piece of writing
based on the precept of a proverb. In other words, they learned to develop
eloquence, to explore an idea, and to arrange it appropriately all at once. For
instance, Hagaman stresses that the sequenced exercises in the progymnasmata
are meant to help students develop their rhetorical skills so that they are able
to progress from concrete tasks to more abstract ones, thus training students to
use a variety of rhetorical elements to help them address their instructors and
classmates, as well a more public audiences. "The progymnasmata," Hagaman
claims, "progresses from the concrete, narrative tasks to abstract persuasive
ones; from addressing the class and teacher to addressing a public audience
such as the law court" (1986, p. 25). To that end, students at St. Paul's were
instructed in the progymnasmata as a means of teaching them to develop style
based on a number of rhetorical situations they may eventually encounter in
their professional and scholarly lives.

   At the advanced level of grammar school, students were expected to showcase
all of this learning as part of the declamatio. Toward the end of the students'
grammar school career, they were expected to demonstrate their knowledge of
rhetoric with a prepared speech (declamatio). In his Handlist of Rhetorical Terms,
Richard Lanham defines the declamatio as "The elaborately ornamented and
rehearsed speech on a fictional situation or hypothetical lawsuit which formed
a central part of Roman rhetorical discipline" (Lanham, 1984, p. 44). If the
progymnasmata were the smaller-scale exercises, the declamatio was a full-scaled
rhetorical performance in which the student was expected to showcase all he
learned and accomplished during his tenure in grammar school. Together, both
the progymnasmata and the declamatio worked together to prepare students for
using eloquence as a public function. In his Roman Declamation in the Late
Republic and Early Empire, S. F. Bonner points out that the declamatio began
as exercises in voice training, as rhetors learned to adjust their voice and pitch

                                                                                                143
Pace

to fit whatever rhetorical situation they faced (Bonner, 1949, pp. 277ff.). Early
modern education adapted the practice in their grammar schools, and it soon
became a central part of the curriculum. Lanham points out that declamatio
was significant to the young boy's education because it allowed the student to
receive a fairly broad education: not only in history and mythology, law and
political science, but in psychology, sociology ... and, above all, in decorum, the
appropriate adjustment to social situations of all sorts. Declamation provided
what we might call a centrifugal educational technique, a single central (we
would say interdisciplinary) exercise out of which training of declamation
provided, that is, a model for a core curriculum in miniature (Lanham, 1984,
p. 44).

   Lanham raises an interesting point about the usefulness of the declamatio in
early modern education. The point about the declamatio as an interdisciplinary
exercise is significant because it shows how language instruction was fundamental
to a student's education in early modern grammar classrooms. Instruction in
language, in eloquence, went hand-in-hand with teaching students how to
think, how to learn their subject matter, and how to understand how to use
language in a variety of public situations. This interdisciplinary curriculum,
with the progymnasmata and the declamatio at its core, leads students use style
and to develop eloquence as a tool for becoming participants on the stage of
public life.

TEACHING STYLE IN TODAY'S CLASSROOM

   Much of what the early modern stylistic classroom addressed can be applied
to today's writing classrooms. Recently, I taught a first-year writing course where
my writers explored the intersection between style and invention, used imitation
as a tool of developing their style, and wrote their projects for a public audience,
both academic and non-academic. The students in this course were all first-year
students attending the university on a service and social justice scholarship and,
as a result, many of the writing projects asked students to write about issues of
service for public audiences. In all, students wrote four major essays. I asked
them to revise three of their projects for submission in their final portfolios. In
addition to the portfolio, my writers also worked in small groups throughout
the semester developing, planning, writing, editing, and producing their own
academic journal. The journal contained essays written by each group member
that explored issues of social justice and service that students and faculty at the
university would find relevant and noteworthy. At the end of the semester, the
groups' journals were reviewed by an outside team of writing specialists: the

144
                                                                                      Inventio and Elocutio

university's Writing Center director and two of her consultants--an English
department graduate assistant and an undergraduate junior marketing major.
These readers came to class on the last day of the semester and discussed with
the writers the strengths and weaknesses of each journal. Thus, throughout the
semester, my writers became cognizant of the notion that they were developing
their writing style for a real audience of academic readers in a way they normally
would not if they were just writing for me or for their class colleagues.

   While many of the assignments asked students to perform a variety of
academic tasks--summary, making claims and supporting them with research,
connecting personal experience to public contexts, among others--the main
thrust of the course was exploring stylistics as a tool of invention. This interaction
between style and invention was accomplished mainly through using Graff and
Birkenstein's They Say/I Say. This book is an accessible introduction to the various
sentence-level rhetorical moves that academic writers make in argumentative
writing. The authors present dozens of model templates that students can
incorporate into their own prose in an effort to see how academic writing is often
writing done in response to other people's ideas. The book helped my writers
unpack the vagaries and mysteries of academic discourse. As such, the exercises
and lessons from They Say/I Say act as a mini-progymnasmata and declamatio. By
this, I mean that the lessons on academic style the book teaches build on one
another, showing how the different academic conventions and rhetorical moves
can be used as tools of invention. Students use the templates to imitate various
academic conventions, with an eye toward generating sophisticated prose for
public academic and non-academic audiences. Ultimately, building on these
lessons and stylistic elements allow students to showcase their learning at once
in their final projects.

   Each of the four major essays students wrote corresponded with a lesson
from They Say/I Say, stressing the role style plays in the invention process. The
first essay asked them to write a clear, well-organized summary of one of the
essays from the course reader. In doing so, students were asked to establish
some kind of connection between the article and its impact on their thinking
about their education and what they hope to accomplish as a service and social
justice scholar at the university. The second essay asked writers to pick one of
the course readings and make a claim about whether they agree or disagree, or
both, with the main claim of the reading, using library research to support their
claims. In this essay, students were introduced to Cicero's arrangement scheme
and expected to use it in their paper. The third essay asked students to pick an
issue about which they are passionate and write three different letters to three
different public audiences advocating for that issue. Finally, their last project
asked them to write a personal narrative about their experience with service

                                                                                                145
Pace

and social justice and to connect their experience with a larger social context.
In this final project, students were expected to showcase their stylistic learning,
much in the spirit of the early modern declamatio. As such, the sequence of
assignments in this course, using the exercises and lessons from They Say/I Say,
mirrors the step-by-step process of the progymnasmata and declamatio.

   For all four assignments, students were asked to use a number of the templates
and the lessons on style from They Say/I Say to help them generate and develop
their ideas in their papers and to further develop a more sophisticated prose
style. Indeed, I would suggest that the stylistic lessons and templates from They
Say/I Say reflect Butler's argument in Out of Style: Reanimating Stylistic Study
in Composition and Rhetoric that the teaching of style appears in places where
many of us in composition studies do not expect it. Specifically, Butler argues
that is often mistaken to believe that style disappeared completely following the
social turn and is no longer a part of the field. Rather, Butler implies that "style
is often hidden, having dispersed into a `diaspora of composition studies,' where
it is being used in important ways" (2008, 24). Specifically, Butler locates this
"diaspora" in such categories as genre theory, rhetorical analysis, personal writing,
and theories of cultural difference. To these categories, I would add the various
elements of academic discourse that Graff and Birkenstein's book address, since
They Say/I Say works from the assumption that all good argumentative writing,
including academic writing, makes claims in response to other claims.

   Now, I would like to share some of my writers' reflections on how imitating
and using the templates from They Say/I Say, how focusing on the interplay
between style and invention, and how writing for various public academic and
non-academic audiences helped them develop their own prose style. Imitation,
of course, is nothing new in writing instruction, as Denise Stodola argues in this
collection, noting that the medieval focus on imitation helps current writing
instructions break down the form-content binary. This collapsing of the form-
content binary is one of the strengths of They Say/I Say. One of my writers,
Melissa, noted how focusing on the templates from They Say/I Say helped
her write a more sophisticated academic style than she had before entering
college. "The templates in They Say/I Say actually helped a lot," Melissa claimed,
"because when I would be stuck with what transition to use or how to introduce
a thought, the templates gave me great ideas to incorporate." Here, Melissa
suggests that imitating the templates in her academic writing led her to develop
ideas in her writing, not just use the templates for artifice or surface decoration.
Indeed another student, Abbey, also suggested the importance of style in her
writing, not just for her composition course but for other first-year courses as
well. "Most of my classes required me to write a significant amount," she asserts,
"so I took what I was learning about style and applied it to my other writing

146
                                                                                      Inventio and Elocutio

assignments. I found it easier to take on opinions in speech, political science,
and religion when writing with style in mind." Both Melissa and Abbey were
able to use their lessons in style for other academic assignments outside the
composition classroom, thus reinforcing the public function of style in writing
instruction.

   Here's an example of Melissa's prose in an early draft of her first assignment,
where students summarized a reading and connected it to their personal
experiences as students. The audience for this essay was the university community,
so students had to write for an audience outside the classroom--a more public
audience, if you will. In her essay, Melissa summarized Kate Ronald's essay on
the importance of style and connected it to an experience from high school.
Here's the opening of Melissa's first draft:

         In Kate Ronald's "Style: The Hidden Agenda in Composition
         Classes or One Reader's Confession," style is described as a
         necessity in writing. Without it every paper blends together
         and the reader awaits the end. Ronald argues against the age-
         old theory in schools: "it is what you say and not how you
         say it." Throughout my years of service before becoming an
         Arrupe Scholar and working with others I have learned that
         the way you connect with someone and interact with others
         has everything to do with the style of how you present the
         information therefore agreeing with Ronald's argument.

   Melissa's opening is problematic. She does not clarify clearly Ronald's
argument, nor does she clearly show how Ronald's essay connects to her own
experiences from high school--though, she begins to make those moves. These
moves are a bit clumsy, and she moves much too fast from Ronald's essay to her
own experience.

         By the time Melissa submitted this essay in her final portfolio,
         she had revised it several times, using the stylistic advice from
         They Say/I Say. Her prose grew more confident, stronger, and
         she was able imitate the templates in a way that allowed her
         to generate ideas in her opening that were missing in the first
         draft, ideas that allowed her slow down and take the reader
         point by point to establish connections between Ronald's es-
         say and Melissa's personal experiences. Here's the revised first
         paragraph:In her essay, "Style: The Hidden Agenda in Com-
         position Classes or One Reader's Confession," Kate Ronald

                                                                                                147
Pace

         argues that while most writing instructors do not teach style,
         most of them do grade a student's writing style. Style, ac-
         cording to Ronald, is the sense that "someone is home" when
         writing (Ronald, 1995, p. 95). One feature of style that she
         elaborates on in her essay is the element of entertainment
         that shows the reader a focus on style. Ronald points out that
         if writers do not interest their audience, then the reader will
         have a hard time paying attention or remembering anything
         from the writing. This element of entertainment goes along
         with the importance of style in writing. Ronald argues that
         style is the most important part of writing and that personal
         experience is a great way to add outside experience to a paper
         and make it more interesting. I agree with Ronald's stance
         that style is the most important asset in conveying a message
         because I have seen style act as a significant asset in my own
         experiences, both academic and extracurricular.

   This revised version not only shows that Melissa holds a firmer grasp of
Ronald's argument, but she also displays a more eloquent style. The sentences
are more cohesive with one another, and Melissa slows down her connection
between Ronald's essay and her experiences so that the reader is less confused
about how Melissa arrives at those connections.

   But writing for an audience was not the only public audience these writers
addressed. In their third project, students were asked to write three letters to
different audiences outside the university, advocating for an issue. Jessica, one
of the strongest students in the class, chose to advocate for clean water in her
small Ohio town, writing to an audience of high school students urging them
to begin a clean water advocacy club, as well as to an audience of local business
owners. Jessica is an interesting example because she came to the class already
a strong writer. As she noted in her final portfolio letter, "As skeptical as I was
coming in to this class (I thought that since I had tested out of it with my two
AP English classes, I didn't need to take it), I have learned a lot in the last few
months." Later, she told me that the course's focus on style made her more
conscious of how elements of style, imitation, and the templates from They
Say/I Say led her to be more aware of the interplay between style and invention,
especially as it relates to the stylistic elements cohesion. "The way I believe style
consideration has most impacted by writing in the last semester was through
the idea of cohesion," Jessica insists. "When I edit my papers, I now try to make
sure all of my sentences flow with the sentences that precede them." In her letter
to the local business owners, Jessica demonstrates how this focus on cohesion

148
                                                                                      Inventio and Elocutio

leads her to write more eloquent prose for a public function. In this section of
the letter, Jessica appeals to the business owners' awareness of cost, showing how
clean water does not have to be as expensive as they may fear:

         As dismal as these statistics may be, the solution is hopeful.
         A mere $20 can provide one person with clear water for 20
         years. One well, to supply an entire village with clear water,
         costs only $5,000. Last year, our group organized an end-
         of-summer dance for high school students in order to raise
         awareness and money for this cause. We succeeded in raising
         $6,312--more than enough to build an entire well and
         change the fate of a village community.

   Her use of the templates from They Say/I Say, as well as her conscious use of
the stylistic element cohesion, leads Jessica to develop ideas for her writing in a
public sphere that she may not have been able to do otherwise. For instance, the
first sentence in the above example uses a dependent clause to connect to the
previous paragraph and to set up the argument about expense in this paragraph.
Also, Jessica uses numerous transitions from sentence to sentence to reinforce
cohesion from one idea to the next. As such, Jessica's heightened awareness of
style in a public sphere echoes many of the stylistic exercises and purposes in the
early modern grammar school.

   Another student, Matthew, also recognized the power of sentence-level
rhetoric in helping him generate ideas in his writing, for both academic audiences
and non-academic public readers. Before coming to college, Matthew had not
considered style much at all in his writing, noting that "My style before EN 111
had been sufficient for previous assignments in high school. However, I realized
that I needed to be able to develop a more scholastic style for my years in college."
Matthew learned how to generate ideas more fully and to connect more clearly
to his audience. Here's an example of Matthew's prose, where he consciously uses
the templates from They Say/I Say not only to imitate academic styles to produce
more sophisticated prose but to help him generate ideas to write about. This
passage comes from an essay in which Matthew responds to arguments made by
Graff about the role of public schools fostering intellectualism through the use
of students' personal interests, such as popular culture:

         Personal interests can indeed be the foundation for the
         understanding of intellectualism. In his essay "Hidden Intel-
         lectualism" Gerald Graff makes the claim that too often we
         associate intellectualism with common areas of study and

                                                                                                149
Pace

         that instead we should incorporate individual interests and
         passions to motivate the intellect. Graff uses personal experi-
         ence to back this belief, citing the analysis he and his friends
         made between "sport teams, movies, and toughness" (Graff
         & Birkenstein, 2010, p. 300). According to Graff these inter-
         ests are legitimate areas for intellectualism to thrive, "It was
         in these discussions with friends about toughness and sports
         that I began to learn the rudiments of intellectualism" (Graff
         & Birkenstein, 2010, p. 300). It is clear then that, at least to
         Graff, personal interests can be the foundation for counterar-
         guments, arguments, and the composing of beliefs.

   As this passage illustrates, Matthew imitates numerous academic moves and
conventions, allowing him to create a more "scholastic style" to write a fluid
summary of Graff's position. That is, Matthew incorporates various transitions
and phrases, uses connecting elements to show cohesion from sentence-to-
sentence, and he frames his summary around different templates from They
Say/I Say, including such phrases as "According to," "It is clear that," and "Not
only did," among others. In his final portfolio letter in which he reflects on his
writing throughout the semester, Matthew acknowledges that "using style ...
for the first time with an understanding of ethos and pathos made the essay
a more interesting one to write and gave me a new perspective and form to
use in writing subsequent papers." The understanding of style that Matthew
reveals in this letter suggests the interplay between style and invention, as well
as the public function of style when students are required to consider audiences
beyond the classroom, as he was asked to do in the previous assignment.
Actually, Matthew himself says as much later when he observes the role style
now plays in his writing for other academic audiences. "I am more conscious
of when and how I insert my opinion and keep in mind the prompts and field
of study," he asserts. In other words, a conscious understanding of style and its
role in the writing classroom leads students like Matthew, as well as others cited
in this chapter, to consider how style helps them develop ideas, to consider how
imitating other styles improves their own academic prose, and to consider how
style makes them more aware of their writing in the public sphere.

CONCLUSION

   My students' writing demonstrates how style is not a reductive, rigid
pedagogy that teaches standards of form and rules of usage, but rather style

150
                                                                                      Inventio and Elocutio

is a dynamic part of the writing process that can be seen as synonymous with
composition. This understanding of style as a vibrant element of the writing
classroom locates a historical precedent in the early modern grammar classroom.
The education that students received at St. Paul's grammar school, for instance,
points to the high place that style held in the early modern curriculum. For
scholars and educators such as Erasmus and Colet, training in eloquence was
hardly naïve, but this focus on eloquence led to careers in public oration, in the
law, in commerce, in the clergy, and in other early modern professions. Students
who read and imitated classical authors and who practiced and learned the
progymnasmata and the declamatio did so with an eye toward public practice
of their art. Accordingly, style formed the very heart of rhetorical education
and reinforced the connection between elocution and inventio. This lively
interplay between style and invention emerges in the contemporary writing
classroom through the use of Graff and Birkenstein's They Say/I Say, a book
that offers students opportunities to strengthen their own style by imitating
numerous academic conventions, through using their templates as sources of
invention, and through following a revised progymnasmata and declamatio.
The early modern grammar schools, therefore, act as a historical precedence
for contemporary writing classrooms to re-imagine style as a central feature of
writing instruction.

REFERENCES

Baldwin, T.W. (1944). William Shakespeare's small Latine and lesse Greek. Ur-
   bana, IL: University of Illinois Press.

Bonner, S. F. (1949). Roman declamation in the late republic and early empire.
   Berkeley: University of California Press.

Butler, P. (2008). Out of style: Reanimating stylistic study in composition and rhet-
   oric. Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.

Cicero. (1949). De inventione. H.M. Hubbell. Tran. Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
   versity Press.

Clark, D. L. (1942). John Milton at St. Paul's School. New York: Columbia
   University Press.

Connors, R. (2000). The erasure of the sentence. College Composition and Com-
   munication 52: 96-128.

Fleming, J. D. (2003). The very idea of a progymnasmata. Rhetoric Review
   22(2), 105-120.

Graff, G. & Birkenstein, C. (2010). They say/I say: The moves that matter in aca-
   demic writing (2nd ed.). New York: W.W. Norton.

                                                                                                151
Pace

Hagaman, J. (1986). Modern use of the `progymnasmata' in teaching rhetorical
   invention. Rhetoric Review 5(1), 22-29.

Horner, W. B. (Ed.) (1983). The classical period. The present state of scholar-
   ship in historical and contemporary rhetoric. Columbia: University of Missouri
   Press.

Lanham, R. (1991). Handlist of rhetorical terms (2nd ed.). Berkeley: University
   of California Press.

Lupton, J. H. (1909). A life of John Colet. London: G. Bell and Sons.
Morgan, T. (1998). Literate education in the Hellenistic and Roman worlds. Cam-

   bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nichols, F. M. (1962). Epistles of Erasmus. Epistle 223. New York: Russell and

   Russell.
Rebhorn, W. A. (Ed.). (2000). Renaissance debates on rhetoric. Trans. Wayne A.

   Reborn. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Thompson, C. R. (Ed.). (1978). Collected works of Erasmus (Vol. 24). To-

   ronto: University of Toronto Press.

152
    THE RESEARCH PAPER AS

    STYLISTIC EXERCISE

      Mike Duncan
      University of Houston-Downtown

   There is a major theoretical and pedagogical consequence of recognizing
that style is central to composition; namely, all the writing done by student
writers in composition courses must be re-conceptualized as some form of
stylistic exercise. By "stylistic exercise," I mean an activity that allows a student
to explore the myriad of rhetorical options that style offers. This exploration
is typically accomplished through exposure to a new writing genre, with the
accompanying expectation that students will acquire increased skill and fluency
within that genre, as well as genres that they have yet to encounter.

   One of the oldest common stylistic exercises in American colleges and high
schools is the so-called "research paper," which has been widely assigned in some
form since the 1920s. Direct descendants of the assignment continue to appear
on American college syllabi nationwide, despite numerous criticisms over the
last seventy years over its form and even the need for such an assignment. Most
versions of this creature do not exist outside the composition classroom, for
example, in direct conflict with their professed purpose of teaching students how
to do "research." The length requirements, too, can be arbitrary and counter-
productive. The difficulty the assignment presents for students is considerable,
perhaps even unfair.

   But I am not writing here to bury the research paper. Rather, I think the
assignment--or, rather, the idea of the assignment as much as any particular
execution--is an ideal candidate for demonstrating the pervasiveness of the
claims of this collection.

   At every step of its nearly hundred-year career as a secondary and college-
level pedagogical tool, the "research paper" has taught a certain kind of writing
that is difficult and laborious enough to persuade countless students to have
someone else write it for them. It tends to represent one style--the "right" or
"correct" style for performing "research." And in that form, it has guided many
a student to better writing.

   But there is another way to conceptualize it, and that is as a door to a
multitude of other demanding styles. This approach, of course, requires that
the research paper exist not only in the mind of the student, but in the mind

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.10  153
Duncan

of the instructor, as an exploration of style, even as it seemingly hews to one
specific path.

   To explain what I mean by this claim--namely, that the research paper can be
profitably viewed as a stylistic exercise that leads to increased control over many
styles, rather than just an artificial "research" style--I offer three origin stories
for the research paper in American education. These three stories agree with
each other more than they disagree, but the portraits are sufficiently different
to give them voice individually as accounts of the assignment's instructional
genesis. Together, these three stories form a historical pathway toward a style-
based way of reconceptualizing the assignment.

ORIGINS

   One origin story is told in Robert Connors's Composition-Rhetoric, revised
from an earlier appearance in his 1987 "Personal Writing Assignments" article.
Connors holds the genre arose in composition around 1920 out of three needs:
1) instructors wanting to "transcend the personal writing" paradigm that was
prevalent, 2) the desire for a corrective response to the increasing availability
of secondary and tertiary source materials, namely a packaged, gentrified
solution to increasing concerns over intellectual property, and 3) a hunger
for more formalized, efficient instruction. Furthermore, Connors concludes
that the assignment teaches "the research attitude," synonymous with "the
modern attitude," where the rhetor is a "medium, not an originator"--the
student collectively merges with the secondary research rather than create new
knowledge (1997, pp. 321-323).

   In this first tale, the research paper is an ironic and flawed entity that meets
institutional needs rather than student ones; any student benefits are secondary
precipitate. The assignment was not wielded without good intent, or completely
ineffectual, but it failed on an epistemic front and as part of the larger current-
traditional pedagogy.

   A second origin story is told in David Russell's Writing the Academic
Disciplines. Russell holds that the genre is a mixture of the research ideal of
German universities and the British oral thesis tradition (2002, pp. 78-79).
"Course theses" appeared, beyond the usual shorter themes, in the 1860s,
evolved into "graduating theses" by the 1880s, and eventually became class-
specific papers simultaneously with the introduction of German-style seminars.
This rapidly forming tradition, originally intended to model scholarly activity
to students and improve writing skills, migrated to lower-level courses and
secondary schools, losing much of its scholarly idealism on the way. In the

154
                                                                  The Research Paper as Stylistic Exercise

1910s, the assignment "begins to harden into its familiar form" as an empty
exercise in formality (Russell, 2002, pp. 83-88). Suffused through Russell's
account is the social function of the assignment. To scholarly idealists, it was
an apprenticeship lesson for bright students in conjunction with a seminar. To
more "egalitarian" forces, it functioned as a doorway to college success for all
students, even in secondary settings, which quickly led to "research papers"
being taught in junior high schools (Russell, 2002, p. 86).

   In this second tale, the research paper is an emancipating entity that did
not always succeed in its promise, decaying rapidly as it drifted down to the
secondary level. The portrait is more positive than the one offered by Connors,
but it, too, is a story of failure.

   The third origin story is mine, and a bit longer. It is a story of a central
institutional debate about student teaching that recurs every decade or so in
journal or book form, with the sides taking on new avatars and new sites of
battle, and with the concept of the research paper serving as one of the favorite
battlegrounds. The military metaphor is not accidental, as World War II seems
to have had a significant hand in its development.

   Narrowing down the time periods of its presence is crucial to understanding
that development. The research paper was "established custom" (Angus, 1948,
p. 191) in 1948, with a division between the "high school term paper" and the
college "research paper" present in 1943 (Arms, 1943, p. 24) that goes back at
least to 1936, with the secondary version preparing for the latter version (Bader,
1936, p. 667). Taylor's 1929 A National Survey of Conditions in Freshman English
(Brereton, 1995, pp. 545-562), reviewed in The English Journal in 1930 by Stith
Thompson, does not give any details on assignments; Thompson, though, refers
to it in passing as "the project" at his institution, where it concerns "the proper
handling of bibliography, notes, and planning in the large" (Thompson, 1930,
p. 555).

   However, Ralph Henry's 1928 survey of twenty-seven American colleges
reveals, in response to a question about the length of assignments, that themes
were still the dominant assignment, with an average of one per week assigned,
with "longer themes assigned `occasionally'":

         These longer themes are from 1,500 to 2,500 words in length
         and fall due "once a month," "three per semester," or in a
         larger number of institutions, "one each semester." ... In gen-
         eral the program agreed upon by the large majority is as fol-
         lows: a theme of about 300-500 words (three or four pages)
         each week, with one long paper of 1,500-2,500 words due
         each semester. (Dr. Shiperd reports an average assignment of

                                                                                                155
Duncan

         1.7 themes per week, an average length of 4+ pages, and an
         average of two longer themes per semester. (1928, p. 306)

   The "longer theme" of 1928 would then be, by the modern 300-word page,
a 5-8 page paper. "Long theme" seems to be the preferred term in this period;
high school students speak poorly of such a "long theme" in a 1913 survey
(Hatfield, 1913, p. 318). It is unclear, however, when it became a freshman
college requirement across the board, as opposed to something reserved for
junior or senior level classes, as it seems to be in an elective class in 1902 (Hart,
1902, p. 370) and in a 10,000 word form in 1916 (Harris, 1916, p. 502).
It is also unclear when it became "long"--the high school "long theme" of
1915 is only 750 words (Rankin, 1915, p. 196). In 1922, Fred Newton Scott
complained (at length) about pointing out errors in themes in the English
Journal (Scott, 1922, p. 463), but made no mention of long themes.

   While the early 1920s seems a reasonable time frame for it to be a widespread
requirement from college freshmen, the assignment does not become a
focus of recorded debate until the 1940s. Angell Matthewson's 1941 "Long
Compositions Based on Research" and Annette Cummings' 1950 "An Open
Letter to Teachers of English," could be considered at first to be odd choices to
represent poles of conflict; one is a high school teacher just before WWII; the
other is a junior college teacher after the war, nine years later. But their opinions
are antithetical products of the earlier forces described by Connors and Russell,
as well as the world war that happened between the two essays.

   Matthewson, in 1941, held that senior high school students of the time
needed to write at least one long paper (1,500 to 3,000 words) involving
research. His reasoning was that longer rather than shorter assignments tended
to challenge and motivate students to do more, and prepared them better for
college work, which would involve similar assignments.

   Not long afterward, the educational world shifted with the war. Shortly
after the attack on Pearl Harbor in December, an editorial in the January 1942
English Journal opined it was the job of teachers of English to build war morale
and support social service among students (Hatfield & De Boer, 1942, pp. 67-
68). The NCTE quickly followed in February with a statement on "The Role
of the English Teacher in Wartime," championing American values and ideals
while rejecting the xenophobia and excessive patriotism that had appeared
during the Great War. It includes the following injunction:

         e) As teachers of English, we can develop those skills essen-
         tial to participation in democratic life (1) through classroom
         practice in grouping thinking and decision, (2) through

156
                                                                  The Research Paper as Stylistic Exercise

         teaching the techniques of public and panel discussion, and
         (3) through emphasis upon the need for precision and hon-
         esty in the use of language in reading and reporting and in
         the expression of ideas in speech and writing. (NCTE, 1942,
         p. 88)

   These idealistic wartime NCTE standards hang over the thoughtful review
of faculty and student views of the college "term paper" in the Journal of
Higher Education in June of the same year. The assignment is taught unevenly
at the lower level and often overburdens students across courses, but when
carefully supervised and possibly saved for junior and senior level classes, it is
a "worthwhile" assignment (Rivlin, 1942, p. 342). It would seem, then, that
the research paper met patriotic muster in the 1940s; Angus' aforementioned
description of it as "established custom" becomes even more ironclad.1

   "An Open Letter to Teachers of English," however, appears in 1950, five
years after the war is over, from a junior college in Michigan, after the G.I.
Bill of 1944; over a third of junior college students are veterans. Cummings
holds that research papers in undergraduate classes are a hypocritical waste of
time. Most students, she states, cannot handle logical thinking, and therefore
the research paper is lost on them; the assignment is an artifact of colleges
gunning for more graduate students, and high schools gunning for more college
enrollees. She would prefer assignments based on "experience and observation"
for teaching logic (1950, p. 39).

   Cummings' critique is notable in that she critiques the assignment as an
assignment, rather than how it is taught. Earlier criticism focuses on pedagogical
cautions such as plagiarism and padding (Woods, 1933, pp. 87-89) or a lack of
"scientific" standards (Ahl, 1931, p. 17). The assignment itself is spared and its
value, when taught well, is championed. Arms, in 1943, for example, is typical;
he has major issues with topic selection, but thinks the assignment is "the real
center of freshmen English in that, like little else in much college work, it gives
an opportunity to set up a problem and find a solution" (Arms, 1943, p. 25).

   The concept of the research paper becomes, thus, a focus point for
professional opinions of the transforming student body and the nature of
ideal "college work." If, as Matthewson, you believe students tend to rise to
a structured challenge presented by an enthusiastic and organized instructor,
and it meets the moral and political demands of the age, it's the best stylistic
exercise since sliced bread. If, however, as Cummings, you believe that many,
if not most, students in your classroom are not suited for logical thinking by
intelligence or temperament, the research paper tends to only be an exercise in
futility for both student and instructor.

                                                                                                157
Duncan

   Notably, despite the distance between their opinions, both Matthewson
and Cummings largely pass over the content of the assignment. Cummings
is worried about command of "logic," and Matthewson is worried about
"argument"--both of which must be displayed within the genre. These are
critical concerns about any writing. But looking back to the assignment's early
origins and accounts of its teaching, the assignment is all about meeting genre
expectations--documented secondary sources, library protocols, formatting,
scientific method, appropriate topic selection (probably the most pressing
concern of instructors up until Cummings)--argumentation and logic are
necessary, of course, for these tasks, but not as emphasized.

   The remainder of my tale of the assignment is cyclic. The assignment
changed under the influence of abolitionist thought, but it did not go away. In
1961, 83% of all colleges required a research paper in the freshman composition
program (Manning, 1961). In 1982, when Richard Larson attacked the very
concept of the assignment in College English, it was 84% (Ford & Perry, 1982,
p. 827). Larson's attack is different from that of Cummings; he too sees the
assignment as hypocritical, but not because it is beyond the students. Rather,
the concept of the assignment--as much as he is willing to allow its existence2--
tends to produce a kind of "non-writing" that cannot but fail to teach research.
Furthermore, the job of teaching the writing styles of other disciplines should
not fall to English (Ford & Perry, 1982, p. 816). Concerns about writing
across the curriculum aside, Larson's is still a critique kin to those seen before
the 1940s, which concerned themselves with the value of the assignment to
teaching research.

   These three stories suggest something very interesting about our discipline--
namely, one of its central, traditional assignments is a murky, multi-definitional
entity that isn't even universally agreed upon as pedagogically useful, even
though four-fifths of programs use it in some form. The question, then, is not
so much about the assignment, but what model of writing is preferred; are we
to teach argument and logic, with the rest trappings, or are we to focus on genre
demands and research methods, in which case argument and logic will come?
Is there another way? The format of the traditional research paper offers a clue;
namely, it forms a genre that is plastic and generic enough to be molded into
other styles.

BENEFITS OF THE "GENERIC" STYLE

   The generic research paper simultaneously displays all the weaknesses of a
rhetoric reduced to ornament, and all the strengths of a rhetoric grounded in

158
                                                                  The Research Paper as Stylistic Exercise

genre. It can be an empty and frustrating exercise in formalism, and it can
be an empowering stepping-stone that leads to linguistic flexibility, which in
turn allows the absorption and mastery of a multitude of other genres. It is
the latter way of thinking--the stepping-stone model--that I want to describe
here, but that will require dissecting the prevailing versions discussed thus far.
One problem rests in the word "research," and the other in the word "paper."

   In composition studies, "research" is generally talked about either as a skill
(something you do) or as a genre (how a skill is used in a particular locale). We
can talk about writing skill in general, a sort of under-writing that changes for
the occasion, or writing skill in the context of a certain field or occasion, say
psychology. The generic research paper is neither quite an English literature
analysis, nor a publishable psychology journal article; its method of inquiry is
not precisely the same as either and would be rejected by peers in both, at least
until it bent to the will of genre. In its final form, with a research method, topic
selection, and citational demands, without particular disciplinary ties, it is a
sectioned, preliminary, sketchy shadow of a "real" writing genre that is socially
connected. This is the point from which Larson started his critique, and where
I depart.

   I depart from Larson because there are benefits to socially isolated writing.
The WAC job that the paper often takes on, rightly or not, demands a generic
approach, even if that generic feel coming from picking a topic or theme for
the entire course and deriving writing principles from that topic. Either way, an
isolated paper is a safe space in which to experiment with stylistic conventions,
at least if it is taught in the light of revision. More time can be spent working
on generic argumentative moves. An audience beyond the instructor could be
provided, as I can do in professional writing courses, to add the social aspect,
but this puts a lie to the authority of the instructor, as well as the fact that there
is a social aspect to the paper already--the university as a whole, and their
fellow students.

   The word "paper," implying a fixed and formal product, also has problems;
this is why I favor "project," like Thompson did in 1930. For students to see the
research paper as a stylistic exercise, it must be equated with revision. Projects
are ongoing works-in-progress; papers are physical entities. If students can
screw up citations without fear and see them as the parenthetical helpers for the
reader that they are, then they are in the stylistic mindset. If they see citations as
hurdles they must clear before arguing, then they are in a research mindset. The
former is vastly preferable for teaching writing.

   The project (leave "research" and "paper" behind for now) must be eased up
to carefully rather than demanded all at once; breaking into individual sections
or drafts reinforces its constructed, temporary nature. Above all, though, it

                                                                                                159
Duncan

must be constantly portrayed as preliminary practice, rather than a certificate
of achievement that says the writer now knows how to conduct "research."
Doctoral degrees perform that role well enough. A spirit of inquiry, though,
can be instilled without going that far. There is no right way to write the project,
any more than there is a right way to write a memo; an "A" on a project should
not mean mastery of research. It must should, rather, a mastery of a style, a way
of arguing.

   All college freshmen need is the simple confidence that when they encounter
new writing genres--and they will--that they have a basic stylistic template to
draw from through experience with a project of inquiry that has given them a
model for how knowledge is constructed. Thinking about the research paper in
terms of stylistic play drains persuasive power from its sideshow horror elements
of length and complexity and focuses, rather, on how language affects change. It
is when they move to the sophomore level without a stylistic template for large
documents, however, that ethical issues appear.

LENGTH AND ETHICS

   A March 2011 op-ed in the New York Times called "Teaching to the Text
Message," by Andy Selsberg, an adjunct professor at John Jay College, begins
with the following three sentences:

         I've been teaching college freshmen to write the five-paragraph
         essay and its bully of a cousin, the research paper, for years. But
         these forms invite font-size manipulation, plagiarism and cli-
         chés. We need to set our sights not lower, but shorter. (2011)

   The rest of the piece, which is about 470 words, is a case for assigning smaller
writing assignments to college freshmen--some two lines long, some the length
of YouTube video comments or Amazon book reviews, topping off at the length
of a cover letter or a networking email. Selsberg does not advocate eliminating
longer writing projects from English courses, but he would prefer to set them
aside for the second semester or later. Doing what he calls "rewarding concision
first," he suggests, "will encourage students to be economical and inventive with
language," as this is more, "in tune with most students' daily chatter, as well as
the world's conversation."

   I do not like bullies, but I do not think the research paper is a bully. On
the contrary, I think the research paper, or, rather, the stylistic project I have
described thus far, is a close friend--a sometimes boorish, anal-retentive, nerdy,

160
                                                                  The Research Paper as Stylistic Exercise

and verbose close friend, but a friend nevertheless, and sometimes a quickly
neglected friend when new ideas for teaching writing come along.

   Namely, it is a friend that serves a special and central ethical function in the
teaching of writing at the college level. For if, as scholars and teachers, we believe
that well-constructed arguments require evidence, and not just evidence, but
warranted evidence--if we believe that the intellectual work of others must not
only be referenced to make informed arguments, but cited for easy reference--
and if we believe that stylistic conventions of academic discourse must be
respected (if not followed lockstep) in order to facilitate communication and
learning, then it follows, necessarily, that when we teach college students how to
write, we must teach and demonstrate to them the best practices for presenting
complex arguments that we have available. In this way, the "learning research"
goal merges with the "better writing" goal for the assignment.

   This necessitates an assigned paper of sufficient length that has the
metaphorical and literal breathing room to develop complex, warranted
arguments that require parenthetical citation, and exhibit the stylistic forms
common to what we ourselves recognize as learned discourse. Break it up into
smaller assignments first if you would, but eventually, it must be performed in
total to satisfy the ethical charge that I have just outlined.

   My concern with Selsberg's position, even as I sympathize with it and see
how it responds obliquely to the research paper tradition, is that our mission
as university and college instructors cannot be primarily to teach students how
to replicate and value soundbite discourse, web discourse, twitter discourse--
pick whatever new medium you prefer, including ones yet to emerge. We
must understand these emerging forms, yes. Be fluent with their conventions,
certainly. Critique and analyze them, definitely. But we should not fall prey
to fetishizing new mediums, no matter how current or hip or tantalizingly
brief they are. We have an ethical charge to expose students to the existence of
complex and nuanced argumentation that requires extended forms to develop
ideas. Furthermore, we have a charge to show them how to construct these
structures. We can value concision while knowing quite well that argumentation
cannot always be reduced to, say, 470 words, or 140 characters.

   The research paper is difficult work for both students and instructors. It is
so difficult to grade that many professors eschew it for smaller assignments.
It is so difficult to write that students see even modest page requirements as
torture. The research paper is one of the reasons that the composition course is
sometimes dryly called the course taken by students who do not want to take it
and taught by teachers who do not want to teach it. The assignment is ultimately
frightening for many students because it confronts one of our greatest fears as
social humans, which is that we have nothing to worth to say of any length

                                                                                                161
Duncan

on a topic. This is a fear so frightening that students will try to circumvent it
through plagiarism and padding without close supervision. Getting past that
fear is worth it, though, and this point cannot be stressed enough. Once a
student has the genre in hand, they have something far better than the skill that
Selsberg favors, "to express one key detail succinctly and eloquently"--and that
something is the form of good questions, which returns to the praise of Arms
in 1943: the assignment, when taught well, shows how to state a problem and
seek a solution, in that order.

   Eloquence and succinctness are wonderful qualities. But they will not enable
a student to provide a nuanced answer that requires more than a few sentences
to explain. In order to write an extended argument, one must read a great deal,
understand what one has read, reflect on that reading through analysis, and
then reconsider all that has been done. All academics know this task can't be
done "succinctly," let along quickly, if quality is desired. Even the books written
by academics for general lay audiences, rather than for other academics, are still
books--they don't become 470-word articles through a skillful application of
eloquence and succinctness. Succinctness demands a harsh price in the form of
context and complexity, and eloquence can be a distracting lacquer.

   I am not arguing against the value of style here--on the contrary. Style and
content are the same thing. The form of the discourse empowers its content,
which is why it is extremely hard to say anything very meaningful in a five-
paragraph essay, a form that is almost entirely consumed by its maddening
redundancy. Constraints like those of the sonnet can empower writers, of course,
but the research paper has its empowering constraints, too. An insistence on
a thesis, on a specific question of interest, on warranted evidence for claims,
on supporting citations, on accurate (not necessarily succinct) summary and
synthesis--all these add power. Once a student knows how these work--a state
only possible by fitting them together themselves--they become old friends.
Cranky, nerdy friends, but friends nonetheless--and ethical friends, too.

   I do not want to make a straw man out of Selsberg because as I mentioned
before, he does not want to get rid of research papers. But I have seen college
curriculums that have done so in the name of meeting students where they
are--a noble and practical idea--and yet the very point of meeting students
where they are is to get them closer to where the instructor is, not to pull them
up about halfway and then let them go. If an undergraduate student cannot
write a developed, thesis-driven argument of ten pages or more by the time they
graduate, the university that granted their degree has done them a disservice
in a myriad of ways. I could also argue the same if they cannot do so by the
beginning of their sophomore year.

162
                                                                  The Research Paper as Stylistic Exercise

CONCLUSIONS

   There is no reason the assignment has to be called a "research paper" to
serve a sound pedagogical purpose. I have assigned plenty of rhetorical analysis
papers, textual analysis papers, analytical reports, reader-response papers,
proposals, exploratory papers, compare-contrast papers, feasibility reports,
linguistic analyses, articles, you name it--but I cannot recall ever telling an
undergraduate or graduate class that they needed to write a "research paper,"
save casually or absentmindedly. All of that writing that I have assigned requires
some kind of specialized method of inquiry, so I have always thought most
of these assignments as "research papers" to some extent, part of my ongoing
pedagogical crusade for the civil right of being able to think about and express
one's positions in written form. I do not think most of my colleagues call it by
its 1950s name, either--the buzzphrases I've heard lately at recent conferences
are "extended argument" or "extended thought"--either way, the length is both
metaphorical and tangible.

   As someone who primarily teaches junior-level and senior-level professional
writing more so than composition, there is a similar assignment in my classes--
the proposal. It requires research, though not research that can be done entirely
in library or online--it requires making phone calls, interviewing people, going
to places to find physical records. Its written product is also quite different.
And yet the students who do well on such an assignment are the ones who
understand from the beginning that it is all a stylistic dance; certain sections of
the proposal do certain maneuvers, which in turn support other sections--they
must look a certain way in order to persuade visually, and content presented
must leap a certain bar to establish authority. It is a game we are playing in
which learning how to play is the goal. The actual proposal is a mere byproduct
of the style-driven process. Likewise, "the research paper," printed and stapled
for review, should not be the final arbiter of learning "research" or "writing" in
a course; it can at best reflect dimly on what has occurred within the student's
mind as a result of stylistic play.

   I have taken a historical approach here, as Tom Pace did in the previous
chapter, rather than that of a shorter and more sermonic piece for two reasons.
First, the research paper is an old assignment, and an old topic; to praise or
blame, at this point, is as much of a tradition as the assignment itself, and stories
are easier to follow from the beginning. Second, it seemed a shame to praise the
old research-imprinting mission of the research paper and reframe it as stylistic
exercise in 470 words, when I could enact the "long paper" myself, and thus
demonstrate the form and value of the extended argument.

                                                                                                163
Duncan

NOTES

1. There is a non-epistemic slant to the university mission in these years; Edward
Hamilton's idea of the function of higher education in 1944 as "training youths to
find, formulate, test, and evaluate ideas" or, rather, "to read intelligently and critically,
to think, and to express ideas properly, logically, and forcefully" (p. 164) tends to skip
right past invention.

2. See Doubleday's response (pp. 512-513).

REFERENCES

Ahl, F. N. (1931). The technique of the term Paper. The High School Journal
   14(1), 17-19, 53.

Angus, D. (1948). Avoiding the pseudo-research paper. College English 9(4),
   191-194.

Arms, G. (1943). The research paper. College English 5(1), 19-25.
Bader, A. L. (1936). Independent thinking and the "long paper." The English

   Journal 25(8), 667-672.
Brereton, J. C. (Ed.) (1995). The origins of composition studies in the american

   college, 1875-1925. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Carpenter, H. S. & Elder, V. (1928). Objective teaching in the library. The Eng-

   lish Journal 17(2), 121-128.
Clark, W. (2006). Academic charisma and the origins of the research university.

   Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Connors, R. J. (1987). Personal writing assignments. College Composition and

   Communication 38(2), 166-183.
Connors, R. J. (1997). Composition-rhetoric: Backgrounds, theory, and pedagogy.

   Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Cummings, A. (1950). An open letter to teachers of English. The English Jour-

   nal 39(1), 38-39.
Ford, J. E. & Perry, D. R. (1982). Research paper instruction in the under-

   graduate writing program. College English 44.8: 825-831.
Hamilton, E. W. (1944). Let's teach composition! College English 6(3), 159-

   164.
Harris, L. H. (1916). A proposed course in advanced exposition for college

   students. The English Journal 5(7), 501-503.
Hatfield, W. W. (1913). What the graduates of our high schools think. The

   English Journal 2.5: 318-322.

164
                                                                  The Research Paper as Stylistic Exercise

Hatfield, W. W. & De Boer, J. J. (1942). Teaching English in wartime: An edi-
   torial. The English Journal 31(1), 67-69.

Hart, S. C. (1902). In the college. The School Review 10(5), 364-373.
Henry, R. L. (1928). Freshman English in the Middle West. The English Journal

   17(4), 299-310.
Larson, R. L. (1982). The "research paper" in the writing course: A non-form of

   writing. College English 44(8), 811-816.
Manning, A. (1961). The present status of the research paper in freshman Eng-

   lish: A National Survey. College Composition and Communication 12, 73.
Mattewson, A. (1941). Long compositions based on research. The English Jour-

   nal 30(6), 457-462.
McCaslin, D. (1923). The library and the department of English. The English

   Journal 12.9: 591-598.
Moulton, M. R. & Holmes, V. L. (2003). The research paper: A historical per-

   spective. TETYC: 365-373.
NCTE. (1942). English instruction and the war. The English Journal 31(2),

   87-91.
Rankin, C. S. (1915). After "Pilgrim's Progress". The English Journal 4(3), 196-

   200.
Rivlin, H. N. (1942). The writing of term papers. The Journal of Higher Educa-

   tion 13(6), 314-320, 342.
Russell, D. R. (2002). Writing in the academic disciplines: A curricular history

   (2nd ed.). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Selsberg, A. (2011, March 7). Teaching the text message. The New York Times.

   Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/20/opinion/20selsberg.
   html
Scott, F. N. (1922). English composition as a mode of behavior. The English
   Journal 11(8), 463-473.
Thompson, S. (1930). A national survey of freshman English (Review). The
   English Journal 19(7), 553-557.
Woods, R. C. (1933). The term paper: Its values and dangers. Peabody Journal
   of Education 11(2), 87-89.

                                                                                                165
PART TWO: APPLYING STYLE

                                                                                         167
INTRODUCTION TO PART
TWO: APPLYING STYLE

Mike Duncan and Star Medzerian Vanguri
University of Houston-Downtown and Nova Southeastern
University

   While Part One of this collection presented a variety of conceptions of style
that were both theoretically and pedagogically informed, the essays in Part Two
concentrate more on how style can be presented as a central aspect of composi-
tion in the classroom. The diversity of methods and genres offered here again
assume the centrality and importance of style, regardless of the nature or the
disciplinary site of pedagogical presentation. In particular, however, teachers of
composition, as well as those teaching technical writing, linguistics, literature,
creative writing, nonfiction, and fiction will find much of interest in this second
half of the collection, given the focus on assignments, example texts, techniques
for stylistic analysis, assessment, and terminology that enables increased student
conceptualization of style. Also, much like the collective argument formed by
Part One, these eight essays, when read together, suggest strongly that these
different pedagogical sites have, in common, the potential for a pedagogically
profitable incursion by style due to its centrality to composition.

   The first essay, "Style in Academic Writing" by Nora Bacon, argues for
a pedagogy focused on stylistic variation, rather than that of mere clarity of
concision. This pedagogy can teach students to make and appreciate stylistic
choices in various genres of academic writing across the curriculum. Bacon
debunks the commonly-held assumption that academic writing does not
embody style, and also provides an historical account of the influence of the
Plain Style on academic writing. She concludes her essay with the claim that
teaching stylistic variation can allow students to develop rhetorical awareness
of their stylistic choices, as well as that of others. Bacon's essay reflects Greer's
emphasis on awareness in Part One, though her location of this awareness in
academic writing places this essay more firmly within the demesnes of the
classroom.

   Zak Lancaster's "Tracking Interpersonal Style: The Use of Functional
Language Analysis in College Writing Instruction" also argues for a stylistic
approach, placing such approaches within the recent trend of rhetorical genre
studies. He argues that systemic functional linguistics (SFL) and appraisal
theory can bridge the global concept of genre, with local methods of analyzing

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.11    169
Duncan & Vanguri

textual language patterns. Lancaster's skillful link between style, composition,
and linguistics reminds us of the cross-disciplinary nature of style and the value
in such interdisciplinary work.

   The growing presence of multimodal texts in composition classes is also
addressed here through the lens of style. In the third essay, "Multimodal
Style and the Evolution of Digital Writing Pedagogy," Moe Folk calls for a
production-centered style pedagogy. Accounting for the material dimensions
of style within computer-mediated contexts, Folk presents three iterations of
multimodal style--style as technical prowess, style as difference, and style as
subservience. These three iterations are then examined in an analysis of a digital
retelling of the fairy tale Little Red Riding Hood. As editors, we would be remiss
to not include an essay such as this one that addresses how style is, too, central
to emerging mediums as well as existing ones.

   Creative writing is yet another area where attention to rhetorical style can be
highly beneficial. In "Voice, Transformed: The Potentialities of Style Pedagogy
in the Teaching of Creative Nonfiction," Crystal Fodrey argues for a rhetorical
approach to creative writing pedagogy that has as its core rhetorical style. Fodrey
presents several iterations of style as it is discussed in creative nonfiction craft
texts to illustrate the writer-centered, rather than audience-centered, stance
that dominates these texts. She then presents a style-focused creative writing
curriculum as a demonstration of how the two seemingly disparate disciplines'
pedagogical approaches can work together. In addition to placing style in yet
another academic context, Fodrey performs an important service by offering a
middle ground between style-focused and audience-focused composition.

   Luke Redington's "Fighting Styles: The Pedagogical Implications of Apply-
ing Contemporary Rhetorical Theory to the Persuasive Prose of Mary Woll-
stonecraft and Mary Hays" claims that effective writing style begins with "sty-
listically-aware" reading. Redington outlines a pedagogy that has students first
read and identify stylistic elements in published prose before employing these
techniques in their own writing. Redington stylistically analyzes the writings
of Mary Wollstonecraft and Mary Hays, as an example of his argument, to
illustrate how their styles relate to their identities as women in eighteenth-cen-
tury Great Britain. This analysis leads into a heuristic that further explains the
analysis and can be adapted for other classroom contexts. Redington's ordering
of awareness before enaction, again, stresses the imitative nature of effective
composition instruction.

   While much of the recent scholarship on style pedagogy is situated in
composition courses, the parallel field of professional writing is another
important context for style-focused approaches to writing. Jonathan Buehl's
"Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum: Teaching Stylistic Fluency

170
                                                                                  Introduction to Part Two

through Science Writing" offers a stylistic approach to teaching science writing.
In this chapter, he presents a curriculum for a professional writing course whose
goal is to address the challenges of multiple audiences (expert, non-expert,
general). Because workplace writing genres are tailored to audiences beyond
the classroom, the audience expectations and stylistic conventions may be more
varied than in composition courses. Buehl's curriculum seeks to make stylistic
fluency transferable to these multiple contexts. This flexible fluency has long
been a goal of composition, though it is not always, as it is in Redington's essay,
characterized as style.

   In "Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance," Erik Ellis borrows the concept
of "psychic distance" from creative writing to describe the "felt" metaphorical
distance between reader and text. Ellis suggests that when students can
internalize an awareness of psychic distance, they can become more audience-
aware in their writing and more aware of the craft of their own and others'
writing. Perhaps more importantly, the concept of psychic distance allows
students to reconceptualize readers as an audience to be invoked, rather than
directly addressed. While traditional rhetorical approaches to identification ask
students to anticipate an audience's needs (which a student may or may not
have access to), psychic distance makes students aware of how their language
choices define roles for their readers. Ellis gives Ede and Lunsford's work on
audience construction a stylistic turn toward ethos and awareness.

   Star Medzerian Vanguri's "What Scoring Rubrics Teach Students (and
Teachers) about Style" argues that while style is not explicitly taught in many
composition classrooms, rubrics (which may be created departmentally and
used by teachers with little modification) often contain a category for style
and, therefore, communicate to students certain expectations for stylistic
effectiveness that may be decontextualized from classroom teaching. From an
analysis of scoring rubrics collected nationwide, Vanguri culls the conceptions
of style that the rubrics communicate, and develops from them four evaluative
criteria for style: readability, appropriateness, consistency, and correctness. By
exploring style's relationship to grading, this chapter illustrates the ubiquity of
style in our everyday practices as teachers of composition and the significance
of the role it plays in defining "good" writing for students.

                                                                                                171
    STYLE IN ACADEMIC WRITING

      Nora Bacon
      University of Nebraska at Omaha

   There can be little doubt that a central goal of first-year composition is to
teach academic writing; this commitment is visible in our professional literature
and in the mission statements of countless first-year writing programs. We
promise to help students make the transition to college writing and succeed in
their other classes because that is the purpose for which first-year composition
courses were created, and it's the reason our courses continue to be required in
almost every American college and university.

   But teachers who embrace this mission find that it sits awkwardly with
our commitment to teaching style. First, we recognize that many academic
genres allow limited room for stylistic play. Is style an important enough
feature of academic writing to deserve a place in our overcrowded curriculum?
Second, we know that style varies across the curriculum: the styles preferred
by mathematicians may be quite different from those preferred by historians
or social workers or chemists. If we integrate style instruction into a general
education course designed for students who are headed toward dozens of
different majors, which style do we teach? Even if we could know the whole
range of academic styles, we could hardly teach all of them in fifteen weeks. Is
there a generic, teachable "academic writing style"? Is it the plain style?

   In the paragraphs that follow, I challenge two widespread assumptions
about academic writing that have obscured our view of its style(s): the notion
that academic writing is impersonal and formulaic (essentially style-free) and
the notion that the only characteristics of academic style worth teaching are
clarity and conciseness. I suggest that a central insight of Writing Across the
Curriculum--that academic discourse practices vary--provides a guiding
principle for style pedagogy: at the heart of the enterprise is analysis of stylistic
variation, with attention to the rhetorical choice-making that accounts for it
and with opportunities for imitation, experimentation, and play.

THE DICHOTOMY: WRITING WITH STYLE
VS. WRITING FOR THE ACADEMY

   Perhaps because it addresses an audience of students, Kate Ronald's 1995
essay, "Style: The Hidden Agenda in Composition Classes or One Reader's

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.12  173
Bacon

Confession," describes style's uncertain place in composition instruction
in particularly clear and accessible language with a focus on the practical
consequences for students. Ronald explains that

         different eras have emphasized different parts of composition.
         Plato and Aristotle were upset by what they saw as an en-
         chantment with style; they worried that writers could dazzle
         audiences without caring much about telling them the truth.
         And so they focused on invention, on figuring out issues by
         thinking and writing. (Ronald, 1999, p. 170)

   In the 1980s and 1990s, she says, composition teachers informed by the
writing process movement similarly focused on content rather than form and
thus on invention rather than arrangement or style.

   But there's a problem:

         Your teacher, and I, and all the others who were part of this
         latest revolution in rhetoric, haven't been exactly honest with
         you about the matter of style. We say we aren't overly inter-
         ested in style ... but we are still influenced by your writing
         style more than we admit, or perhaps know... . I'm still
         rewarding and punishing my students for their writing styles.
         And here's the worst part of my confession: I'm not sure that
         I'm teaching them style. (Ronald, 1999, pp. 170-71)

   When teachers don't address style in their classes, students are judged by a
standard that's hidden from view, and they are expected to demonstrate stylistic
skills that they are never taught. One student will write vivid, lively sentences
and another won't; the first student's success and the second's relative failure will
be reflected in their grades, but the matter of how one achieves an effective style
will remain mysterious.

   If Ronald is correct--and I believe she is--then composition teachers have,
in our neglect of style, done our students a disservice. But for all her honesty
and wisdom, Ronald takes her argument down an unfortunate path. She
accepts the dichotomy that has plagued our thinking about style pedagogy for
too long, suggesting that writing with an effective style is one thing, writing for
the academy quite another.

   Ronald defines style in terms of the presence of the author; the writing
she admires is "writing where somebody's home." She speculates that students
sometimes write as if "nobody's home" because they're playing it safe, writing

174
                                                                                 Style in Academic Writing

to avoid mistakes or distancing themselves from their prose in order to protect
themselves from criticism, and sometimes they write dry, lifeless prose because
they think they have to in order to sound "collegiate." And, she implies, collegiate
writing does indeed require that the writer leave home. While English teachers
may like writing with style--"we have a real bent for the literary element, the
metaphor, the clever turn of phrase, the rhythm of prose that comes close to
the rhythm of poetry" (Ronald, 1999, p. 174)--teachers in other disciplines are
likely to prefer author-evacuated prose:

         Many professors believe that you should be learning to write
         one certain kind of style in college, one that's objective,
         impersonal, formal, explicit, and organized around assertions,
         claims, and reasons that illustrate or defend those claims.
         You know this kind of writing. You produce it in response to
         questions like "Discuss the causes of the Civil War," or "Do
         you think that `nature' or `nurture' plays the most important
         role in a child's development?" (Ronald, 1999, p. 175)

   The example that follows is stiff and verbose, easily recognizable to any
composition teacher as the work of a young writer trying on an overly formal,
alien "academic" voice. Observing that the passage has "no authentic voice,"
Ronald observes, "I don't like this kind of writing very much myself... . I prefer
discourse that `renders experience,' as Peter Elbow (1991) puts it, rather than
discourse that tries to explain it" (Ronald, 1999, p. 175).

   The assumptions behind this analysis warrant scrutiny because they are
so very widespread in our profession. Like many others who have written
about academic discourse, Ronald writes as if the qualities we see in the most
unappealing academic writing--awkwardness, wordiness, excessive formality,
impersonality, a naïve aspiration to objectivity--were what defines academic
writing. If the writing performs an academic function, such as explaining
experience, the writer must be away from home; the writing will be stale, and
while reasonable people may write such stuff because they have to (on an exam,
for example, or in a publication required for tenure) and other people may read
it because they have to, they can hardly expect to like it. Only if the writing
performs a different function, "rendering experience" as literary works do, can
a text convey the writer's voice and give pleasure. The academy harbors a few
people who write, appreciate, and reward clever, well-crafted prose--Ronald
suggests that all English teachers fall into this category while others limit the
group to "creative" writers--but for the most part, the academy insists on
thesis-driven essays written in plain, utilitarian prose by uncreative writers. You

                                                                                                175
Bacon

can have academic writing or you can have style, but you can't have both. You
can teach academic writing or you can teach style, but you can't teach both.

   This dichotomy is easy to see in "Style: The Hidden Agenda in Composition
Classes" because Ronald, writing for an audience unfamiliar with debates in
composition pedagogy, necessarily simplifies the issues. Others who criticize
academic writing acknowledge that academic styles vary widely (in "Reflections
on Academic Discourse," Peter Elbow is particularly specific and persuasive
on this point; see pages 138-140). Nevertheless, the essential terms of the
dichotomy inform most of our thinking about style in composition studies,
so that teachers feel compelled to choose between teaching academic discourse
and teaching the delights of style. The choice is imposed on us not only because
we have so little time that we have to make difficult choices about where style
might fit but because style has so little relevance to academic writing as it is
usually conceived.

THE PLAIN STYLE

   With her reference to Plato and Aristotle, Ronald points to ancient
articulations of the tension between style and substance, between language
that "dazzles" and language designed primarily to express truth. In seventeenth
century England, Thomas Sprat addressed the same tension, writing a forceful
condemnation of eloquence. In The History of the Royal Society, Sprat urges
a spare, unadorned style as necessary to scientific inquiry. Volubility, copia,
eloquence--these are the enemies of the plain style, and Sprat reports that in
the interest of science, members of the Royal Society sought to avoid them:

         They have therefore been most rigorous in putting in execu-
         tion, the only Remedy, that can be found for this extrava-
         gance: and that has been, a constant Resolution, to reject
         all the amplifications, digressions, and swellings of style: to
         return back to the primitive purity, and shortness, when men
         deliver'd so many things, almost in an equal number of words.
         They have exacted from all their members, a close, naked,
         natural way of speaking; positive expressions; clear senses; a
         native easiness: bringing all things as near the Mathematical
         plainness, as they can: and preferring the language of Artizans,
         Countrymen, and Merchants, before that, of Wits, or Schol-
         ars.(Tillotson, Fussell, & Waingrow, 1969, p. 27)

176
                                                                                 Style in Academic Writing

   The ideal of matching the number of things to the number of words is telling,
for the theory of language underlying the plain style is a correspondence theory.
The goal of writing is to reflect external reality. The best writing is transparent,
permitting a clear view of the phenomenon being described or analyzed without
excess, without distortion, without distraction.

   The influence of the plain style on writing pedagogy can hardly be
overstated. Among Sprat's descendents are the authors of the two most widely
adopted books on style, Strunk and White's The Elements of Style and Joseph M.
Williams's Style: Ten Lessons in Clarity and Grace.

   As many readers have observed, The Elements of Style is as idiosyncratic and
inconsistent as it is charming. In the final chapter, "An Approach to Style,"
White seems to be having a wonderful time fooling around with language,
creating a string of aphorisms and extended metaphors even as he recommends
"turning resolutely away from all devices that are popularly believed to indicate
style--all mannerisms, tricks, adornments. The approach to style is by way of
plainness, simplicity, orderliness, sincerity" (1959, p. 55).

   His own indulgences notwithstanding, White cautions against calling
attention to oneself or one's craft: Place yourself in the background; write in a way
that comes naturally; do not overwrite; do not overstate; avoid fancy words; avoid
foreign languages; use figures of speech sparingly; prefer the standard to the offbeat.
Throughout the book, Strunk and White highlight the importance of clarity
and conciseness. Among the "Elementary Principles of Composition" is the
admonition to omit needless words:

         A sentence should contain no unnecessary words, a para-
         graph no unnecessary sentences, for the same reason that a
         drawing should have no unnecessary lines and a machine no
         unnecessary parts. This requires not that the writer make all
         his sentences short, or that he avoid all detail and treat his
         subjects only in outline, but that every word tell. (1959, p.
         17)

   To illustrate Strunk's most famous injunction--use definite, specific, concrete
language--White turns to that other well-known advocate of the plain style,
George Orwell, quoting his translation of Ecclesiastes ("I returned, and saw
under the sun, that the race is not to the swift ...") into gobbledegook ("Objective
consideration of contemporary phenomena compels the conclusion that success
or failure in competitive activities exhibits no tendency to be commensurate
with innate capacity ...") (1959, p. 17).

                                                                                                177
Bacon

   In Style: Ten Lessons in Clarity and Grace, Joseph Williams offers dozens
of similar translations, and his exercises invite students to transform wordy,
awkward, or indirect sentences into lean, clear prose. The stylistic virtue that
he stresses from beginning to end is clarity; his specific suggestions--to use the
subject and verb positions to identify actors and actions, to avoid nominalization,
to prune out redundancy--are offered to this end. And like Orwell, he weighs
the ethical and political consequences of clarity on the one hand, obfuscation
on the other. We have an ethical duty, Williams argues, to write prose as clear as
the prose we wish to read. And we have a right to insist on clarity from people
in positions of power: "We must simply insist that, in principle, those who
manage our affairs have a duty to tell us the truth as clearly as they can. They
probably won't, but that just shifts the burden to us to call them on it" (2005,
p. 186). To Orwell and to Williams, clarity matters because the workings of
democracy depend upon clear thinking and honest communication.

   The plain style seems perfectly congruent with the goals of scientific
discourse. The knowledge-making mission of the academy would seem to be
well served by the effort to describe, explain, analyze, and evaluate the world
with as much clarity as we can muster. For this practical reason, as well
as the ethical and political reasons suggested by Orwell and Williams, the
plain style endures. To the extent that style has any presence in composition
theory and pedagogy, it consists mostly of lessons encouraging clarity and
conciseness.

   This approach to style pedagogy is problematic, however, for at least two
reasons. First, there's the epistemological problem. While some scholars may
proceed from a positivist view of language, seeking words that map onto a
pre-existing, describable reality, others question such a project. In Style: An
Anti-Textbook, Richard Lanham raises this point as an objection to privileging
clarity above all. Characterizing style textbooks and handbooks together as "The
Books," he identifies a "fundamental error":

         In Western philosophy's long-standing quarrel between ideal-
         ism and realism, The Books remain realists. Reality is "out
         there" and words must remain loyal to it.

         A complete theory of prose style need not settle this endless
         dispute [between idealism and realism]. But it should chart
         the whole dispute. It should account for a prose loyal to a
         preexistent reality and it should account for a prose loyal to
         words themselves as a final reference point... . The Books
         omit half the process... . They thus ground themselves on

178
                                                                                 Style in Academic Writing

         both a false theory of knowledge and a false theory of percep-
         tion. They assume both a neutral observer whom psychology
         has long ago disproved and a neutral language that even sci-
         ence has now discarded. (1974, p. 39)

   In the forty years since Lanham wrote those words, the "realist" view has
continued to lose ground in the academy.

   The second problem with reducing style pedagogy to instruction in the plain
style is an aesthetic one. It's easy enough to grant that clarity and conciseness
are generally desirable qualities in writing. When I read Orwell, Strunk and
White, or Williams, I nod in agreement; when these writers offer "before" and
"after" examples of revision, with a profusion of nominalizations or a string of
prepositional phrases in the first sentence and taut, lean syntax in the second,
I always prefer the sentence as revised. And yet. While clarity and conciseness
may be necessary to an effective style, surely they are not sufficient.

   Pedagogy that privileges the plain style cannot teach style as Kate Ronald
has defined it for us. To Ronald, writing has an effective style if it is infused
with the personality of the writer, making use of those literary devices English
teachers love ("the metaphor, the clever turn of phrase, the rhythm of prose that
comes close to the rhythm of poetry") (1999, p. 174). To write with style is to
arrange words artfully, striving for euphony, wit, eloquence. Twentieth-century
advocates of the plain style may not reject artful language with the vehemence
of Thomas Sprat, but they don't encourage it, and they don't offer much help to
the young writer who hopes to achieve it.

   What this discussion has, I hope, demonstrated is that conceptions of
"academic writing" and "style" that prevail in composition studies make it
difficult for us to see where style fits into a course in academic discourse. The
academic/creative dichotomy creates one kind of difficulty: when we accept
the view of academic writing as inevitably dry, stiff, and impersonal, academic
writing and style must live in different homes, presumably the dutiful, dogged
first-year writing program and the happily sybaritic creative writing program.
Privileging the plain style creates another difficulty: while the plain style seems
generally well suited to the purposes of academic writing, the goals of clarity
and conciseness constitute a disappointingly anemic conception of style.

VARIATION IN ACADEMIC WRITING

   Let us return to the rather obvious observation that academic writing is
not all the same. It varies, in structure and in style, in many respects: the shape

                                                                                                179
Bacon

taken by a text, or by particular paragraphs and sentences within a text, will
depend upon factors associated with the writer--his or her personality, mood,
knowledge, experience, professional status, ethnicity, gender, proficiency with
language, and so on--and other factors associated with the context--the
practices of the discipline, the conventions of the genre, with these in turn
shaped by the culture in which the discipline is situated and the history in
which generic conventions have evolved.

   Given the breadth of this variation, and given the complex personal, social,
and political dynamics that account for it, what sort of instruction in style
might be useful to a writer at the point of entry into the academic discourse
community?

   This question is nested in two larger issues that composition theorists have
wrestled with at least since the early 1980s. First is the issue of what it means
to become part of a discourse community. Ever since Patricia Bizzell's 1982
article introducing the term, composition teachers have taken seriously the
responsibility to initiate students into the academic discourse community. The
issue that never really goes away, and that seems particularly pressing when
we think about style, is that "initiation" slides so easily into "assimilation":
we worry that as students learn to sound like members of academic discourse
communities, they will sound less like members of other communities they care
about, less like themselves.

   Second is the issue of transfer. To a surprising degree, knowledge seems
to be context-bound; people who learn a skill in one setting do not easily
operationalize it in other settings, and the more pronounced the differences
between the two settings, the less likely that transfer will occur (Ellis, 1965;
Perkins & Salomon, 1992; Smagorinsky & Smith, 1992). Some years back,
an "abolitionist" argument gained some traction among composition scholars
with the claim that since discourse practices vary within the academy, since
academic writing is not one thing, first-year composition courses cannot teach
a universally applicable set of "general writing skills" and therefore have no
function (Petraglia, 1995). If this argument is extended to style instruction, it
leads to the conclusion that since style varies within the academy, it is fruitless
to try to teach academic style.

   The abolitionist argument has largely disappeared from view, to be replaced
by a commonsense approach informed by Writing Across the Curriculum
theory. We aim to teach not only those skills that seem broadly useful in
the academy but also rhetorical awareness, alerting students to the fact of
discourse variation and teaching them to analyze the rhetorical demands
of new disciplines and other new contexts. Specifically, we aim to teach a
critical rhetorical awareness, inviting students not only to try their hands at

180
                                                                                 Style in Academic Writing

academic writing but, at the same time, to stand at a distance from it, to see
how it compares to other kinds of writing, to think about why it has the
characteristics it has, what values it reflects and perpetuates, whose power it
reflects and perpetuates, and where, in light of that analysis, they choose to
stand in relation to academic discourse.

DIRECTIONS FOR STYLE PEDAGOGY

   What, then, does a first-year writer need to know about style? What might
he or she expect to gain from style pedagogy in a composition course focused on
academic writing? Guided analysis of style in academic texts can help students
recognize the stylistic preferences of successful writers; appreciate variation
across writers, disciplines, and occasions; and understand the factors that
account for variation. Guided practice--deploying specific syntactic/stylistic
options to achieve desired rhetorical effects--can help novice writers take the
step from appreciating to producing effective style in academic texts. The three
passages below are examples of academic texts that could function as objects of
analysis and resources for practice with style.

   The passages represent different genres and disciplines--Programming in
Prolog is a textbook in computer science, The Freedom of the Streets a monograph
in history, "On Beauty and Being Just" a lecture in philosophy--but each is the
product of an academic writer doing academic work.

         It is a dark and stormy night. As you drive down a lonely
         country road, your car breaks down, and you stop in front
         of a splendid palace. You go to the door, find it open, and
         begin looking for a telephone. How do you search the palace
         without getting lost, and know that you have searched every
         room? Also, what is the shortest path to the telephone? It is
         just for such emergencies that maze-searching methods have
         been devised.

         In many computer programs, such as those for searching
         mazes, it is useful to keep lists of information, and search
         the list if some information is needed at a later time. For
         example, if we decide to search the palace for a telephone,
         we might need to keep a list of the room numbers visited so
         far, so we don't go round in circles visiting the same rooms
         over and over again. What we do is to write down the room

                                                                                                181
Bacon

         numbers visited on a piece of paper. Before entering a room,
         we check to see if its number is on our piece of paper. If it
         is, we ignore the room, since we must have been to it pre-
         viously. If the room number is not on the paper, we write
         down the number, and enter the room. And so on until we
         find the telephone. There are some refinements to be made to
         this method, and we will do so later when we discuss graph
         searching. But first, let's write down the steps in order, so we
         know what problems there are to solve. (Clocksin & Mellish,
         1984, p. 142)

         In 1888, twelve-year-old Ollie Kreps lived with her parents
         in a house on East Second Street in Davenport ... . She was
         the oldest child in a crowded, poverty-stricken home. Her
         parents, married thirteen years, had nine children. Ollie and
         her father were the family's sole wage earners. Albert Kreps
         worked as a laborer at the Davenport Lumber Company. His
         work, though poorly paid, was probably steady in the warm
         months, when river men floated huge rafts of logs down the
         Mississippi from the timberlands of Wisconsin for processing
         at riverside lumber mills. But in the winter months, when the
         central events of this story took place, the river froze and traf-
         fic dwindled to a standstill. Lumber milling and virtually all
         other work depending on the river came to a halt, and Albert
         Kreps joined hundreds of other seasonally unemployed men
         in Davenport, waiting for the spring thaw, when the river
         opened, the mills turned, and plowing and planting began
         again. (Wood, 2005, p. 111)

         Beauty brings copies of itself into being. It makes us draw
         it, take photographs of it, or describe it to other people.
         Sometimes it gives rise to exact replication and other times
         to resemblances and still other times to things whose con-
         nection to the original site of inspiration is unrecognizable.
         A beautiful face drawn by Verrocchio suddenly glides into
         the perceptual field of a young boy named Leonardo. The
         boy copies the face, then copies the face again. Then again
         and again and again. He does the same thing when a beauti-
         ful living plant--a violet, a wild rose--glides into his field of
         vision, or a living face: he makes a first copy, a second copy, a

182
                                                                                 Style in Academic Writing

         third, a fourth, a fifth. He draws it over and over, just as Wal-
         ter Pater (who tells us all this about Leonardo) replicates--
         now in sentences--Leonardo's acts, so that the essay reenacts
         its subject, becoming a sequence of faces: an angel, a Medusa,
         a woman and child, a Madonna, John the Baptist, St. Anne,
         La Gioconda. Before long the means are found to replicate,
         thousands of times over, both the sentences and the faces,
         so that traces of Pater's paragraphs and Leonardo's drawings
         inhabit all the pockets of the world (as pieces of them float in
         the paragraph now before you). (Scarry, 1998, p. 3)

   The three passages serve as counterexamples to the idea that academic writing
is dry, dull, objective, passionless, or merely utilitarian. These writers have
made stylistic choices in the interest of giving pleasure, and for me as a reader,
they succeed. Each passage is quite different, stylistically, from the others. Of
the three, Scarry's lecture strikes me as being most self-consciously styled: the
language itself commands our attention as images "glide" into an observer's field
of vision, as traces of an image "float" in a paragraph, as the writer shatters the
fourth wall in the final clause. The paragraph is typical of Scarry's long lecture; it
is a virtuoso performance, both as an instance of philosophical reasoning and as
cleverly crafted prose. In the other passages, the language does not call attention
to itself. Nevertheless, all three texts demonstrate stylistic choices that would be
fruitful to discuss in a course on academic writing.

Sample Stylistic Analysis: Choosing Subjects

   Consider, first, the human presence in each of the passages. None of these
writers uses "I"; none seeks to render the writer's own experience. Nevertheless,
the passages are decidedly populated, a point students could discover by
analyzing the focus, or choice of subjects, in the clauses.

   The Clocksin and Mellish passage is the easiest to analyze. In the first
paragraph, there are ten subject-verb pairs; in five of them, the subject is "you."
Student writers are sometimes advised to avoid the second person in academic
writing, so it's worth asking why Clocksin and Mellish use it. What does the
use of "you" accomplish? What tone does it set? (Other questions naturally
follow: What else do these writers do to set an informal tone? Why would
they want such a tone in a textbook? Would they be likely to make similar
choices in other academic contexts?) In the second paragraph, there are twenty
subject-verb pairs; in twelve, the subject is "we." To whom does "we" refer?
Presumably to the reader and writer. In the first few sentences, the search for the

                                                                                                183
Bacon

telephone continues, so Clocksin and Mellish could easily have continued to
use the second person. But with "we," they insert themselves into the paragraph,
and so "we" search for the telephone together and, in the final sentences, "we"
write down our steps in order so that "we" can see what problems there are to
solve and what refinements might be made when "we" discuss graph searching.
Having walked through the castle with me, Clocksin and Mellish are by my side
as I learn to write code for maze-searching programs. When I return to my day
job as a writing teacher, I might ask students to comment on the effect of the
pronoun choice on the chapter's tone or on the appropriateness of the stylistic
choice to its rhetorical context.

   Like the Clocksin and Mellish passage, Sharon Wood's paragraph introducing
Ollie Kreps's family illustrates the general preference of published writers for
human subjects. Writing students picking out the subject-verb pairs would
find that seven clauses have human subjects: Ollie Kreps, she, parents, Ollie and
her father, Albert Kreps, river men, Albert Kreps. The non-human subjects are
concentrated in the last two sentences: events, river, traffic, milling, work, river,
mills, plowing and planting. The list of subjects captures the movement of the
paragraph, from Ollie to the social group that shaped her (her family), from her
father to the social group of which he was a part (river men), from river men to
the forces that governed their economic circumstances (the river traffic, milling,
work, plowing and planting). Because Wood is a colleague of mine, I was able
to ask her, in a discourse-based interview, about the reasons for her stylistic
choices. She explained that, as a labor historian, it is important to her that
Albert Kreps's unemployment and Ollie Kreps's prostitution be understood not
only as the plight of individuals but as social phenomena. In crafting sentences,
she responds quite intentionally to concerns about both content and style.
In this passage, she chose concrete subjects and active verbs in the interest of
keeping the prose clear and direct; human subjects in the interest of telling an
engaging story; and subjects naming natural or economic forces in the interest
of accurately representing the historical context in which her "characters" lived.

   The stylistic principle of preferring concrete, preferably human, subjects is
one that I like to teach: I want my students to know that using human subjects
can help them achieve clarity in their sentences and cohesion within their
paragraphs. But because academic writing often focuses on natural phenomena
or abstract concepts, academic writers do not always have a cast of characters
available to serve as subjects. The Scarry passage is an interesting example
because not only is the writer discussing an abstract concept, but her purpose
is to attribute agency to this abstraction. Not surprisingly, the passage has more
non-human than human subjects, with beauty itself serving as a subject in the
opening sentences: "Beauty brings copies of itself into being. It makes us draw

184
                                                                                 Style in Academic Writing

it, take photographs of it ... Sometimes it gives rise to exact replication ...
." In the fourth sentence, people begin to appear on stage as a face "glides
into the perceptual field of a young boy named Leonardo." Words referring
to Leonardo (boy, he) become subjects in the next clauses, though Scarry still
manages to present the artist as being acted upon: as images come before him,
he reproduces them, over and over, repeatedly, almost robotically. Finally, it
is a description of Leonardo's practice that assumes agency--clause subjects
include Walter Pater's essay, traces of his paragraph, pieces of his text--as beauty
replicates itself in the work of Leonardo, then Pater, then Scarry. This passage
cannot illustrate a simple lesson like "prefer human subjects." But it surely
demonstrates the importance of the subject position in establishing agency.
The presence of Leonardo and Pater (and, perhaps, the entrance of an angel, a
Medusa, a woman and child, etc.) may reflect an accomplished stylist's impulse
to populate her prose.

Sample Stylistic Analysis: Sentence Variety

   When advised to keep their sentence subjects consistent, students often
worry that the sentences will sound too much the same, that the style will be
boring. The three passages above, or others like them, could be used in lessons
on sentence variety. Taken together, the texts have 33 sentences containing 643
words. The average sentence length is 19.5 words, a bit shorter than the norm
for academic writing. But the range of sentence lengths is strikingly wide, and
the sentence structure varies in other ways as well.

   Of the three texts, the Clocksin and Mellish passage has the least variety
in sentence length: the average length is 17.6 words, and nine of the fifteen
sentences fall close to the mean. This passage also has the most consistency in
its sentence subjects, relying heavily on "you" in the first paragraph and "we" in
the second. But I think it's a rare reader who would find the passage choppy or
dull. The sentences vary in type--in addition to declarative sentences, there are
two questions and an imperative--and the writers have varied their sentence
openers. In the second paragraph, for example, although "we" is used as a
subject of eleven clauses, it never begins a sentence. Instead, the writers begin
sentences with transitional expressions, free modifiers, and subordinate clauses:
For example, if we decide ... What we do is to write down ... Before entering a
room, we check to see ... If it is, we ignore the room ... If the room number is not on
the paper, we write down ... And so on until we find the telephone.

   In the Wood and Scarry texts, the sentences vary more dramatically in length.
These sentences are, overall, longer than Clocksin and Mellish's, with means of
19.8 words in the Wood passage and 22.0 words in the Scarry passage. But

                                                                                                185
Bacon

the ranges are wide (Wood's sentences range from eight to 45 words, Scarry's
from six to 52 words) and in each passage, only two sentences fall near the
mean. In other words, both writers create a mix of short, medium-sized, and
long sentences. While all the sentences are declarative (excepting one fragment
in the Scarry piece), their structure is varied: some are developed by means
of pairs or series, others with subordinate clauses, others with free modifiers.
In a composition class, these passages would work well to introduce medial
modifiers, phrases that interrupt the sentences to provide detail or, in some
cases, drama. Novice writers don't often use medial modifiers, but when they
give them a try, they find them easy and natural. So students would benefit
from noting, and imitating, sentences like these:

         Her parents, married thirteen years, had nine children.

         His work, though poorly paid, was probably steady in the
         warm months ...

         He does the same thing when a beautiful living plant--a
         violet, a wild rose--glides into his field of vision ...

   Analysis of sentence variety in effective academic writing can give students
motivation and specific strategies for developing their own sentences.

SAMPLE STYLISTIC ANALYSIS: FIGURES OF SPEECH

   A time-honored approach to teaching style is to identify figures of speech.
The Clocksin and Mellish passage is an extended metaphor, using the story
of hunting through a castle in search of a telephone to explain the logic of
maze-searching. The story is entertaining, but Thomas Sprat's worries can be
laid to rest: the pleasure does not distract us from the point or short-circuit
our ability to comprehend. On the contrary, the strategy of explaining a new
concept by analogy to a familiar one is common in academic writing because it
aids comprehension; in this case, the metaphor is so essential to the explanation
that it is difficult to imagine how maze-searching could be explained without it.

   The three passages offer a wealth of resources for teaching schemes of
balance, particularly parallelism. Again, Clocksin and Mellish's use of parallelism
contributes to the clarity of their explanation:

         Before entering a room, we check to see if its number is on

186
                                                                                 Style in Academic Writing

         our piece of paper. If it is, we ignore the room, since we must
         have been to it previously. If the room number is not on the
         paper, we write down the number, and enter the room.

   The two sentences beginning with "if " describe alternative scenarios in
grammatically similar constructions: If X, we ignore the room; if--X, we enter
the room. It is important that the sentences be grammatically similar so that
readers immediately recognize the two options as a pair, just as they would
recognize two arrows on a flowchart.

   Lessons in parallel structure, simply showing that items in a list should have
the same grammatical structure, begin with series like these:

         You go to the door, find it locked, and begin looking for a
         telephone.

         It makes us draw it, take photographs of it, or describe it to
         other people.

   More complex series illustrate how effectively a parallel list can draw a
picture, establish a rhythm, create a mood:

         Lumber milling and virtually all other work depending on
         the river came to a halt, and Albert Kreps joined hundreds of
         other seasonally unemployed men in Davenport, waiting for
         the spring thaw, when the river opened, the mills turned, and
         plowing and planting began again.

   Student writers can hear the beauty of a sentence like that one. They
appreciate the sense of motion, of water flowing and wheels turning in response
to the thaw, and they understand how the alliterative phrase "plowing and
planting" calls to mind ancient, earth-bound cycles in which the men of
Davenport participate.

   Elaine Scarry relies heavily on parallelism and repetition, as well she might in
a paragraph about replication. Almost every sentence contains an echo, whether
she is setting out an array of possibilities in matched phrases ("sometimes it gives
rise to exact replication and other times to resemblances and still other times to
things whose connection to the original site of inspiration is unrecognizable") or
repeating exactly the same words ("The boy copies the face, then copies the face
again. Then again and again and again.") In her final sentence, Scarry, like Wood,

                                                                                                187
Bacon

plays with the sound of the words. Read the sentence aloud, listening for for the
echo of faces in traces and pieces, or for repeated use of words beginning with p:

         Before long the means are found to replicate, thousands of
         times over, both the sentences and the faces, so that traces
         of Pater's paragraphs and Leonardo's drawings inhabit all the
         pockets of the world (as pieces of them float in the paragraph
         now before you).

   If Elaine Scarry can have this much fun with her academic writing, then so
can the rest of us. More to the point, so can our students.

FROM ANALYSIS TO PRACTICE

   I come, in the end, to the recommendation that we teach style by relying
on familiar methods: analyzing the work of excellent stylists; introducing
principles like sentence focus, sentence variety, and balance; designing exercises
that prompt students to imitate the stylistic moves they admire; encouraging
students to experiment with style in their own writing. I believe this work can
and should be done in the context of courses focused on academic writing.
There is no shortage of exemplary academic writing: if you pause for a few
minutes, you'll think of academic texts that you would like to bring into the
classroom, and if you spend an afternoon browsing through your bookshelves,
you'll find dozens more.

   Such texts deserve analysis not only in our classrooms but in our scholarship.
Are the stylistic features observed in the three sample passages above characteristic
of their disciplines? My impression is that computer scientists are often playful
in their writing and that historians are typically good storytellers, but I suspect
Scarry's writing is unusually lyrical for a philosopher. I wish I could give you
more than impressions and suspicions; I wish I had studies to cite or findings
to report. Stylistic variation in academic writing is a research area begging for
further exploration. Close attention to style would be a useful extension of
current scholarship in writing in the disciplines; ideally, the work would be
performed with sophisticated analytical tools such as those afforded by systemic
functional linguistics (see Lancaster, this volume). Students who are invited into
the investigation will find a window into the values and mores of the academy.

   Reflecting on the place of style in composition classes, we do not have to
conceive of style and academic writing as competing topics vying for our limited
time. Academic writing is writing. Its style is sometimes ugly, sometimes lovely,

188
                                                                                 Style in Academic Writing

sometimes almost invisible--but if the writer is making choices about how to
arrange words in sentences, the prose has style. It must be acknowledged that
different kinds of discourse permit different degrees of stylistic experimentation
and play. A dissertation has less room for eloquence than a poem or a memoir.
But doesn't a dissertation have some room for stylistic play? Couldn't it have
more? If we look for style in academic writing, we may find more pleasure
and beauty than we expected, or we may find that we--or the next generation
of writers, taught to appreciate and experiment with prose style--can create
more room by pushing at the edges of academic genres. Whether they are
"rendering" experience or "explaining" it, they should know that they can strive
simultaneously for clarity and elegance, for truth and beauty.

REFERENCES

Bizzell, P. (1982). College composition: Initiation into the academic discourse
   community. Curriculum Inquiry 12, 191-207.

Clocksin, W. F. & Mellish, C. S. (1984). Programming in Prolog (2nd ed.). Ber-
   lin: Springer-Verlag.

Crowley, S. (1998). Composition in the university: Historical and polemical essays.
   Pittsburgh, PA: University Pittsburgh Press.

Elbow, P. (1991). Reflections on academic discourse: How it relates to freshmen
   and colleagues. College English 53, 135-155.

Ellis, H. C. (1965). The transfer of learning. New York: Macmillan.
Lanham, R. A. (1974). Style: An anti-textbook. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Perkins, D. N. & Salomon, G. (1992). Transfer of Learning. International ency-

   clopedia of education, second edition. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Petraglia, J. (Ed.). (1995). Reconceiving writing, rethinking writing instruction.

   Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ronald, K. (1999). Style: The hidden agenda in composition classes. In W.

   Bishop (Ed.), The subject is writing: Essays by teachers and students (pp. 167-
   82). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Scarry, E. (1998). On beauty and being just. The Tanner lectures on human
   values. New Haven: Yale University.
Smagorinsky, P. & Smith, M. W. (1992). The nature of knowledge in composi-
   tion and literary understanding: The question of specificity. Review of Educa-
   tional Research 62, 279-305.
Strunk, W. & White, E. B. (1959). The Elements of Style. New York: Macmillan.
Tillotson, G., Fussell, P., & Waingrow, M. (Eds.). (1969). Eighteenth-Century
   English literature. New York: Harcourt

                                                                                                189
Bacon

Williams, J. (2005). Style: Ten lessons in clarity and grace (8th ed.). New York:
   Pearson.

Wood, S. (2005). The freedom of the streets: Work, citizenship, and sexuality in a
   Gilded Age city. Chapel Hill: UNC Press.

190
TRACKING INTERPERSONAL
STYLE: THE USE OF
FUNCTIONAL LANGUAGE
ANALYSIS IN COLLEGE
WRITING INSTRUCTION

Zak Lancaster
Wake Forest University

INTRODUCTION

   Rhetorical Genre Studies, or RGS, has had much influence in recent years on
reconceptualizing the goals of college level writing instruction in North America,
both in the contexts of first-year composition (FYC) and upper-level writing in
the disciplines. One broad goal for FYC specifically has been conceptualized
as helping students gain "genre awareness" (see the work of Beaufort; Devitt;
Johns) or "awareness of the social and ideological aspects of genre production
and consumption" (Cheng, 2007, p. 304). By assisting students to develop a
nuanced awareness of genre--and not just familiarity with particular genres--it
is hoped that students will be better equipped to examine samples of a genre
they are working in with a keen rhetorical eye, approach unfamiliar writing
situations with greater confidence in their existing store of genre knowledge,
and learn to make more deliberate genre choices in their own writing--which
may include motivated disruptions of genre expectations. A key instructional
method for fostering this kind of nuanced genre awareness is to train students to
analyze genres, tracking how textual choices shape, and are shaped by, contextual
dynamics. This approach is discussed by, among others, Amy Devitt, Anis
Bawarshi, and Mary Jo Reiff ("Materiality"), who argue that RGS informs a
discourse analytic approach that "links patterns of language use to patterns of
social behavior" and thus "allows students and researchers to recognize how `lived
textuality' plays a role in the lived experience of a group" (2003, p. 542). The
advantage of the approach, as Devitt et al. explain, is that it "focuses on the actual
uses of texts, in all their messiness and with all their potential consequences" and
"ties that use to actual language, to the smaller bits of language that alert analysts
to underlying ideas, values, and beliefs" (2003, p. 543).

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.13  191
Lancaster

   As suggested by the focus on language and text in the above explanation,
undertaking genre analysis in FYC has the potential to place stylistic analysis
back on composition's center stage in a theoretically-grounded manner, enabling
instructors and students to track textual patterns in a way that is sensitive to
contextual dynamics. Nevertheless, I'd like to suggest in this chapter that the
approach has not been as fully operationalized for the classroom as it could be
if the textual aspects of genre analysis were considered with more systematic
attention to language use. As Devitt notes ("Refusing"), RGS has largely
distanced itself from matters of form, and so the "smaller bits of language"
referred to above have not been foregrounded in published genre analyses, nor
have specific analytic constructs that students and instructors can use to guide
the process of noticing these bits of language, connecting them to other bits
of language, and discerning their socio-rhetorical purposes in samples of genre
under analysis. My argument in this chapter is that systematic approaches to
text analysis are necessary if writing instructors are to support students' analyses
of genre in ways that help them to identify subtle patterns of text that connect
to context. Starting from this initial position, I'd like to suggest that genre-
register theory in systemic functional linguistics, or SFL, can offer one very
useful way to get started connecting genre as an abstract concept to the nuts and
bolts of analyzing genre samples systematically and in detail.

   SFL is a theory of language developed from the work of the linguist Michael
Halliday (see, e.g., "Explorations"; "An Introduction") that explores how our
choices in language reflect, and work to realize, key contextual variables that are
always at play in situations where language is used. These are the field (the topic
of the text, the nature of the social action), the tenor (the relationship between
participants, i.e. writer and reader), and the mode (the part that language plays,
and what the participants expect the language to do for them in the situation).
According to this theory, stylistic qualities of a given text are constructed through
patterns of language choices that are motivated by the field, tenor, and mode.
For example, as Jonathan Buehl's chapter (this volume) helps us to understand,
science discourse is the way that it is (lexically dense and highly nominalized)
because the discourse has evolved over time to accommodate the expression of
new kinds of knowledge (field) and interpersonal relationships (tenor).

   Williams' lessons in Style: Ten Lessons in Clarity and Grace draw liberally
from Halliday's meaning-based grammar and from Halliday and Hasan's work
on textual cohesion. Building on this earlier work in SFL, James R. Martin and
David Rose, among others, have recently developed a set of discourse-based tools
for "tackling a text" (Martin & Rose, 2007), and these tools enable analysts to
explore how meanings (ideational, interpersonal, and textual) are constructed
in discourse. Because these analytic tools do not assume prior knowledge of

192
                                                                               Tracking Interpersonal Style

SFL, they are ideal for use in composition classrooms when the goal is to unpick
how a text's abstract qualities--such as its "flow" or "style"--are constructed
through language.

   In this chapter, I focus specifically on the SFL-based Appraisal framework
(developed most fully in Martin and White) in order to discuss how patterns of
language use construct a text's interpersonal style. Building from the clause-level
resources described by Halliday ("An Introduction"), the Appraisal framework
is useful for tracking how a particular "voice" or persona is constructed in a
text; how other voices and perspectives are brought into play; how affect and
judgment are encoded; how evaluative meanings are scaled up and down in
force and focus; and how community-recognized knowledge and values are
signaled. As an analytic tool, Appraisal helps to explore how these meanings
may be infused in a text below readers' and writers' consciousness, patterning
together in certain ways to construct the text's interpersonal style. In this way,
the analysis is useful for getting students and instructors to think concretely in
terms of the frequently cited dictum that stylistic choices are meaningful.

   In order to motivate the use of SFL-based discourse analysis in composition
instruction, I begin with a very brief explanation of composition's relationship
to linguistics and then turn to recent work in rhetoric and composition studies
on rhetorical grammar. I place emphasis on aspects of that approach that seem
to be working toward the goal of operationalizing rhetorical genre analysis for
the composition class and those aspects that do not. I then use this critique to
demonstrate how key analytic concepts from SFL, including genre, register, and
interpersonal meanings, can aid in the stylistic analysis of academic texts. This
discussion builds on Nora Bacon's general point (in this volume) that style is
very much present in academic discourse, and that analysis of stylistic choices in
academic writing is of high educational value for FYC instruction.

THE BACKGROUNDING OF LANGUAGE
IN COMPOSITION STUDIES

   Because I am suggesting that students and instructors take up linguistic
analysis to analyze stylistic patterns in genre samples, a brief discussion of
composition's relationship to the field of linguistics seems relevant. Composition's
distancing from linguistics has been well documented (see, for example, Barton
and Stygall; Johnson and Pace; and MacDonald), and it is more than partly
justified. It has to do with at least three interconnected phenomena: the shift
from a product to process-oriented view of writing, which had the effect of
positioning questions about textual patterns as representative of a "product"

                                                                                                193
Lancaster

or static view of writing; the increasing awareness that the structuralist and
generative linguistics of the sixties and seventies had little to offer either our
teaching of writing or our study of the production and reception of actual texts;
and, perhaps most importantly, the increasing use of social constructionist
theories to examine texts, which had the effect of shifting attention away from
the texts themselves to their larger social contexts. This latter move, referred
to widely as "the social turn," has been important for bringing about a de-
centering of language and text in favor of a stronger focus on the social patterns
of activity revolving around the interpretation and (re)production of texts.

   This de-centering of language is understandable given composition's past
privileging of form without consideration of context, as seen in older formalist
approaches. It is also understandable given the field's past focus on the individual
writer engaged solely in a cognitive process of problem-solving, a point of view
reflected in much work on text linguistics (e.g., Beaugrande and Dressler). I'd
like to suggest, however, that the "social turn" has succeeded so well in directing
the field's gaze upwards and outwards, above and beyond the linguistic features
of texts, that most compositionists nowadays tend not to think about meaning
as construed through the language we use to construct texts but rather as
residing in the activities that surround and govern the workings of texts. As a
result, the field's theoretical understanding of language and how it functions as
a meaning-making resource has been under-explored.

   This de-centering of language is evident in Devitt, Bawarshi, and Reiff's
genre-based textbook Scenes of Writing, which is geared toward training students
to analyze genres and raise their genre awareness. To analyze a genre, the authors
outline four analytical steps:

   1. Collect Samples of the Genre
   2. Identify the Scene and Describe the Situation in Which the Genre is

       Used
   3. Identify and Describe Patterns in the Genre's Features
   4. Analyze What These Patterns Reveal about the Situation and Scene

       (2003, pp. 93-94)
   These four steps provide a useful overarching direction for analysis. They do
not, however, provide the type of detailed support needed to account for salient
patterns in language use that are not apparent after initially scanning a text.
Under the third step, students are prompted to consider "patterns in the genre's
features," for example whether sentences are long or short, complex or simple,
and whether they are in passive or active voice. Students are also prompted to
consider whether the sentences "share a certain style" and "what diction is most
common" (Devitt, Bawarshi, & Reiff, 2003, p. 94). This level of analysis, I'd like
to suggest, is not as nuanced as it could be to guide students toward analyzing

194
                                                                               Tracking Interpersonal Style

how "smaller bits of language" can reveal "underlying ideas, values, and beliefs,"
as suggested above, and so a number of questions arise. For one, what advice
can we give students if they cannot identify recurring patterns in the texts they
are analyzing? What analytic tools are available to guide students' process of
identifying recurring and co-occurring patterns--ones that may not stand
out after initial scans--and then connecting those patterns to larger rhetorical
functions? How can students develop an analytic vocabulary, or meta-language,
for talking about word/phrase, clause, and text level features in genres under
examination in meaningful and concrete ways?

RHETORICAL GRAMMAR

   Rhetorical grammar is one approach to analyzing word/phrase, clause,
and text level features of discourse that is potentially valuable for students'
genre analysis projects. Laura Micciche defines rhetorical grammar as "using
grammatical devices that enable us to respond appropriately and effectively to
a situation" (2004, p. 719). As opposed to analyzing "style," which Micciche
defines as the "`extraordinary' use of language," analyzing rhetorical grammar
means tracking the rhetorical purposes of seemingly minor choices in "the
`ordinary' use of language--grammar" (2004, p. 717). In this way, Micciche
endorses a pedagogical goal that rings familiar with Devitt's goal of alerting
students to "purposes behind forms" (2004, p. 197). As Micciche writes:

         The grammatical choices we make--including pronoun use,
         active or passive verb constructions, and sentence patterns--
         represent relations between writers and the world they live in.
         Word choice and sentence structure are an expression of the
         way we attend to the words of others, the way we position
         ourselves in relation to others. (2004, p. 719)

   Instruction in rhetorical grammar, Micciche points out, can assist learners
in coming to see the rhetorical effects of particular syntactic and lexical choices.
For this reason, rhetorical grammar is "just as central to composition's driving
commitment to teach critical thinking and cultural critique as is reading
rhetorically, understanding the significance of cultural difference, and engaging
in community work through service-learning initiatives" (2004, p. 717).

   A concrete method that Micciche explains for sharpening students'
sensitivity to rhetorical grammar is to have students keep commonplace books
in which they record grammatical patterns from their readings that are of

                                                                                                195
Lancaster

interest to them and then practice using those patterns to construct texts of
their own. This method encourages students to "tinker with language, seeing
how it is crafted and directed rather than as simply `correct' or `incorrect'"
(Micciche, 2004, p. 724). Further, by tinkering with grammatical choices,
students can begin to take notice of how subtle manipulation of language can
have important political ramifications. Micciche demonstrates, for example,
how an analysis of "hedging" devices such "likely" and the verb "believe" in
George Bush's 2002 speech to the United Nations--as in Bush's claim that
"U.N. inspectors believe Iraq has produced two to four times the amount of
biological agents it declared"--can open up a discussion with students about
standards for providing evidence when making a case for declaring war (2004,
p. 725). Keeping commonplace books, therefore, pushes students "to think in
unfamiliar ways about texts to which they have developed familiar responses"
(Micciche, 2004, p. 727). In this way, instruction in rhetorical grammar can
arm students with concrete ways of looking at and talking about language and,
potentially, can enable them to home in on subtle ways that arguments are
built up through language in particular texts. Micciche's discussion of rhetorical
grammar, therefore, goes a long way toward revealing the tension between
formal constraint and choice that gives rise to creative expression and nuanced
rhetorical decisions.

   One potential limitation of the approach, however, is that it is not clear
how rhetorical grammar analysis is informed and shaped by considerations
of genre. In particular, neither Micciche's article, nor Martha Kolln's widely
used textbook, treats explicitly the ways in which genre acts as a superordinate
constraint on the array of possible grammatical choices speakers/writers can
make in a given rhetorical context, or the ways genre serves as a guidepost for
directing the process of rhetorical grammar analysis. To return to Micciche's
example of Bush's speech, an important sequence of questions for analyzing this
speech from a genre and rhetorical grammar perspective include: What are the
communicative purposes of U.S. presidential speeches to the U.N.? Under what
circumstances are they typically delivered? What are some typical rhetorical
moves used in other crisis speeches? How does Bush's particular speech relate
to these genres and how is its structure similar to or different from typical
organizational stages in these other genres? Then, we may ask: in which moves
do "hedging" devices, or expressions of modality, accumulate most abundantly?
What rhetorical work do these devices accomplish within the context of a
particular move or argumentative stage? What language features accumulate
and pattern together with other language features in other moves?

   In pursuing questions such as these, rhetorical grammar and genre analysis
can be brought together so that instructors and students can track ways that

196
                                                                               Tracking Interpersonal Style

grammatical choices accumulate and pattern together in particular phases of
a text as it unfolds; students and instructors can discuss how these patterns
create waves of meaning that achieve generic purposes and perhaps give rise to
a particular style for the sample of the genre under investigation.

   A second limitation of rhetorical grammar analysis--one that is characteristic
of most other linguistically oriented approaches to discourse analysis--is that
the discussions of grammatical/rhetorical "choices" do not specify what exactly
it is that is chosen when a grammatical or rhetorical choice is made. In other
words, making a choice suggests that a speaker/writer is at least tacitly aware of
multiple other available options for producing related meanings in a particular
situation, but those other available options tend not to be discussed explicitly.
The usefulness of the SFL approach to discourse analysis, to which I now
turn, is that it proposes networks of increasingly delicate levels of options that
are available in various linguistic systems (for example the system of mood)
to achieve particular discourse level meanings. These system networks help
analysts track the choices that speakers/writers have made from a network of
other choices they could have made but did not.

LOCATING STYLE IN SFL GENRE/REGISTER THEORY

   As mentioned above, SFL explores language choices in terms of the meanings
they realize. As Mary Schleppegrell explains,

         Every language offers its speakers/writers a wealth of options
         for construing meaning. SFL facilitates exploration of mean-
         ing in context through a comprehensive text-based grammar
         than enables analysts to recognize the choices speakers and
         writers make from the linguistic systems, and to explore how
         those choices are functional for construing meanings of dif-
         ferent kinds. (2011, p. 21)

   These choices and meanings are analyzed at the most general level through
the connected concepts of genre and register.

Genre

   Genre in SFL has been defined as "staged, goal-oriented social processes"
(Martin, 1998, p. 412). Importantly, genre in this view operates at the broad
context of culture, which is a point of view somewhat at odds with the RGS view

                                                                                                197
Lancaster

of genre as socially situated. Specific differences in perspectives and purposes of
SFL and RGS approaches to genre have been discussed in detail elsewhere (see,
e.g., Bawarshi & Reiff; Devitt; Hyon; Martin & Rose, 2008), but primarily it
should be noted that, in the RGS view, genres are fluid modes of action that can
be located within particular communities (i.e., they are socially situated); this
is because they regularly facilitate communicative purposes among participants
in a particular social group. In the SFL perspective, genres are recurring text
types that grow out of social purposes within the culture at large; narratives, for
example, are used to resolve complications in a story and critical responses are
used to challenge the message of a text.

   It is conceivably possible to reconcile the RGS and SFL views of genre, as
others have noted, by casting the SFL conceptualization as "elemental" genres
that pattern together in particular ways to construct larger "macro" genres.
Tenure and promotion reports, for example, are socially situated genres that are
comprised of accounts, explanations, narratives, personal responses, and so on, and
these elemental genres are realized through recurring textual stages. Attempting
to reconcile the two approaches in this way has merit, but to proceed with genre
analysis it is arguably more important to understand the SFL concept of register.
Register is the crucial component in SFL genre theory that tends to be under-
discussed in others' accounts of SFL genre theory and pedagogy.

Register

   Analyzing the schematic structure of elemental genres like accounts and
expositions does little in and of itself to help forward our understanding of how
genres are infused with meanings, or how meanings vary in specific instances
or realizations of a genre in a particular context. Register, therefore, is a specific
theory of social context that helps to answer these questions. Register analysis
explores how three contextual variables are both reflected and realized in every
situation where language is used. These variables are, as identified above, the
field of discourse (the topic of the text, the nature of the social action), the tenor
of discourse (the relationship between participants, i.e., writer and reader), and
the mode of discourse (the part that language plays, what the participants expect
the language to do for them in the situation). Using this linguistically oriented
theory of context, we can talk, for example, about how interpersonal meanings
are realized through specific lexico-grammatical choices that both reflect and
shape the tenor, or participant relations, in a given context.

   As illustration of this last point, consider the case of the critical response
genre. Critical responses are one of many response genres frequently assigned
in school contexts (on response genres, see Christie & Derewianka; Martin

198
                                    Tracking Interpersonal Style

& Rose, 2008). The critical response is realized through the stages of
evaluation, deconstruction, and challenge. Generally, the author(s) first evaluates
a text (evaluation), then breaks the text down by explaining how it works
(deconstruction), and then challenges some aspect of the message in the text
(challenge). When an individual author constructs a critical response in a given
situational context--for a particular group of readers, on a particular topic,
through a particular mode of discourse--his or her specific choices in language
range in degree of formality, commitment, explicitness, and other factors related
to the interpersonal context. To illustrate, consider the following two versions
of an excerpt from a challenge stage of a published New Left Review article by
Joshua Cohen and Joel Rogers. The one on the left is the actual published
version and the one on the right is my modified version.

Published Version by Cohen &        My Modified Version

Rogers                                 Evidence is presented for
                                    the [propaganda] model....
Chomsky presents reams of           Nonetheless, in three ways
                                    Chomsky overstates the argument
evidence for the [propaganda]       that the media manufacture
                                    consent. First, he completely
model....  Nonetheless,             overdraws the claim that business
                                    people and state managers are
Chomsky's view of the media and     in the main relatively "free of
                                    illusion"; he certainly overdraws
the manufacture of consent seems    this claim when he offers it
                                    without substantial qualification,
overstated in three ways. First,    as he frequently does....

the claim that business people

and state managers are in the

main relatively "free of illusion"

seems overdrawn, at least when

that claim is offered (as Chomsky

usually offers it) without

substantial qualification....

   One similarity between the versions is that they are both relatively formal.
They both use diction appropriate for scholarly journalistic discourse (e.g.,
nonetheless, overstates, overdraws, substantial qualification). In addition, the
length and complexity of clauses are comparable, and they both use a mix of
active and passive constructions. But the differences in meaning are important,
and they are accomplished through language in two basic ways.

   First, there is a difference in the kind of nouns that serve as the theme for the
forthcoming evaluations. As Nora Bacon notes in her chapter in this volume,
academic writing often cannot use persons as grammatical subjects because of
the frequent need to deal with abstract concepts. The use of abstract sentence
subjects (rather than personal ones) can become even more complex when the

                                    199
Lancaster

task at hand is to critically evaluate others' work. In Cohen and Rogers's text (the
published one), only the first clause and one parenthetical clause toward the end
of the passage thematize a person, Chomsky, whereas the second clause and each
remaining clause thematize abstractions, Chomsky's view ..., the claim ..., and
that claim. The pattern is reversed in my modified version, where the first clause
thematizes an abstraction, Evidence, and the second and remaining clauses
thematize a person, Chomsky, he, he, and he. The choice, then, about what to
take as the point of departure for the message turns on whether the forthcoming
evaluation can be interpreted as praise or as critique. In other words, that
there is evidence presented for the propaganda model can be understood as a
positive appraisal, while the other appraisals can only be understood as critiques
(overstated, overdrawn). The difference in theme selection here therefore bears
on the degree of interpersonal alignment with the subject of the evaluation:
Chomsky and his views on the media. Cohen and Rogers' grammatical choices,
that is, are at least partly guided by their purpose of constructing a critically
distanced stance when engaging in critique of Chomsky's work on the media.

   Second, there is a difference in the way the authorial voice modulates its
commitment to the evaluations being put forth. In the published version, the
authorial voice reduces the level of commitment when putting forth critiques.
This is accomplished through the use of the expressions seems and usually, while
the authorial voice amplifies the proposition that Chomsky presents evidence.
(Compare reams of evidence with much evidence). The opposite pattern obtains
in my modified version. The authorial voice is highly committed to the critiques
(completely overdraws, frequently does), while the passive construction of the first
clause works to construct a more reluctant concession regarding the existence
of evidence.

   Through this brief register analysis, then, we can be very explicit about how
Cohen and Rogers construct a textual voice that is at once critical of Chomsky's
views on the media and committed to the basic set of value configurations
that many New Left Review readers are likely to associate with Chomsky's
point of view. This positive positioning is accomplished by placing Chomsky
in theme position and amplifying the positive evaluation--that this person,
Chomsky, presents reams of evidence. In terms of negative evaluations, the
textual voice is more distant; this distance is accomplished by backgrounding
the human participant, thematizing abstractions, and using the appearance-
based evidential seems to signal willingness to reconsider the critique. In my
version, the interpersonal positioning is the opposite. Choices in wording frame
the textual voice as interpersonally involved and committed to the critiques of
Chomsky's views on the media, but distant from Chomsky as a person (or,
the values he represents) when it comes to saying anything positive. A close

200
                                                                               Tracking Interpersonal Style

examination of Cohen and Rogers' article reveals, in addition to many other
complex rhetorical strategies, recurring patterns in these configurations. Here
are further examples (positive/negative appraisals are in italics, and appearance-
based evidentials are shaded):

   Positive evaluation
   · With copious documentation, he effectively makes the case that ...

   Negative evaluations
   · Second ... the model's claim that ... seems exaggerated ...
   · The "Backroom Boys" example just given indicates otherwise

   This brief analysis, then, challenges the view that these textual patterns
represent some stylistic "tic" that is characteristic to Cohen and Rogers as
individual authors. Rather, I am suggesting that we can account for these
patterns in terms of the register variables of field, tenor, and mode. Specifically,
the difference in meanings between the original version and my modified one
can be best analyzed in terms of tenor, in this case the interpersonal distance
between the authors and the subject of the critique (Chomsky and his media
analyses) and also, importantly, the ways the authors choose to position
themselves in relation to their readers' perspectives on Chomsky and his work.
The particular set of values that the New Left Review represents and that its
readers are likely to bring to their reading of the article factor into Cohen
and Rogers' (perhaps tacit) choices for what to place in theme position and
how to construct an interpersonal stance in regard to those values. We could
imagine register configurations where my modified version would be more
interpersonally effective, for example contexts where Chomsky's work on the
media tends to be met with more committed resistance.

   Through this type of analysis, students can come to see how particular stylistic
choices--for example, the choice to be dialogically expansive (this seems to be the
case), dialogically contractive (this is definitely the case), or dialogically disengaged
(this is the case)--may vary within instances of the same genre (e.g., a critical
review article) in light of particular contextual variables. To make increasingly
subtler shades of distinctions in interpersonal positioning, and begin to home
in on a particular text's or author's style of interpersonal positioning, SFL-based
Appraisal theory is useful for tracking the choices that speakers/writers make to
encode attitudinal meanings, adjust degrees of evaluations, and contract and
expand dialogical space. As Martin and White explain, the framework explores
"how writers/speakers construe for themselves particular authorial identities or
personae, with how they align or disalign themselves with actual or potential

                                                                                                201
Lancaster

Table 1: Engagement resources in excerpts from economics and political
theory term papers

From challenge stage of A-graded criti- From challenge stage of A-graded criti-

cal response in economics                cal response in political theory

(1) The result of this kind of              (1) With his theory established, I
market structure is a system in          think Rawls' first response to Fraser
which insurance firms control            would be that the cultural injustices
significant market power, as a           she believes require recognition are
monopsony to medical practitioners       already accounted for in his "fully
and a monopoly to patients. (2)          adequate scheme of equal basic rights."
The Supreme Court rejected the
argument that the Federation's              (2) Rawls proposes that one way
actions were designed to protect         of forming a list of basic rights and
patients from insufficient dental        liberties is to consider what is essential
treatment, stating that the idea of      to "provide the political and social
the provision of information leading     conditions essential for the adequate
to adverse outcomes was directly         development and full exercise of the
against the spirit of the Sherman        two moral powers of free and equal
Act. (3) However, their reasoning        persons."
that insurance companies act
almost as simple representatives of         (3) It seems obvious that persons
patients is not upheld by the current    are unable to adequately develop
situation. (4) The object of the health  and exercise their moral powers
insurance company is to maximize         under conditions of extreme cultural
profit, not to maximize the health       disenfranchisement. (4) If a person
of the patient. (5) If insurance were    is "routinely maligned or disparaged
purchased directly by the patient,       ... in everyday life interactions", then
competition among providers could        it is unlikely that they will be able to
equate the objects of both provider      participate in the means of acquiring
and patient. (6) However a perfectly     the moral powers and will certainly
competitive market clearly is not        be unable to fully exercise their moral
available to many of the consumers       power. (5) For example, if a woman is
who purchase insurance directly.         unable to go to school and be educated,
                                         then it is unlikely she will be able to
                                         adequately develop her moral power.
                                         (6) Further, if she is then unable to
                                         fully participate in society, she will be
                                         limited in the exercise of her moral
                                         power.

202
                                                                               Tracking Interpersonal Style

respondents, and with how they construct for their texts an intended or ideal
audience" (2005, p. 1).

TRACKING INTERPERSONAL STANCE-TAKING

   Appraisal theory makes use of three interrelated sub-systems to track choices
in interpersonal meaning. Attitude, Graduation, and Engagement. Attitude
tracks meanings related to feelings and affect, judgment of people (their
motives and behavior), and appreciation of the aesthetic quality of things.
Graduation tracks meanings related to raising or lowering the force and focus
of propositions (in terms of intensity, quantity, preciseness, and protypicality).
And finally Engagement, inspired as it is by Bakhtinian notions of heteroglossia
and dialogism, tracks meanings related to engagement with others' voices and
perspectives. Appraisal analysis is useful for systematically tracking how the
sequencing and configuration of various interpersonal resources of language
vary depending on the genre under analysis.

   To illustrate, the following paragraph is from a second year student's
argumentative essay written in a political science course. This paragraph
demonstrates how particular configurations of Appraisal resources can cluster
together to create a distinct interpersonal style. (Resources of Attitude are in
underlined and resources of Graduation are in small caps.)

         (1) Firstly, Zakaria's implication that the forces that moved
         into power in Bosnia were counterproductive ones to the
         American ends is totally irrelevant. (2) If America found
         democracy to truly be such a noble cause to spread, then
         surely it would not violate a nation's sovereignty in an at-
         tempt to preserve its democratic status. (3) Although ostensi-
         bly this would tie into his greater thesis regarding liberty as a
         lesser need than democracy as ideals America has worked to
         spread, his generous usage of the term democracy here and
         his inability to properly hold it true to its definition totally
         undermines his insistence in conceptual exactness and differ-
         entiation between democracy and liberty in the first place.

   This paragraph makes use of many Appraisal resources. The meanings
that overwhelm the paragraph, however, have to do with, on the one hand,
Attitudinal resources of judgment (noble, violate, generous, inability to properly
hold it true to its definition) and appreciation (irrelevant, undermines), and,

                                                                                                203
Lancaster

on the other hand, Graduation resources of force (totally, surely) and focus
(truly, properly). In terms of sequencing, the high force appreciation in the
first sentence--that Zakaria's claim is "totally irrelevant"--sets up a wave of
strongly negative meanings that spread through the remainder of the paragraph.
This general spreading-through partly explains why the use of the conditional
structure in the first part of sentence 2 (If America found ...) works to reinforce
the negative meaning by ironically reconsidering Zakaria's claim after having
just forcefully rejected it. This ironic meaning is carried through in the second
part of sentence 2--then SURELY it would not ...--by strongly negating a
proposition that we can assume the author in fact endorses, that "America"
has violated a nation's sovereignty. Finally, the ironically and forcefully critical
stance is carried through in the lengthy third sentence by the sarcastic judgment
of Zakaria's use of the term "democracy" as generous, combined with the more
explicitly negative judgment, his inability to properly hold it true to its definition.
This student's critiques of Zakaria's reasoning, then, are expressed in a style of
stance-taking that is explicitly evaluative, strongly committed, and dialogically
contractive.

   Appraisal analyses of undergraduate student writing (Coffin; Derewianka;
Tang; Wu) show that the style of stance-taking displayed in this critique of
Zakaria is not always rewarded in university contexts calling for "critical
discussion" of texts. Particularly as students progress into upper-level writing
courses in the disciplines, they are expected to construct stances that are at once
critical, authoritative, and dialogically expansive. Beverly Derewianka found,
for example, that writing from more advanced students tended to construct
stances that were "explicitly open to other voices and possibilities" (2009, p.
162). Through the use of various Engagement strategies, more advanced and
proficient writers tend to encode in their texts "an awareness of the problematic,
constructed and intersubjective nature of meaning-making" (Derewianka,
2009, p. 163). Unlike the critique of Zakaria above, which uses heavily ramped
up and ironic judgments, the texts Derewianka analyzed in her study of student
writing worked to carefully juxtapose "other voices [that] are explicitly drawn
into the discussion, interpreted, analyzed, critiqued and played off against each
other" (2009, p. 163).

   The particular choices explored by the Appraisal sub-system of Engagement
involve the way writers/speakers engage with other voices and perspectives
by directly acknowledging them or by denying, countering, conceding, or
entertaining those perspectives. Dialogically contractive wordings work to
boost the speaker's/writer's commitment to the proposition being put forth;
in so doing, they contract space for the inclusion of alternative perspectives.
Options for contracting the dialogic space include:

204
                                                                               Tracking Interpersonal Style

         pronouncing an assertion (I am convinced that ...)
         affirming a proposition (clearly, certainly, obviously it is true/
         is the case)
         disclaiming alternative views (It is not the case ... rather ...).
         conceding and countering alternative views (It is true that
         ..., but ...)

   Dialogically expansive wordings, in contrast, lower the speaker's/writer's
commitment to the proposition being put forth and thus expand space for
the inclusion of alternative perspectives. Available options for opening up the
dialogic space include:

         suggesting (one way to proceed is ...)
         conjecturing (perhaps, probably, it is likely ...)
         evidentializing (it seems/appears that ...)
         hypothetical reasoning (if we grant that ..., then we ...)

         attributing views to others (Chomsky states that ..., accord-
         ing to experts)

   The options of conjecturing and evidentializing have been viewed in the
linguistics literature on hedging, or displaying uncertainty and/or "deference,
modesty, or respect" (Hyland, 2000, p. 88). In the Engagement framework they
are seen more as functioning to open up space for the inclusion of alternative
views and, as Martin and White explain, to extend offers of solidarity to
imagined readers who are not already aligned with the author's point of view
(2005, p. 126). Through the use of this framework, analysts can make explicit
the specific choices in interpersonal stance-taking that speakers/writers have
made and track the ways those choices pattern together to create a particular
interpersonal style.

USING ENGAGEMENT TO ANALYZE
DISCIPLINARY STYLES OF STANCE-TAKING

   One useful project that students and instructors can explore in the context of
FYC is the ways in which similar genres across disciplines may be characterized
by different stance-taking styles. For example, how might argumentation in
the contexts of classroom genres calling for "discussion" or "critical reasoning"

                                                                                                205
Lancaster

assume subtly different and discipline-specific ways of positioning the textual
voices vis-à-vis anticipated readers?

   Before proceeding with illustrations, let me concede that such a project is
a complex undertaking. One finding from Chris Thaiss and Terry Zawacki's
Engaged Writers, Dynamic Disciplines is that the causes for miscommunication
between students and faculty about good writing often result from five largely
unexamined contexts at work in the design and evaluation of any writing
assignment: "the academic; the disciplinary; the subdisciplinary; the local or
institutional; and the idiosyncratic or personal" (2006, p. 138). Many or most
instructors have difficulty stepping outside their own "ways of knowing, doing,
and writing" (Carter, 2007, p. 385) to reflect on which of these contexts are
at play when they design writing assignments and develop evaluative criteria.
When it comes to talking about stylistic patterns at work in student writing,
therefore, analyses of student-produced classroom genres may point to valued
features of a general academic style (as opposed to a journalistic or conversational
style), a broad disciplinary style (economics discourse), a sub-disciplinary style
(discourse in economic regulation and antitrust policy), a sub-disciplinary style
favored at a particular institution, or an author's idiosyncratic style. For this
last context, Bacon (this volume) lists such factors as the writers' "personality,
mood, knowledge, experience, professional status, ethnicity, gender, proficiency
with language, and so on." When an interpersonal style is unpicked, then, any
of these contextual variables may be seen as relevant, and making these complex
interpretations can be a valuable exercise for student writers in the context of
FYC.

   Pursuing this line of analysis, I used the Engagement framework discussed
above to code two undergraduate students' argumentative essays, one in
economics and the other in political theory. The two paragraphs presented below
are comparable because (a) they are both from the critical response sections of
the respective papers, which called for evaluation and reasoned argumentation;
(b) they were both written by fourth year students at the same large public
university who were majoring in the respective disciplines; and (c) they both
received A's and were praised by the instructors for sophisticated "critical
reasoning." The economics text was written in an upper-level undergraduate
course focused on economic regulation and antitrust policy, and in this passage
the student is challenging the reasoning of the Supreme Court. The political
theory text was written an upper-level undergraduate course on twentieth
century political thought, and in this passage the student is using John Rawl's
concept of justice as fairness to challenge Nancy Fraser's argument in her paper
"From Redistribution to Recognition." (Dialogically expansive resources are set

206
                                                                               Tracking Interpersonal Style

in shaded text and contractive resources are underlined. As with my analysis
of the student's critique of Zakaria above, I have highlighted here the lexico-
grammatical "triggers" for discourse semantic options.)

   An important similarity between the two excerpts is that both authorial voices
are highly engaged dialogically. Both texts, that is, use strategies of attributions
(e.g., argument, stating, proposes) and hypothetical reasoning to expand dialogical
space, subtly allowing for alternative views, and they use pronouncements
(clearly, obvious, certainly) to contract that space and guide the readers toward
their own points of view. What this heteroglossic engagement suggests is that
both authors are aware that, in academic contexts, writers are expected to
negotiate assertions with an imagined reader who is not already aligned with
the author's point of view but rather "is coolly rational, reading for information,
and intending to formulate a reasoned response" (Thaiss & Zawacki, 2006, p.
7). Furthermore, the juxtaposition of perspectives accomplished by alternating
between expansive and contractive wordings may be characteristic of academic
writing valued for "critical" reasoning. In her study of the ways experts in
anthropology evaluated student writing in a general education course, Mary
Soliday found that readers tended to reward a "reflective stance," which involves
a "student's ability to appreciate diverse positions and then to commit to a
judgment within [that] context" (2004, p. 74).

   In the two paragraphs in Table 1, we can see that such appreciation, or at
least awareness, of diverse positions is subtly infused throughout the texts as
the writers open up dialogical space by acknowledging and entertaining other
points of view before committing to a stance. For example, in the economics
paragraph, the direct denial in sentence 4 (not to maximize the health of the
patient) is followed by an expansively worded elaboration in sentence 5 that
works to entertain a concession (If insurance ... could equate ...); the dialogic
space is then once contracted in sentence 6 through the use of a counter
(However) and pronounced denial (clearly is not available).

   In terms of differences, the paragraph from economics generally takes a
more committed stance. It makes use of dialogically contractive options that
the political theory text avoids, namely the strategy of directly disclaiming other
views (e.g., However ... is not upheld by the current situation). It also grounds its
propositions in a more objective voice, as seen in the bare assertion in sentence
1 and the lack of self-mentions. In contrast, the excerpt from political theory
uses more expansive options to build its argument, particularly the option of
entertaining alternative views, which is accomplished not only through the use
of attributions and hypothetical reasoning, which the economics text makes
use of as well, but also conjecturing (I think; it is unlikely) and evidentializing

                                                                                                207
Lancaster

(it seems obvious). Through the use of these strategies, the student author gently
challenges Fraser's views rather than directly countering or denying them.

   One pedagogical question raised by this type of analysis, then, is whether or
not argumentative writing in economics is more highly valued when it adopts
a direct and committed stance-taking style, and whether argumentative writing
in political theory is more highly valued when it adopts a less committed style.
Obviously, there is no way to give a generalized answer to this question on the
basis of two students' essays. We certainly would not want to over-estimate the
value of committed and direct argumentation in economics, especially in light
of the economist Deirdre McCloskey's suggestion that "the economist looks
always at other possibilities in a world of imagination, the opportunity cost, the
alternatives foregone by the actions in question" (1998, p. 94) or Trine Dahl's
recent finding that writers of research articles in economics excel at constructing
knowledge claims that "achieve the optimal balance of caution, modesty, and
self-promotion" (2009, p. 385).

   Perhaps, then, we need to consider the sub-disciplinary contexts. For the
economics paragraph, this context is the field of economic regulation and
antitrust policy, and thus the course material (and likely style of argumentation)
shunts back and forth between the discourses of economics and law. In this
regard, the frequent disclaim moves found in the economics paragraph may be
more characteristic of the "lawyerly" rhetoric identified by McCloskey in the
economist Robert Coase's discourse (McCloskey, 2009. p. 90). Furthermore,
on a personal/idiosyncratic level, we might consider the fact that the graduate
student instructor (GSI) who graded the papers in the course was pursuing a
joint PhD in law and economics and that, as stated in an interview, he valued
explicit counter-argumentation.

   Likewise, it would be unfair to conclude that the dialogically expansive style
evident in the political theory paragraph represents a political scientist's mode
of argumentation. The particular context is political theory, and the professor
of the course, who was trained in philosophy, remarked in an interview that the
writing assignments in his courses tended to be more "humanities oriented"
than social science. At the same time, however, another possible understanding
of this paragraph, one suggesting a more "idiosyncratic" stylistic reading, is that
the dialogical positioning in the paragraph is too complex and thus the writer
misses an opportunity to align the reader with his/her own point of view. In
particular, it seems that the writer could have wrapped-up the paragraph with
a more contractive move rather than ending with the hypothetical examples.
Yet another reading, one which rings with the skillful use of dialogically
contractive language that appears in the conclusion of this paper, is that the
writer is trying out a "voice" perceived to be appropriate for a political theory

208
                                                                               Tracking Interpersonal Style

discussion, in which critical argumentation should not be carried out in a heavy
handed manner but through the careful juxtaposition of various positions and
evaluation of them with respect to one another.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

   In this chapter I have discussed ways that SFL-based genre/register theory
and Appraisal theory can guide the textual dimensions of genre analysis projects
in the context of college writing instruction. Through the type of systematic
attention to the interpersonal dimensions of texts that I have illustrated in this
chapter, students and instructors can trouble some of the hard and fast stylistic
principles that many students bring with them to their FYC courses, principles
such as "be assertive, use active verbs, be clear and concise, eliminate `filler'
words, avoid repetition," and so on. What I would like to suggest, then, is
that my discussion of texts in this chapter can serve as a model for the types
of discussions that can take place in the context of FYC instruction that is
focused on analyzing classroom genres across the curriculum. What drives my
discussion is the general question of what sorts of interpretations can be made
about fine-grained language choices in academic writing. What enables me to
have this discussion is a concrete analytic framework and robust meta-language
for talking about linguistic choices as they are related to meaning, in this case
interpersonal interaction and dialogical stance-taking.

   Use of an analytic framework allows students to adopt a critical distance
from the texts they are analyzing. In this way it can facilitate the process of
observing and tracking recurring patterns of language use that are otherwise
difficult to notice from more casual scanning. Research from English for
Specific Purposes contexts shows that students equipped with concrete analytic
constructs for analyzing texts are better able to engage in reflection on their own
rhetorical choices. Cheng, for example, discusses the gains graduate students
made when reflecting on their rhetorical "moves" and "steps" when writing
research article introductions (after John Swales' CARS model). Cheng's main
argument is that in order to recontextualize discursive/rhetorical strategies from
one genre to another, novice academic writers need a set of concrete analytic
constructs that allows them to notice recurring patterns in the texts they read
and then articulate their meta-reflections about their own use of such patterns.
This process of noticing and reflective articulation can support a rhetorically
sensitive transfer of genre features as students learn to use generic features "with
a keen awareness of the rhetorical context that facilitates its appropriate use"
(Cheng, 2007, p. 303). This argument makes sense when we consider that,

                                                                                                209
Lancaster

in order to engage in meta-reflection about writing strategies and discursive
choices, especially very fine-grained strategies and choices, learners need a
specific language of reflection.

   In short, I have argued in this paper for particular conceptual and
methodological tools of text analysis with the goal of enabling students to
conduct genre analysis with control and authority. The larger goal of enabling
students to do close, text-based genre analysis, however, is to help them to foster
sensitivity to the relations between textual forms and rhetorical effects as they
learn to write in various and complex rhetorical situations. As Devitt et al., put
it, the idea is to "teach students how to gain knowledge of scenes and genres
and how to use that knowledge to make more critically informed and effective
writing decisions within various scenes" (2004, p. xvii). This knowledge and
sensitivity can be the driving force behind the transfer from successfully
analyzing to successfully writing genres, a process whereby students come to
read as writers and to write as readers.

REFERENCES

Barton, E., & Stygall, G. (Eds.). (2002). Discourse studies in composition.
   Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.

Bawarshi, A., & Reiff, M. J. (2010). Genre: An introduction to history,
   theory, research, and pedagogy. West Lafayette, IN: Parlor Press and the
   WAC Clearinghouse. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/books/
   bawarshi_reiff/

Beaufort, A. (2007). College writing and beyond: A new framework for university
   writing instruction. Logan: Utah State.

de Beaugrande, R., & Dressler, W. (1981). Introduction to text linguistics. Lon-
   don: Longman.

Carter, M. (2007). Ways of knowing, doing, and writing in the disciplines. Col-
   lege Composition and Communication 58(3), 385-418.

Cheng, A. (2007). Transferring generic features and recontextualizing genre
   awareness: Understanding writing performance in the esp genre-based lit-
   eracy framework. English for Specific Purposes 26, 287-307.

Christie, F., & Derewianka, B. (2008). School discourse. London and New York:
   Continuum.

Coffin, C. (2002). The voices of history: Theorizing the interpersonal semantics
   of historical discourses. Text 22(4), 503-528.

Cohen, J., & Rogers, J. (1991). Knowledge, morality and hope: The social
   thought of noam chomsky. New Left Review 187, 5-27.

210
                                                                               Tracking Interpersonal Style

Dahl, T. (2009). The linguistic representation of rhetorical function: A study
   of how economists present their knowledge claims. Written Communication
   26, 370-391.

Derewianka, B. (2009). Using appraisal theory to track interpersonal devel-
   opment in adolescent academic writing. In A. McCabe, M. O'Donnell, &
   R. Whittaker, R. (Eds.), Advances in language and education (pp. 142-165).
   New York and London: Continuum.

Devitt, A. J. (2004). Writing genres. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University
   Press.

Devitt, A. J. (2009). Refusing form in genre study. In Giltrow, J., & Stein, D.
   (Eds.), Genres in the Internet: Issues in the theory of genre (pp. 27-46). Amster-
   dam, NLD. John Benjamins.

Devitt, A. J., Bawarshi, A., & Reiff, M. J. (2003). Materiality and genre in the
   study of discourse communities. College English 65(5), 541-558.

Devitt, A. J., Bawarshi, A., & Mary Jo Reiff, M. J. (2004). Scenes of writing:
   Strategies for composing with genres. New York: Pearson Longman.

Halliday, M. A. K. (1973). Explorations in the functions of language. London:
   Edward Arnold (Explorations in Language Study Series).

Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An introduction to functional grammar (2nd ed.).
   London: Arnold.

Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London: Long-
   man.

Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourse: Social interactions in academic writ-
   ing. London: Longman.

Hyon, S. (1996). Genre in three traditions: Implications for ESL. TESOL
   Quarterly 30(4), 693-722.

Johns, A. M. (1997). Text, role, and context: Developing academic literacies. New
   York and Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Johnson, T. R., & Pace, T. (2005). Introduction. In T. R. Johnson & T. Pace
   (Eds.), Refiguring prose style: Possibilities for writing pedagogy (pp. 1-2). Lo-
   gan, UT: Utah State University Press.

Kaplan, M. L., Silver, N., Meizlish, D., & Lavaque-Manty, D. (n.d.). Using
   metacognition to foster students' disciplinary thinking and writing skills.
   Ongoing research study, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Kolln, M. (2003). Rhetorical grammar: Grammatical choices, rhetorical effects (4th
   ed.). New York: Longman.

MacDonald, S. P. (2007). The erasure of language. College Composition and
   Communication 58(4), 585-625.

Martin, J. R. (1998). Linguistics and the consumer: The practice of theory.
   Linguistics and Education 9(4), 411-448.

                                                                                                211
Lancaster

Martin, J. R. & Rose, D. (2007). Working with discourse: Meaning beyond the
   clause (2nd ed.). London: Continuum.

Martin, J. R. & Rose, D. (2008). Genre relations: Mapping culture. London:
   Equinox.

Martin, J. R. & White, P. R. (2005). The language of evaluation: Appraisal in
   English. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Micciche, L. R. (2004). Making a case for rhetorical grammar. College Composi-
   tion and Communciation 55(4), 716-737.

McCloskey, D. (1986). The rhetoric of economics. Madison, WI: University of
   Wisconsin Press.

North, S. (2005). Disciplinary variation in the use of theme in undergraduate
   essays. Applied Linguistics 26(3), 431-452.

Schleppegrell, M. J. (2011). Systemic functional linguistics: Exploring mean-
   ing in language. In J. Gee & M. Handford (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of
   discourse analysis (pp. 21-34). London: Routledge.

Soliday, M. (2004). Reading student writing with anthropologists: Stance and
   judgment in college writing. College Composition and Communication 56:1:
   72-93.

Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Swain, E. (2009). Constructive an affective "voice" in academic discussion writ-

   ing. In A. McCabe, M. O'Donnell, & R. Whittaker (Eds.), Advances in lan-
   guage and education (pp. 166-184). New York and London: Continuum.
Tang, R. (2009). A dialogic account of authority in academic writing. In M.
   Charles, D. Pecorari, & S. Hunston (Eds.), Academic writing: At the interface
   of corpus and discourse (pp. 170-190). New York and London: Continuum.
Thaiss, C., & Zawacki, T. M. (2006). Engaged writers, dynamic disciplines: Re-
   search on the academic writing life. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.
Williams, J. (1997). Style: Ten lessons in clarity and grace. New York: Addison
   Wesley.
Wu, S. M. (2007). The use of engagement resources in high- and low-rated
   undergraduate geography essays. Journal of English for Academic Purposes 6,
   254-271.

212
    MULTIMODAL STYLE AND

    THE EVOLUTION OF DIGITAL

    WRITING PEDAGOGY

      Moe Folk
      Kutztown University

   Notions of style--particularly the idea of multimodal style--are key in
the ever-evolving digital composition framework. If indeed composition is
undergoing a multimodal turn (see Faigley; George; Kress; Kress & Jewett; Kress
& van Leeuwen; Lanham; Lankshear & Knobel; New London Group; Porter;
Selber; Selfe; Selfe & Hawisher; Takayoshi & Selfe; WIDE Collective; Wysocki,
2001; Wysocki, 2004; Yancey), understanding the connection of multimodal
style to production and analysis is paramount. Digital composition, in calling
forth the use of multiple meaning-making modes, places stress on the existing
logocentric composition framework, thereby placing stress on logocentric
conceptions of style. In a period when digital compositions constantly evolve,
conceptions of style evolve as well, and the boons and banes of multimodal style
in digital realms are all related to boundless iterations. After all, if the act (and
enactment) of style is difficult enough to grasp when dealing only with words
that it has sustained scholarly inquiry for thousands of years, what happens
when style is no longer bound by the printed page, bound by the essayistic
traditions of composing for delivery on 8.5 x 11 white sheets of paper? As Collin
Brooke wrote, it is important to discover what happens in digital composing
when "style escapes the cage that print technology represents" (2002).

   At the most basic level, if style is seen as a composer making choices,
ultimately revealing patterns and providing style in the sense of a distinct manner
of composing something, then the choices open to a digital compositionist are
simply exponentially greater when working in multiple modes than in a singular
mode. For example, although stylistic inquiries in an alphabetic text could have
focused on some overall visual elements (e.g., font, use of bullets, paragraphing,
etc.), they usually just focused on elements related to words and sentences (e.g.,
sentence variation, schemes, tropes, and figures, not to mention the various
application of static abstractions). In contrast, a stylistic look at a digital video
could involve numerous static visual elements, moving visual elements, audio
components, and textual components, not to mention how they are all mixed
together (or separated). This proliferation of choices is similar to what Kress
argued about the complexity of multimodal composing:

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.14  213
Folk

          [T]here are now choices about how what is to be represented
         should be represented; in what mode, in what genre, in what
         ensembles of modes and genres and on what occasions. These
         were not decisions open to students (or teachers or textbook
         makers) some 20 years earlier. (2003, p. 117)

   Although one could read Kress's concerns merely as inventional choices,
they eventually translate to production choices, and style is part and parcel
of every step of the digital composing approach. Similarly, if we believe that
changes in style result in changes of meaning (Beardsley, 1969, p. 7), then
there is much at stake when there are multiple modes with their own styles
to consider, especially in the consideration as to whether our digital invention
reach exceeds our digital composing grasp. The ability to craft something
rhetorically effective with a digital text, then, depends on one's ability to grasp
style on a deep analytical and productive level.

   In a multimodal work, a singular mode could stand out from the intended
multimodal whole and thus greatly affect the perceived meaning of the entire
work. In other words, whether you're a dualist or not, a singular mode can be
separated from the whole and greatly affect the meaning of a text because of
how one perceives the stylized content of the mode in question. For example, if
a composer constructed a webtext that focused on persuading people to adopt
a pro-life abortion view, that webtext would be perceived quite differently by
its audience--regardless of identical textual and visual content--if the audio
playing over the webtext was AC/DC's "Highway to Hell" versus Albinoni's
"Adagio." This is not to say that the classical piece represents a more "highbrow"
Ciceronian style and is therefore more rhetorically effective, but simply to
illustrate that the attitude, stance, and lyrics of the AC/DC song would be
taken completely differently within the context of the multimodal whole of the
pro-life argument and thus change the meaning of the webtext itself. "Adagio"
might strike a somber note that reinforces the seriousness of the topic, but
"Highway to Hell" could be taken as a chastising, religious-oriented rebuke to
those who do not share the views of the webtext's creator. In addition, playing
the songs softly would not translate to some kind of "lessened" rhetorical effect.
It also points to the intellectual recklessness of privileging the icono-textual
aspects of the argument like many of the field's multimodal textbooks and
scholarly approaches do. In another vein, there will be people who abandon the
pro-life webtext (and thus its argument) on the production level simply because
it had a song playing that could not be stopped or interacted with, a choice in
and of itself that betrays a lack of audience awareness within dominant social
consumption patterns of webpages revealed by prolonged use. In some sense,

214
                                                                                           Multimodal Style

the use of the two songs mentioned above would be noteworthy because they
already have an established ethos that can be elicited (or counteracted).

   This notion recalls the idea of available designs in the multimodal
composition process as formulated by the New London Group. The composer
accesses existing designs that carry some sort of meaning and during the process
of design, transforms them into the redesigned and re-deploys them for different
semiotic purposes.

   Similarly, other scholars address the complex diffusion of style in various
meaning-making modes by examining how style is distributed throughout
modern cultural constructs. Barry Brummett, for example, argued for the
importance of understanding style and how it functions because it is "the
basis for organizing the social today" (2008, p. xiii). Brummett identifies the
importance of style to both individual and collective meaning in contemporary
society:

         [S]tyle creates tensions between social allegiance and in-
         dividuality, tensions likely to increase under conditions of
         postmodern complexity. The social organization of style is
         never value free. Style's aesthetic organizes such value-laden
         dimensions of the social as gender and sexual identity, class,
         time, and space. (2008, p. 43)

   In a similar vein, Brummett argued "there are cohesive clusters of style--
movement, gesture, speech, vocabulary, decoration, and the like" that can
be read and utilized in certain social ways. Providing one of what could be
countless examples, Brummett noted how "`Hippie style' may or may not be
currently fashionable, but it nevertheless remains a style that is available to be
mined for its signs and meanings, and it may go in and out of fashion over
the years" (2008, p. 4). In other words, what digital style accesses is a slew
of social patterns, histories, and technological patterns. Ewen also implicated
the immense importance of style to the social when he defined style as "a
way that the human values, structures, and assumptions in a given society are
aesthetically expressed and received" (1988, p. 3). Taken together, a view of style
in the larger societal sense espoused by Brummett and Ewen is important for
the enterprise of digital composition. For one, if style is such an intrinsic part of
social formation, if it is indeed powerful enough to be simultaneously repellant
and attractant, it cannot help but be implicated in the rhetorical effectiveness of
digital texts in every stage of the composing process.

   In addition to needing to understand the distribution of multimodal style
in established and evolving social contexts, digital composition's embrace of

                                                                                                215
Folk

other modes naturally recalls other disciplines' concepts of style. After all, other
notions of style have developed in disciplines that have traditionally been much
more multimodal than English studies. The opposing tensions between style in
English studies and just one discipline, art history, for example, could fruitfully
complicate notions because multimodal style cannot be shoe-horned into a
lone discipline's previous understandings. For example, the influential early art
scholar Wölfflin categorized an "expressive" base for style rooted in personal,
national, and period representational tendencies, which congeals many English
studies theories of author, text, and genre into one notion. Also, what Milic
identified as psychological monism is mirrored in art history by what Genova
called the "signature view"--"a distinctive ensemble of the characteristic ways
an artifact is made in order to place greater emphasis on the individual maker"
(1979, p. 315) and elevate the innate characteristics of the artist. Additionally,
Genova claimed the signature view is damaging because it denies the vital
role style "plays in creating and discovering meaning" (1979, p. 315), which
is basically opposite of the arguments against monism. Similarly, art history
has provided new schemas, such as having perfected style as a cataloging tool
(see Elsner, 1996, p. 106) in order to make some sense of the vast amount of
artistic works. I argue this is what students, teachers, and citizens of the digital
age do (whether consciously or unconsciously) in order to make sense of the
proliferating digital texts around them--we align ourselves with certain styles
as a means of sifting through and determining what should be focused on and
recalled, what should be discarded and remembered. Art history also has the
"meaning-expressing model," where meaning is the primary function of style
but still plays a role in identification (Genova, 1979). In some ways, this view
is like a hybrid of the monistic views Milic identified (psychological monism
and Crocean aesthetic monism); in a digital composition where more modes are
capable of being styled, this meaning-expressing model can become a powerful
concept.

   The aforementioned art history concepts are not alone in holding promise;
important digital composition behaviors and predilections could also be
understood by examining stylistic conceptions rooted in psychology (see
Brummett, 2008, p. 2) anthropology, and biology (see Bang, 2000; Kress
& van Leeuwen, 2001; Postrel, 2003, p. 32). However, despite the possible
contributions other disciplines' ideas hold for developing multimodal style,
approaching beneficial contemporary theories of style in digital composition
means discerning complex notions of style that dovetail with, and also
rupture, dominant existing conceptions of style within the framework of
English studies.

216
                                                                                           Multimodal Style

EVOLVING CONCEPTIONS OF MULTIMODAL STYLE

   Using traditional composition textbooks as an example, Woodman (1982)
pointed out prevailing conceptions of style, thus illustrating a proliferation of
implied practices even when only working with alphabetic texts:

         Be sure to follow the style of academic documentation
         (style as format); Standard edited English is the style likely
         to be acceptable to your readers (style as grammaticality);
         Try to write in a clear and readable style (style as precision);
         Varied sentence patterns promote a pleasing style (style as
         syntactic variation). Density of embedding is characteristic
         of a mature style (style as syntactic complexity); Modern
         readers prefer a plain style (style as linguistic register).
         (1982, para. 6)

   While the guises Woodman pointed out cover much stylistic ground and
are still quite common in contemporary textbooks and pedagogical approaches,
the complexity that multimodal style adds to the equation means that other
iterations of style are missing or under-theorized. The viewpoints and attitudes
applicable in the spaces where composers use computers and various semiotic
modes to form new types of digital compositions give rise to ever-evolving
notions of style. What follows are existing iterations of multimodal style
that I have developed, a process that included years of teaching multimodal
composition, years of analyzing and creating a variety of digital texts, and years
of collecting what amounts to thousands of students' rhetorical reflections
about their own multimodal works. One of the things that spurred my interest
in multimodal style was the importance I noted that students placed on
multimodal style across all aspects of the composing process, as discussed in
their rhetorical reflections. For example, when prompted to discuss why they
chose a particular topic, students often cited a desire to approximate the style
of a particular work they had admired, or they chose a particular style they
identified with a positive, professional ethos, but one they could nonetheless
definitely pull off with their multimodal composing skills. While some of these
existing/evolving iterations of multimodality might recall previous notions of
style, all are still under-theorized from our established iterations of style in
digital compositions, but transcending these entrenched notions is important
because of the integrated nature of multimodal style to the analysis and
production of digital texts.

                                                                                                217
Folk

Style as technical prowess

   In this iteration, style is primarily defined and achieved by expressing
mechanical superiority/expertise. Style as technical prowess privileges how
technologies meld with existing semiotic systems to create new artifacts or the
ways technology is used to foster new expression (similar to the idea of the
redesigned from the New London Group). In short, an individual's expertise
with digital composing technologies (e.g., software) allows for a certain type
of production, which in turn allows for a particular style that is not within the
digital composing repertoire of most people. Indeed, the style often becomes
the text in the eyes of the audience who cannot make it--and in many cases
the actual technical style ends up being valued above content by the composer
and thus becomes the marker for the audience. However, it is important to
note that the advanced technical style is neither patently positive nor negative;
its rhetorical effect, as noted before, is bound up in evolving technologies and
the multimodal style conventions that change as the social practices associated
with those technologies change. In short, style as technical prowess recalls the
social recognition captured in Holcomb and Killingsworth's definition: "[S]tyle
is a performance of identity using a recognized form within a cultural context"
(2010, p. 168).

   An early example taken from the Web would be the use of animated GIFs,
which showcased a certain technical capability on the part of the composer
(particularly for those unfamiliar with how to make them), thus imbuing pages
with a certain sense of style, and often becoming the marker of "wow" technical
factor even when the animated GIF was rhetorically inappropriate. Nowadays,
the animated GIF is often seen as the marker of a cheesy second-generation site
or is used to mark an ironically bad web page. For example, The Geocities-izer,
a website that promises to make any other website "look like it was built by a
13-year-old in 1996," relies heavily on placing animated GIFs in the mirrored
site. While the field tends to suspect that an unyielding focus on technical
prowess is damaging because it supersedes "higher order" critical and rhetorical
concerns, style as technical prowess nonetheless shows how important advanced
digital composing can be to digital text production, and how a wide range of
rhetorical critical possibilities are thus opened up for production and analysis
alike.

Style as difference

   Although style as difference has long been covered under the aegis of
doing something with distinction, or of simply being a matter of unteachable

218
                                                                                           Multimodal Style

essence (as in psychological monism), the digital iteration may rest simply
with actual difference. However, style as difference is intrinsic to current digital
compositions, particularly if we are indeed suffering from an abundance of
information and it becomes more difficult to attract attention (as Lanham
argues). In addition, there is also the issue of what Schilb has called rhetorical
refusals, instances where a composition purposefully elides the expectations
associated with its particular intention; this notion seems apt for digital
compositions, where what is often engaged with and shared with others
amounts to novel constructions.

   Using style as the means to attract attention, though, also presents a
problem, for as Lanham suggested, purposeful self-consciousness is not highly
regarded within our culture (2006, p. 142). Furthermore, style as difference is
not tied to text alone, as Sonya Foss's definition of visual novelty attested: "[S]
ome dimension of the form, structure, or construction technique of the image
stands out as exceptional or extraordinary" (1993, p. 215). The elements Foss
refers to could include such things as exquisite detailing, superb craftsmanship,
or a finely finished surface--elements that stand out in this age of mass-
produced and often poorly crafted objects. The technical novelty may result
from a different scale than usual--miniature or grand--so that it generates awe
and admiration (1993, p. 215).

   In connection, I would argue a notion of digital composition pedagogy
expertise is intended to help students and scholars avoid producing more
ho-hum "mass produced and often poorly crafted objects." (Even though,
sometimes, as in the case of Prezi versus PowerPoint, audiences can be so
negatively overwhelmed by the paradigm of one form, they react positively to
something in a novel form no matter how well the new is done.) Also, Foss's
ideas are tied to the technical and thus recall style as technical prowess; however,
novelty is the ultimate goal in style as difference and even though that may be
achieved through technical ends, style as difference is more outwardly focused
on attracting audience and differentiating itself from what's out there now on
the whole. Style as technical prowess is more focused on attracting audience by
promoting self-ability and achieving novelty through technical ends. What
unites them, however, is the importance of digital production capabilities in
fully achieving either.

Style as subservience

   In contrast to ideas of style that center on individual expression, this notion
posits style as a result of boundaries erected and enforced by groups with rigid
attention to context. This notion also supposes that composing pleasure (and

                                                                                                219
Folk

stylistic impact) is rooted in the familiar, not the novel, and often attempts to
enforce the familiar with stylistic "technological barricades" such as character
limits, image-size limits, and text boxes. This is to be found, for example, in the
case of most content management systems, which usually limit the number of
stylistic "interruptions" available to the author-designer severely (perhaps the
most widespread example would be course management software like WebCT
and Blackboard). Style as subservience is thus related to notions of compositional
efficiency by limiting or eliminating traces of the individual (see Katz) and
intractable notions of genre (see Bawarshi; Kress & Van Leeuwen, 2001, p.
55-56). However, within this stylistic mode, opportunities for style as difference
still present themselves, but the composer can risk much by not keeping to
convention. There may be rigidly enforced conventions associated with the
existing practices that can cause trouble when broken. The other downfall
is that style as subservience can be implied when it is not meant to be, and
subservience can be read as the opposite of style as difference when implicated
in a good way.

MULTIMODAL STYLE CASES IN POINT:
MEDIAWIKI AND LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD

   To illustrate the ways these multimodal style iterations overlap, compete
with, and co-extend each other with regard to rhetorical benefits and drawbacks,
I will look at examples related to digital composition. One example is related to
a platform for building a digital text, and the other centers on the retelling of a
traditional tale in digital form.

   To begin, a digital text produced in MediaWiki provides a brief example
of how the benefits and drawbacks of these three approaches are mediated by
production aptitude. Students or teachers without the means to approach style
as technical prowess would, most likely, have an external person set up the wiki.
No matter what the text is being built, then, the text will have the same default
design to start. If the students or teachers hope to enact style as difference with
their digital text, they would not be able to do so without a more developed
knowledge of digital production. That is, they would need to be able to access
the backend of the database hosting the wiki to effect any rhetorical changes.
Those who do not access the background (or lean on the expertise of the system
administrator or some such person to do it for them), would--regardless of
whatever the written style of the wiki text--end up calling forth the multimodal
style of Wikipedia, which exists using the same open-source MediaWiki software
default with only a few minor tweaks. Thus, some technical production expertise

220
                                                                                            Multimodal Style

is needed to manipulate the backend to move beyond the default settings
that give Wikipedia its main look and stylize the author's content instead of
re-perpetuating the defaults. If not, the wiki will have the default picture of
a sunflower in the upper left, be unable to upload certain file attachments,
and use the defaults for color and font as well. Thus, the text on such a wiki
would fall under the heading of style as subservience whether that was what the
author intended or not, with the audience reacting to a similar way as well.
While some audience members might view the hypothetical MediaWiki text
as trustworthy because it resembled such a known commodity as Wikipedia,
still more people would react negatively to it, particularly in academia, where
its ethos is colored less by its enormously helpful use as a heuristic device
and more by negative concerns about reliability and mutability. In short, the
entire process of building and maintaining the wiki--regardless of whatever
the actual content is--is mediated by digital production expertise, which in
turn translates to a style, which ultimately determines if the text is perceived
as subservient, transcendent, successful, or rhetorically inappropriate. Such a
range of possibilities points to the importance of understanding multimodal
style on a deep level in digital pedagogy.

   The next example centers on the popular fairy tale Little Red Riding Hood,
which is found in variants all over the world, with the variant that took root in
the United States popularized by the Grimm Brothers. I have selected a tale with
multiple variants in order to better interrogate the connection between stylistic
variant and stylistic value: Holcomb and Killingsworth, in adapting Leech and
Short, posit that "Stylistic variant refers to alternate expressions for roughly
the same thing, while stylistic value refers to the consequences (what is gained
and lost) by choosing one alternate over another" (2010, p. 2). What I argue
based on looking at variants of Little Red Riding Hood is that stylistic value in
contemporary digital composition terms is largely a consequence of multimodal
style, especially the text's perceived novelty as accomplished through technical
prowess. In other words, the more work that seemingly went into a text, and
the more it transcends the digital composition capabilities of the average person
and those of other texts they have seen, the more likely the stylistic value will
resonate strongly. After all, a well-worn tale such as Little Red Riding Hood
would seem to hold no further surprises. However, on March 7, 2009, Tomas
Nilsson uploaded a re-interpretation of the classic tale as part of a university
assignment. Within a month, the Swedish graphic design/communication
student's video had attracted more than 500,000 views and almost all of the
comments run along the lines of the following: "Oh my God!"; "How long did
that take to make?"; "I hope you got an A for this!"; and some combination of
"awesome" modified by swear words.

                                                                                                 221
Folk

   Given that the story (the content) is so well-known as to be almost blasé at
this point, what has attracted people to Nilsson's video is the stylistic value of
its re-telling, especially when a look at the video reveals that pieces added to the
original story are more in line with elements of style I have spoken of in the
preceding section on iterations of multimodal style rather than extending the
story's content in any meaningful way. Ultimately, these additional elements
reshape the meaning of the text itself because of the stylistic values attached to
them by the audience.

   The approach established in the beginning of Nilsson's video is the
dominant one taken throughout: (1) The viewer's focus is constantly moved
along different planes (i.e., right to left, top to bottom, from the edges to the
middle, middle to the edges, etc.) (2) The focus switches constantly between
large-scale and small-scale views of similar places, and (3) Diagrams, particular
many employed as a type of visual footnoting, are employed throughout. The
video begins with a "book" coming out of a bookshelf and ends with that book
closing and returning to the bookshelf (Figure 1).

   Multimodal style offers an interesting lens to view this piece as an instructor.
For one, this video illustrates problems that occur when instructors purposefully
or unknowingly privilege text within a multimodal work. Though primarily
reliant upon visual storytelling, there is still plenty of text involved, and much of
it is illegible given the piece's spatial elements and its delivery through YouTube.
In other words, if the instructor is assessing how such a text works by looking
at the text, this piece would suffer, even though the visual elements provide the

Figure 1: Beginning of cut-out view of Little Red Riding Hood and Mother.

222
                                                                                           Multimodal Style

containers for text in the form of a diagram and are more readily recognizable
as such.

   In addition, if classical stylistic approaches were the only means of
interrogating style here, some things could be illumined sharply while other
important stylistic elements reside in the shadows. For example, some classical
rhetorical constructs are directly applicable to this piece. The constant switching
between parts and wholes, for examples, recalls synechdoche, metonymy, and
metalepsis. The part where close-up squares of two eyes, shoes, and a canine-
looking nose are on the screen, the part in the story where the main characters
first meet, is an example of synechdoche (Figure 2). However, there is a
temporal complexity in this example that the synechdoche is situated within
but cannot adequately address: this scene carries more meaning and suspense by
not having all four elements emerge simultaneously--Red Riding Hood's feet
are shown first walking, then stopping, leading to her widened eye, then the
Wolf 's widened eye, and then finally the twitching nose.

   The video engages in visual exergasia (repeating the same idea changing
words/delivery) in the constant use of diagrams. Also, there is visual antanaclasis
(the repetition of a word in two different senses, usually for comic effect): Red
Riding Hoods meets the Wolf, who questions her about where she is going, and
a comic talking bubble appears above Red Hiding Hood that contains an image
of her Grandmother; almost immediately, comic thought bubbles emanate
from the Wolf to Red Riding Hood's bubble containing Grandmother, and a
complete listing of nutrition facts appears right next to the old woman. In other

Figure 2: Synechdoche with Little Red Riding Hood and the Wolf.

                                                                                                223
Folk

words, Grandma is conceived of as a sickly old relative by Red Riding Hood
and as food by the Wolf. Taken together, these few examples show how classical
stylistic strategies are adaptable to digital texts and can offer some significant
rhetorical nuances that can aid with analysis and production; however, the
examples also show there is a lot more going on in this text than the classical
tropes can make sense of.

   For one, the elements of multimodal style that I identified and developed
previously in this chapter, style as technical prowess, style as difference, and style
as subservience, all play a large role in the understanding of the video. As viewer
comments attest, most people are wowed by the technical prowess involved
with making the video and routinely inquire how long it took to make. With
that in mind, there are elements of the video that, on the surface, seem to
support the viewpoint that the whole reason behind creating the text was to
represent style as technical prowess. A look at some of the elements introduced
to the story by Nilsson would seem to bear this out. The Volkswagen bus, for
example, was certainly not in the original story but it receives a rather long view
(especially in the context of how the piece was edited) of 10 seconds. That view
is mostly devoted to showing the aerodynamics of the VW (Figure 3), then a
cutaway view from the side to expose its innards (Figure 4). These views do
not contribute significantly to what would classically be deemed the content
of the story, but these views contribute mightily to the style as technical prowess
of the piece, which in turn affects the overall content of the piece as perceived
by readers. (Again, this is borne out by almost 7,000 comments in the piece.)

   The video also makes use of style as difference. A brief look at existing Red
Riding Hood tales also available on YouTube shows that Nilsson's version
definitely stands out in the context of other Red Riding Hood-related videos,
and not even in the sense of the whole video, but within the listing hierarchy of
its chosen delivery system. For instance, if one were searching for a Red Riding
Hood video, the list of videos comes up, each with a still frame, and almost
all show a girl wearing red or a wolf. Nilsson's still picture shows the cutaway
side view of the VW. The method, using Flash and After Effects to create the
animation, is also a novel way of doing the reinterpretation because of Little Red
Riding Hood's status as primarily an oral or written story with few illustrations,
usually quite representational. In a sense, removing the narration to focus on
using only images to carry the story, thus using images to be the "voice" instead
of to supplement the voice, is novel in itself.

   Despite the novel aspects of the video, it also is bound by style as subservience.
For one, as alluded to earlier with relation to the text being illegible even when
viewed in full-screen mode, the video suffers quality loss in being distributed by
YouTube. Ultimately, the style of the video becomes subservient to the rendering

224
                                                                                           Multimodal Style

algorithms that support YouTube's ability to upload and stream content. So,
despite what many people would read as an adept technician crafting the
story, a technician who seemingly has the ability to create almost anything,
that technician's content is ultimately mediated by YouTube in what amount
to stylistic constraints on the viewer's end. If all of Nilsson's text were legible,
as it might be in other formats and venues, that would change the viewing
experience of the consumer and alter the conception of the meaning as a whole.

Figure 3: View of VW bus showing aerodynamics.

Figure 4: Cut-away view of VW bus.
                                                                                                225
Folk

In other words, the viewer would probably spend more time reading and making
connections between the words and images, rather than concentrating on just
the images. Thus, style as subservience was enacted on Nilsson's video because it
was forced to confine to the realities of YouTube's system.

   Though those previous distinctions help shed further light on the video's
style, there are still elements missing, particularly as to how style is embedded
in social constructs and how that adds to the video's content. The VW, for
example, might be picked up on as a repetitive design element by a multimodal
composition instructor (e.g., it is red because it complements the protagonist),
but neither that nor its existence as style as technical prowess would tell the
whole story of its inclusion. The VW bus is a particular type of transport, with
a particular style that itself agent-lessly seeks a group, and which in turn is
taken up by groups seeking a particular style. Thus, one could make the case
its inclusion/symbolification will be read differently by not only the author but
different cultures. In the United States, for example, the idea of the VW bus can
be associated with the cluster of signs Brummett called hippie style (2008, p. 4),
and it is a vehicle that is associated with a lifestyle of embracing the outdoors and
being a free spirit. As such, it is not associated with the rigid complacency of the
suburbs (where Red Hiding Hood lives in the video) but with being away from
civilization and out in the woods. In the video, then, the style related to the VW
is a marker of the rural and serves to underscore Red Riding Hood's distance
from the safe and comfortable stomping grounds of her house in the suburbs.

   Another social style that is included, and which "updates" the tale, is the
use of video game information style. Although related in some sense to the
constant use of the diagrams, the video game elements differ from the diagrams
and more closely resemble game play elements. For example, after the Wolf
and Red Riding Hood meet, a graph reading "Live Stats" appears, allowing
us to track how they have split up but the Wolf circles back to Grandma's
house. Another example appears later when Grandma and Red Riding Hood
are rescued from the Wolf 's belly. They are shown together, each with her own
"Status" represented by a number of stars and bar graph elements depicting
differing levels of "Health" and "Happiness." Though people of all ages play
video games, their inclusion in what is in essence a children's fairy tale shows a
novel way of skewing the style for a modern audience of children. In addition,
video games are often associated with play and not being serious (despite the
many games that revolve around killing people), and the game play moments
in the video are humorous in light of their novel inclusion in the narrative of
an old story.

   Other social aspects that come into play in constraining and extending
audience resonance with the video's style are related to pre-existing "templates"

226
                                                                                           Multimodal Style

that are yoked, in a sense, to style as subservience. For one, the video is, in essence,
a remix of a video by the Swedish band Slagsmålsklubben, which in turn seems
to have been inspired by a ubiquitous series of Flash animation ads for the
Scandinavian company Nokia by Australian animator Steve Scott. Both rely
on the interplay of close-up and long shot and diagrammatic info and patterns.
There is a direct relation in the comments to Nilsson's video as to its positive
"wow" effect whether or not people are familiar with the Slagsmålsklubben
video beforehand or not.

   In the end, the differing conceptions of multimodal digital style in Nilsson's
video contribute greatly to the meaning of the piece and make it quite difficult
to ascertain previous stylistic areas of debate, such as where form and content
begin and end. It may be more accurate in this case to ascertain the content as
the story that pre-existed the author and the form as everything he did to it,
which in turn both became and reshaped the entire content.

   To further situate how iterations of multimodal style resonate in Nilsson's
approach, it is illustrative to examine another digital variant of Little Red Riding
Hood (Figures 5 and 6). As part of the practical element for a Masters in Design,
Donna Leishman created "RedRidingHood" in 1999-2000, published it on her
website in 2001, and her variant was more widely publicized in 2006, when it
was included in the first volume of the Electronic Literature Collection. Leishman's
variant of Little Red Riding Hood is radically different from the popularized
Grimm variant, making Nilsson's variant seem almost a one-to-one retelling

Figure 5: Leishman's Red getting the basket from her mother.

                                                                                                227
Folk

despite his introduction of modern items to the storyline. Both are virtually
wordless and rely on visuals and music to engage and carry meaning; Leishman's
"RedRidingHood" also hinges on clickable interactivity to uncover additional
elements of the narrative. The narrative here involves a complex storyline with
hidden content (a diary), a (possible) dream sequence, a pregnant Red Riding
Hood, and a Wolf-boy with a gun. As Leishman said, "RedRidingHood is a
non-textual animated exploration into engaging the viewer in a recognizable
narrative experience, combining the utterly and moderately linear alongside
random non-authored sequences (the dream section)" ("Interview"). Leishman
also mentioned how important style situated within digital technology was in
affecting the invention and planning of "RedRidingHood," which was created
using Flash: "A goal of this project was to be interesting to both male and
female readers. A highly stylised comic imagery helped serve this and bypass the
technical limitations of dial up speed Internet connection typical circa the late
1990's" ("Dissonance"). In other words, just as Nilsson's video is subject to style
as subservience because of YouTube's realities, Leishman's was subject to style as
subservience based on the realities of file speeds and how they had formulated
audience expectations in 1999/2000; however, whereas the primary repercussion

Figure 6: The screen that allows readers to enter the dream sequence (or not)

228
                                                                                           Multimodal Style

to Nilsson's video may have been losing rendering quality, Leishman had to
make a conscious decision to render the entire story in a more simple style than
she perhaps otherwise would have chosen.

   Similar to the reception given Nilsson's work, Leishman's variant met
with strong positive reactions upon its initial publication. For example,
the introduction to the piece on the Electronic Literature Collection states,
"Leishman's playful retelling of the Little Red Riding Hood fairy tale makes
use of comic book vernacular, limited forms of explorative interaction, optional
narrative paths, and a jazzy soundtrack. RedRidinghood is the type of Flash piece
that suggests the potential for complex forms of interactive storytelling without
typographic text." Just as the enthusiastic reception for Nilsson's variant was
primarily tied to the stylistic value attributed to its technological prowess, early
reaction to Leishman's piece was primarily based on the pathos that its novelty
and technological prowess aroused. In a review that accompanied an early author
interview, Kendall Pata said, "The animation of these drawings is superb" and
"flawless"; moreover, Pata noted, Leishman's tale "may be an adaptation, but it
is so original and relevant that the older story easily becomes yesterday's news."
In fact, a term seen often in early pieces that reference Leishman and her work
is "Flash Goddess."

   However, it is important to remember that Leishman's was made public in
2001 and Nilsson's video was made public in 2009, and despite a difference
of only eight years, the stylistic difference in the way technology is related
to understanding and appreciating each digital text is about as pronounced
as the stylistic difference between Faulkner and Hemingway. Indeed, those
who experience "RedRidingHood" in 2011 rather than 2001 seem to have a
much more negative take on it in comparison to early opinions. For one, the
entire genre of the clickable Flash narrative is one that seems to be unknown
to many users, or at least transcend their currently operating patience levels.
The animation itself may have been revelatory in 1999 when it was being built,
but advances in speed and attendant image-rendering capabilities have affected
what audiences expect. For example, Claudia Cragg, who maintains a blog
called "The Writer's Game," talks about the results of testing Leishman's work
on her own family:

         [T]he three novice DF [Digital Fiction] readers who test-
         drove RRH [RedRidingHood] did not appreciate all the fac-
         ets of Leishman's production quite simply because they failed
         to open the right doors. This may not make them idiots.
         Instead it means that they came at the project with different
         levels of gaming and computing exposure, which led them to

                                                                                                229
Folk

         make choices that even Leishman may not have anticipated.
         Only the very youngest, 12, was willing to keep having an-
         other attempt to see what had been missed and only she fully
         appreciated the "Secret Diary" with its Satanic aspirations
         and the protagonist's dream sequence for another hidden life
         as a player in the meat market. (2007)

   As Cragg notes, contemporary context is important in considering how
people will respond to the text, but what is implied to the test subjects here is
that there is more to the text, which influences their expectations. On a personal
note, I only realized the various facets to this text after becoming frustrated
that nothing worked, born out of frustration with the dream sequence. In an
unanticipated bit of style as subservience that I interpreted as style as technical
prowess (or lack thereof ), I assumed the text was broken because nothing
ever came up when I clicked on "shall Red dream?". Only when I tried it
on a different computer whose pop-up blocker actually prompted me about
continuing was I able to explore the dream. After reading the intro to the piece
on the Electronic Literature Collection, I knew I was missing vast swaths of
content but felt I had clicked everywhere I could; I ended up having to research
how other people found the content. Thus, while Nilsson's video was able to
take advantage of much improved streaming capacity and wide distribution
available through YouTube and the faster connection speeds that support them,
Leishman's work is still stuck in the parameters of the file size that shaped it in
1999/2000 and is further impacted by advances browsers have made to deal
with the ubiquity of Flash pop-ups that characterized a previous generation
of webtexts and advertising. Thus, through no fault of her own at the time,
Leishman's work suffers in contemporary reception because of the ways current
technological realities shape the style as subservience of her text.

   The other problem lies with style as technical prowess related to visuals. For
one, the parts of the narratives that might most suggest style as technical prowess
are often hidden away in the clickable narrative (i.e., the dream sequence, the
diary, and the title sequence). The title sequence where Red's name grows in
dagger-like images, for example, is impressive, and all of the little flourishes
of the flowers are not uncovered unless a reader explores. A misreading of
Nilsson's video might mean the viewer skews the analysis even more toward
technical prowess; a misreading of Leishman's clickable narrative means the style
as technical prowess objects are hidden instead of open as with Nilsson, thus
affecting the value of the text. Thus, a viewer who couldn't find/open those
aspects would probably not even develop any sense of style as technical prowess
when looking at it through a contemporary lens. The one aspect of the main

230
                                                                                           Multimodal Style

narrative that does stand out is the ultimate bedroom scene (Figure 7), although
that might be more aptly described as style as difference because the scene evokes
mystery and a rupture to the predominant narrative of Little Red Riding Hood:
the viewer sees Red in bed, cradling her stomach (which, when clicked, reveals
a spinning baby that resembles the Wolf-boy), and the Wolf-boy emerges from
behind a wall with a gun. He strokes Red's hair, then she looks directly at the
audience, and the piece is over.

    With the exception of the bedroom scene, the other piece that jumps out in
the main narrative in a style-as-technical-prowess sense is the city scene (Figure
8). The window that is lit up needs to be clicked on to continue the story,
but just about every window in every building lights up when scrolled over.
It creates a fascinating diversion once one finds out there are clickable places
hidden in parts of the text, and detracts from the style as technical prowess once
one realizes no content is hidden behind any of these other windows. While the
amount of detail in the buildings themselves may not be enough to create "wow"
factor on behalf of the audience, they nonetheless stand out compared to the
other buildings and some of the animation that feels clunky by contemporary
standards (i.e., Red moving around on her knees among the flowers). While

Figure 7: "RedRidingHood" Bedroom Scene

                                                                                                231
Folk

Nilsson's video did not exactly have stellar character animation (that effort
seems to have gone into the VW), as witnessed by the way his Red Riding Hood
moves from the house, the facial features in close ups are well done. Looking
at "RedRidingHood" today involves seeing it not as it was meant to be seen
in 2001 but, constructed as we are by multimodal style and social contexts,
seeing it through the lens of 2011 digital texts. As part of Cragg's experiment
to have people navigate through Leishman's work, one of her reviewers called
it "pretentious," but the main complaint was that "the graphics aren't up to it;
this generation is used to video game graphics that are absolutely terrific, so if
you're gonna have a sort of computer animated story, really it has to be pretty
high quality to keep people's interest" (Cragg, 2007). Cragg's experiment dated
from 2008, and it must be added that while Leishman's "RedRidingHood" is
fixed in time, the graphics and animation (among other elements) that color
our perception of digital texts are constantly evolving toward complexity, not
simplicity. As such, it's hard to imagine, given the constraints of bandwidth in
1999, how forward thinking Leishman's text was at the time, but it's difficult,
if not impossible, to read through that lens today (with the possible exception
of a novel kind of style as difference in adding plenty of subversive and feminist
wrinkles to a well-established tale).

    The iterations of style I have mentioned earlier in this chapter and have
applied to the two Little Red Riding Hood variants all relate to each other in
complex ways in the contemporary moment, and will relate to each other in
even more complex ways that may be difficult, if not completely impossible, for
a composer to conceive in the future given the inter-related effects of technology
and society on texts. While a composer cannot prepare for every eventuality

Figure 8: Cityscape in "Red RidingHood"

232
                                                                                           Multimodal Style

relative to the reception of a text in the future, the fact remains that having a
hope for a successful text in the future means creating a successful text today,
and that involves an intense understanding of the multimodal style of the kinds
of texts one wants to make on an analytical and production level, realities that
need to be considered on a deep pedagogical level by composition instructors.

CONCLUSION

   Taken, together, the iterations of multimodal style point out the importance
of digital style as more than a means of personal expression, more than a means
of emotion, more than a cultural construct, more than a matter of taste, and
more than an individual choice. Digital style is embedded in material constructs,
economic constructs, historical events, and technological production. In short,
style is a complex adaptive system (Holland). On the wider scale of style as
a complex adaptive system, the powerful use of style in the Nilsson video is
now "out in the world," and it can emerge within a multitude of texts by a
multitude of authors (even though it may have been based on two different pre-
existing texts). Its style is not a stable form, then, but will lead to a co-evolution
of differing styles, which ultimately will re-shape the idea of style within the
original video. The video itself might be "fixed" in its place on YouTube, but
the elements of its style are not fixed because they transcend containers and
taxonomies. There could very well be a "redundant flow" from this video, but
it will probably occur in an intriguing web of non-linear objects related to the
original video.

   On the whole, these iterations of multimodal style point to the necessity of
instructor expertise in digital production and analysis when fruitfully engaging
issues of digital composition. For example, what others with more knowledge
in the audience might see as "mistakes" that detract from rhetorical effectiveness
could be falsely construed by the instructor as personal idiosyncrasies beyond
the realm of instructor mediation. There is also the issue of an instructor seizing
on something as brilliantly conceived by the student that is actually a well-
worn default or template without much stylistic cachet. Thinking of how this
example would apply in traditional terms, it is doubtful that stylistic aspects in a
traditional "text-only" writing teacher's wheelhouse would have been dismissed
as personal idiosyncrasy--i.e., penurious or superfluous use of commas was
not seen as a stylistic peccadillo so much as a rhetorical deficiency. This is not
to argue that digital pedagogical expertise means adhering to prescriptivism
when it comes to style, only that instructor understanding of a wide swath
of composing elements is needed when it comes to composing and teaching

                                                                                               233
Folk

sophisticated texts with digital underbellies. This, unfortunately, is not easy to
develop in an area that covers a broad range of meaning-making elements and
evolves daily.1

   However, unless instructors can freely engage with digital style on a deep
production level, I fear the most common pedagogical approach (because it
is easiest to replicate in the current departmental system of most colleges)
surrounding digital texts will ignore the need for digital production expertise
whatsoever, ultimately meaning composers will be unable to produce what they
set out to produce, relying instead on written documents to explain exactly
what the composers were trying to accomplish rhetorically. This becomes a
detrimental method of communication, cutting the composer off from not only
the realities of digital texts but the complex realities and affordances of style:
"[O]ne cannot wear or do whatever one likes and declare to the world that
the garment or action mean what the individual says they mean" (Brummett,
2008, p. 34). In other words, when relying on a separate text to make the case
for the digital text, the latter is severed from reality and given birth by a textual
document that never accompanies it in its actual existence, and the nature of the
digital text is thus conceived of as vastly different from the composer and actual
audience perspective alike. This is dangerous if composition instructors intend
to help students become truly active participants who can handle the complex
realities of their social, civic, and economic lives. Understanding multimodal
style is paramount in the move toward digital composing complexity because
it provides the connection to a sophisticated production that resonates with
contemporary, and perhaps future, audiences.

NOTES

1. One way for instructors to approach the complexity of digital texts might actually
occur during that most inevitable step of teaching: assessing student work. As Star
Medzerian Vanguri argues in this collection, "grading style is teaching style." Multimod-
al style is at once global and local, and it recruits so many different semiotic systems (all
of which are both static and constantly in flux) that assessing digital work provides on-
going challenges for novice and experienced instructors alike. Vanguri's chapter "What
Scoring Rubrics Teach Students (and Teachers) about Style" offers a way for instructors
to start wrapping their heads around the dizzying complexities of multimodal style by
thinking more deeply about how style is constructed on rubrics, which can be used
to approach the complex aspects of multimodal style in a way that is feasible yet not
reductive. The synechdochal aspects of multimodal style provide particular challenges
in assessment (e.g., "extracting" words, sound, and/or images from the whole and grad-
ing them separately); accordingly, Russell Greer's "Architectonics and Style" chapter in

234
                                                                                           Multimodal Style

this collection could be very helpful in constructing rubrics because he channels ideas
from Bakhtin and others to interrogate the intricate relations of parts to wholes in style.

REFERENCES

Bang, M. (2000). Picture this: How pictures work. New York: Basic Books.
Bawarshi, A. (2000). The genre function. College English 62(3), 327-52.
Beardsley, M. (1969). Style and good style. In G. A. Love & M. Payne (Eds.),

   Contemporary essays on style (pp. 3-14). Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman &
   Company.
Brooke, C. (2002). Perspective: Notes toward the remediation of style. Encul-
   turation: Special Multi-journal Issue on Electronic Publication 4(1). Retrieved
   from http://enculturation.gmu.edu/4_1/style/
Brummett, B. (2008). A rhetoric of style. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois Uni-
   versity Press.
Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (Eds.) (2000). Multiliteracies: Literacy learning and
   the design of social futures. London: Routledge.
Cragg, C. (2007, December 10). One writer's view of "Leishman's RedRiding-
   Hood." [YouTube Video, The Writer's Game]. Retrieved from http://www.
   youtube.com/watch?v=ZJ761yb2jCQ
Elsner, J. (1996). Style. In R. S. Nelson & R. Shiff (Eds.), Critical terms in art
   history (pp. 98-109). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ewen, S. (1988). All consuming images: The politics of style in contemporary cul-
   ture. New York: Basic Books.
Faigley, L. (1998). Visual rhetoric: Literacy by design. In L. Bridwell-Bowles, &
   B. Peterson (Eds.), Proceedings of Center for Interdisciplinary Studies of Writ-
   ing, Speaker Series No. 9, 1998, University of Minnesota. Retrieved from
   http://writing.umn.edu/lrs/assets/pdf/speakerpubs/Faigley.pdf
Foss, S. K. (1993). The construction of appeal in visual images: A hypothesis. In
   D. Zarefsky (Ed.), Rhetorical movement: Essays in honor of Leland Griffin (pp.
   210-224). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Genova, J. (1979). The significance of style. The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
   Criticism 37(3), 315-324.
George, D. (2002). From analysis to design: Visual communication in the
   teaching of writing. College Composition and Communication 54(1), 11-39.
Holcomb, C. & Killingsworth, M. J. (2010). Performing prose: The study and
   practice of style in composition. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University
   Press.
Holland, J. (1995). Hidden order: How adaptation builds complexity. Reading,
   MA: Helix Books.

                                                                                                235
Folk

Katz, S (1992). The ethic of expediency: Classical rhetoric, technology, and the
   Holocaust. College English 54(2), 255-275.

Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media age. London: Routledge.
Kress, G., & Carey Jewitt, C. (Eds.) (2003). Multimodal literacy. New York:

   Peter Lang.
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (2001). Multimodal discourse. New York: Oxford

   University Press.
Lanham, R. A. (2006). The Economics of Attention: Style and substance in the age

   of information. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2003). New literacies: Changing knowledge and

   classroom learning. Philadelphia: Open University Press
Leishman, D. (2009). Dissonance in multi-semiotic landscapes in the work

   of Donna Leishman. HYPERRHIZ.06: Special Issue: Visionary Land-
   scapes. Retrieved from http://www.hyperrhiz.net/hyperrhiz06/24-artist-
   statements/77-dissonance-in-multi-semiotic-landscapes
Leishman, D. (2011, February 13). RedRidinghood. Retrieved fromhttp://
   www.6amhoover.com/redriding/red.htm.
Leishman, D. (n.d.). Interview by Grace Sterns. Histories of Internet art: Fic-
   tions and factions-net practice 3.0. University of Colorado, Department of
   Art and Art History. Retrieved from http://art.colorado.edu/hiaff/interview.
   php?id=83&cid=3
Milic, L. T. (1969). Theories of style and their implications for the teaching of
   composition. In G. A. Love, & M. Payne (Eds.), Contemporary essays on style:
   Rhetoric, linguistics, and criticism (pp. 15-21). Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman
   and Company.
Nilsson, Tomas. (n.d.). Slagsmålsklubben--Sponsored by Destiny. YouTube.
   Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y54ABqSOScQ
Pata, K. (n.d.). Fern Hill. Histories of Internet art: Fictions and factions-net prac-
   tice 3.0. Retrieved from http://art.colorado.edu/hiaff/sound/kendall_fern_
   hill.mp3
Porter, J. (2002). Why technology matters to writing: A cyberwriter's tale.
Computers and Composition 20, 375­-394.
Postrel, V. (2003). The substance of style: How the rise of aesthetic value is remaking
   commerce, culture, and consciousness. New York: HarperCollins.
Schilb, J. (2007). Rhetorical refusals: Defying readers' expectations. Carbondale,
   IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Selber, S. (2004). Multiliteracies for a digital age. Carbondale, IL: Southern Il-
   linois University.
Selfe, C. L. (1999). Technology and literacy in the 21st Century: The importance of
   paying attention. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

236
                                                                                           Multimodal Style

Selfe, C. L., & Hawisher, G. (2004). Literate lives in the information age: Nar-
   ratives of literacy from the united states. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum As-
   sociates.

Takayoshi, P., & Selfe, C. (2007). Thinking about multimodality. In C. Selfe
   (Ed.), Multimodal composition: Resources for teachers (pp. 1-12). Cresskill, NJ:
   Hampton Press.

The WIDE Research Collective. (2005). Why teach digital writing? Kairos: A
   Journal of Rhetoric, Technology, and Pedagogy 10(1). Retrieved from http://
   www.technorhetoric.net/10.1/binder2.html?coverweb/wide/index.html

Wonder Tonic. (2011, February 2). The Geocities-izer. Retrieved from http://
   wonder-tonic.com/geocitiesizer/

Woodman, L. (1982). Teaching style: A process-centered view. Journal of Ad-
   vanced Composition 3(1/2), 116-125.

Wysocki, A. F. (2004). Opening new media to writing: Openings and justifica-
   tions. In A. F. Wysocki, J. Johndon Johnson-Eilola, C. L. Selfe, & G. Sirc
   (Eds.), Writing new media: Theory and applications for expanding the teaching
   of composition (pp. 1-42). Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.

Wysocki, A. F. (2001). Impossibly distinct: On form/content and word/im-
   age in two pieces of computer-based interactive multimedia. Computers and
   Composition 18, 137-162.

Yancey, K. B. (2004). Made not only in words: Composition in a new key. Col-
   lege Composition and Communication 56(2), 297-328.

Wölfflin, H. (1915). Kunstgeschichliche grundbegriffe: Das problem der stilent-
   wicklung in der neueren kunst (M. D. Hottinger, Trans., 1932). London: G.
   Bell and Sons, Ltd.

                                                                                                237
    VOICE, TRANSFORMED: THE

    POTENTIALITIES OF STYLE

    PEDAGOGY IN THE TEACHING

    OF CREATIVE NONFICTION

      Crystal Fodrey
      University of Arizona

   At the end of her "Voice as Echo of Delivery, Ethos as Transforming
Process," Theresa Enos asks a question that I, too, have sought to answer in
every composition pedagogy I've developed, modified, or discarded over these
first seven years of my teaching career: "Can we show [students] that their
essays, even "academic" essays, can be ... affirmations that rest on demonstrated
openness and comprehensiveness--all this expressed by a transformed voice that
seeks identification without sacrificing conviction?" (1994, p. 194). We most
often encounter such a voice in writing that situates the self, the sort of writing
published in The Best American Essays with a lineage that goes back to Montaigne,
essays that are usually only assigned in a handful of "creative" English courses
that privilege the personal. But we encounter this voice, too, in the writings of
scholars like Jim Corder, Wendy Bishop, bell hooks, Victor Villanueva, Gloria
Anzaldúa and others who incorporate strong but fallibly human selves who
strive toward greater understanding of whatever issues they choose to explore.
After using a style-based pedagogy in an advanced composition course focused
on creative nonfiction,1 I think I might finally be able to answer Enos's question
(at least tentatively) with a yes. I've found that a style-based pedagogy has the
potential to show students ways to transform their voices into the type of open,
comprehensive ones Enos describes; such voices in the context of rhetorically-
conscious essays have the potential to affect wide-reaching audiences.

   However, a problem arises from the insufficient style resources available
for those who teach creative nonfiction themed classes. When I first started
conceptualizing the creative nonfiction themed advanced composition course
I will later describe, I found plenty of instructive craft essays in textbooks and
other craft publications like The Writer's Chronicle that touched on style in a
broad sense, but, as to be expected, I had a difficult time finding texts positioned
from a creative writing standpoint that would aid students in understanding
sentence-level style from a rhetorical standpoint.2 These discipline-based
perspectives, though, are not as disparate as they might seem because in the end

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.15  239
Fodrey

those who offer instruction all want the same result: good writing that fits the
given genre. It's just that most style-related creative nonfiction craft essays that
instructors, and thus, students, likely come across provide unproblematized
impressionistic criteria to judge and explain style but do not give writers the
tools to learn how to make stylistic decisions, an essential skill to producing
good creative nonfiction.

   From my both/and position as a degree holding, aspiring creative nonfiction
writer and a degree seeking, aspiring composition scholar, I find myself
serendipitously situated to speak to the need for greater stylistic guidance in
nonfiction prose courses. I see the relative silence and ambiguities regarding
style in anthologized creative nonfiction craft essays as an opportunity, as
potentially useful uncharted territory for both teachers and students; therefore,
I'd like to explore how anthologized creative writing craft essayists--who so
readily share their writing experiences and thoughtful suggestions with those
who might follow their lead--attend to or avoid the more technical, sentence-
level aspects of writing, or what Chris Holcomb and M. Jimmie Killingsworth
refer to in their chapter as the textual arena. Based on Tim Mayers's discussion
of core assumptions about creative writing that permeate the discipline, he
would likely point to the idea that "[s]tudents, assuming they're motivated
enough, can learn to master craft, but they either have or do not have the
other essentials of a `serious writer,' and nothing a teacher of creative writing
does can change this" (2005, p. 13). This assumption, if indeed widely held by
those who identify with the dominant ideologies of creative writing over those
of composition, might explain why instructional value of the textual arena
is diminished. It is at the word and sentence level where writers distinguish
themselves; this is where unique voices emerge. But this micro level of writing
is also viewed as expression, as genius, as the man himself. Mayers refers to
this idea of genius--that writers either have it or they don't--as part of the
problematic "institutional-conventional wisdom of creative writing" (2005, p.
13). Style works to demystify "genius" by upholding the idea that all writers
make rhetorical choices, whether conscious or internalized, that have certain
effects on their audiences.

   Undergraduates studying essayistic composing--especially typical non-
geniuses at the beginner or intermediate level--can benefit from stylistic
instruction just as other composition students can.3 Regardless of whether a
creative nonfiction course is housed in composition or creative writing,39 style
study in such courses has the potential to demystify what makes flash essays, travel
memoirs, literary journalism, nature writing, and so on, different from the more
traditional forms of academic writing to which they are accustomed. Yes, style is
only one aspect of creative nonfiction, only one fifth of the rhetorical canon to

240
                                                                                         Voice, Transformed

emphasize in a class that can cover so much else. But teaching the importance of
style analysis and production helps students new to the form understand what it
means when they are asked to write in an open, identification-seeking, literary
way. Vivian Gornick explains to writers in The Situation and the Story: The Art
of Personal Narrative that "[e]very work [of literature] has both a situation and
a story. The situation is the context or circumstance, sometimes the plot; the
story is the emotional experience that preoccupies the writer: the insight, the
wisdom, the thing one has come to say" (2001, p. 13). I tell my students that
the "stories" in creative nonfiction pieces emerge in part from the style of the
writing that begins at the sentence level and moves outward.

   Chris Anderson also makes an important connection between style and
creative nonfiction in Style as Argument in which he analyzes works by Tom
Wolfe, Truman Capote, Norman Mailer, and Joan Didion to defend his claim
that "[o]ur experience reading contemporary nonfiction is an experience of
style," style for him meaning the rhythms and textures of language use (1987,
p. 1). If reading nonfiction prose is "an experience of style," then we can assume
1) that students have much to learn from studying the styles of published
creative nonfiction writers and 2) that writing creative nonfiction can also be
"an experience of style" since writing precedes reading. Yet style instruction is
not being privileged or even much explored in creative nonfiction pedagogy if
the content of the technique-driven craft essays students encounter in popular
textbooks is any indication.

   What I'm proposing is a pedagogy through which students learn to analyze
"the deployment of rhetorical resources, in written discourse, to create and
express meaning" (Butler, 2008, p. 3) in order to demystify the pleasurable
aesthetic qualities or "literariness" of creative nonfiction at the sentence level,
give students a rhetorical vocabulary to discuss works in progress, and help
students develop their writerly voices in an effort to bridge the gap between
writers and various publics. The idea behind the approach is this: If writing
students study published flash essays, literary journalism, memoirs, and other
personally situated prose through a rhetorical lens, study "the use of written
language features as habitual patterns, rhetorical options, and conscious choices
at the sentence and word level" in those writings (Butler, 2008, p. 3), and study
how audiences receive and discuss the writings, then those students just might
be able to learn through this mimetic, analytic process to make similar or better
moves in their writings, for their audiences, for their purposes.

   Those who write in literary genres, just like any other language users, have
the capacity to improve and have the agency to affect diverse audiences, to move
people to action if they so choose. In undergraduate creative nonfiction themed
courses, a pedagogy grounded in rhetorical theory with an emphasis on style

                                                                                                241
Fodrey

can aid students in recognizing and using that agency. My fall 2010 advanced
composition students, whose writings and reflections I will discuss later in this
chapter, are a testament to the possibilities of this style pedagogy. But before
bringing their voices into the conversation, I first need to shed some light on the
ways style is currently discussed in creative nonfiction craft essays.

REPRESENTATIONS OF STYLE

         Style is either something we name but do not value or value but
         cannot name.

                                                      -- Star Medzerian, 187

   In Out of Style Paul Butler briefly discusses the renewed interest that a
growing contingent of compositionists has in personal writing. He notes that this
interest "is imbued with the study of style, even though it is not acknowledged
or recognized in that way" (2008, p. 107). I agree with this assertion as well as
his observation that:

         [t]he dispersion of style into personal writing suggests that
         style, while manifested locally in sentences, has important
         impacts on the broader form of discourse. It seems that the
         attention to ... creative nonfiction in composition is focused
         primarily at that broader level. What is clear, however, is that
         those features of the broader form of discourse ... become
         most important through the stylistic features enacted in sen-
         tences. (Butler, 2008, pp. 107-108)

   To say this another way: compositionists who publish scholarship on creative
nonfiction tend to conflate sentence-level style with form when discussing the
various genres like the personal essay, memoir, or literary journalism. We ask,
what are essayistic forms capable of that other forms are not? How and why
do we teach students to write in these forms? We focus on the importance
of expression, reflection, introspection, uncertainty, and exploration, and we
weigh the pros and cons of the writing's self-centeredness versus its usefulness.
This deliberation is relevant and necessary to our scholarship, and even though
I may be critical of the way those who identify themselves as creative writers
discuss issues of style, let me state for the record that I am equally critical of
those discussions (and lack thereof ) in composition studies.

242
                                                                                         Voice, Transformed

   Most any writing class with a focus on types of creative nonfiction like
the essay, memoir, or literary journalism spend a fair amount of time on the
important issues of genre definitions, memory, truth representation, narrative
construction, public exposure of private details, broad characteristics of various
essay forms--the usual suspects. Those technique and concept-related topics
are covered in most craft sections of creative nonfiction textbooks and in the
creative nonfiction craft articles that appear in prominent magazines like The
Writer's Chronicle. Yet, anthologized creative nonfiction craft essays rarely
emphasize the sentence level where meaning is made (or obscured). Stylistic
terminology becomes conflated with impressionistic, inadequately-defined
concepts like "voice"4 and "authenticity." My initial familiarity with those terms
comes from my years as a creative writing undergraduate and master's student
when I never thought to problematize their meanings. My essays apparently
displayed these qualities, and, therefore, I was labeled a talented writer. While
the part of me that remembers this culture of genius quite well can see the
appeal of using such terms in order to maintain the institutional-conventional
wisdom, the part of me that thinks writing can be taught, the rhetoric and
composition teacher-scholar part, insists that there's a better way to learn about
style. That way is linked to how well students understand style from a rhetorical
standpoint.

   In the fall of 2009, I had a critical encounter with a creative nonfiction
craft article that, at first, bothered me because the title invoked authenticity, a
concept I do not buy into. I opened up my new copy of The Writer's Chronicle
to Sebastian Matthews's article "Stepping Through the Threshold: Ways to
Achieve Authentic Voice in Memoir," read it from a rhetorical perspective, and
didn't quite know what to make of the advice. The strategies he explains to his
audience were largely helpful--

         Strategy 1: Create an occasion for speech
         Strategy 2: Speak through the mask of the first person "I"
         Strategy 3: Engage history
         Strategy 4: Become your project
         Strategy 5: Ground in place and time
         Strategy 6: Separate character from narrator
         Strategy 7: Imagine a listener for your story
         (Matthews, 2009, pp. 72-80)

--but I found them unsettling because of the purported end result: authentic
voice. While I think, as Enos does, that a personal ethos can emerge through

                                                                                                243
Fodrey

one's stylistic choices, I have a hard time believing that a self-constructed written
version of oneself can be absolutely true or authentic. At best a voice can only
seem true or authentic based on how a writer chooses to arrange and word his
sentences within the context of the topic and the form of the piece. So when I
look at that list, especially strategies 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7, my mind immediately goes
to rhetorical situation. Who am I writing for and why? How do I want them
to respond? How will I situate myself for that intended effect? What historical
and cultural contexts am I working within? Am I responding to an opportune
moment? These questions sync up with many of Matthews' "authentic voice"
(ethos) building strategies; therefore, this illustrates one way that rhetoric can
be applied to the teaching of creative nonfiction. Matthews may not be using
rhetorical terminology, but he is still talking about craft in a way that could be
construed as rhetorical, especially if the end result from taking his sage advice
would be similar regardless of how the strategies are worded.

   Likewise, the creative nonfiction textbooks I'm analyzing here--Contemporary
Creative Nonfiction: I & Eye, Fourth Genre: Contemporary Writers of/on Creative
Nonfiction, 5th edition, and Creating Nonfiction: A Guide and Anthology--
contain many writings on craft that at times use a parallel discourse with
rhetoric and composition theory and practice to describe certain conventions
writers of creative nonfiction might follow. And in most of these texts, the fact
that writers use accessible language to discuss strategies that ultimately can help
writers plan writing projects and build ethos works well because anthologized
essayists are some of the best writers of our time. They're engaging. They create
identification with their readers through their use of psychic distance, a concept
Erik Ellis thoughtfully explores in this collection. However, these positive
qualities become somewhat irrelevant when published creative writers write
rather ambiguously therefore unhelpfully about what I have been referring to
throughout as style. The writers I discuss in the upcoming sections address
macro level writing issues but rarely touch on the sentence level where style-talk
would be valuable. I've grouped their depictions of style into three categories--
style as genre, style as magic, and style as voice--based both on the ways that
the term "style" is used as well as how concepts related to style are described.
Closer examination of these depictions illuminate the need for a more direct,
pragmatic approach to the explanation of style in creative nonfiction.

Style as Genre

   Lee Gutkind is the only writer in Contemporary Creative Nonfiction: I & Eye
to use the word "style" in a craft context. In "The Creative Nonfiction Police"
he says, "Of course, I am a creative nonfiction writer, `creative' being indicative

244
                                                                                         Voice, Transformed

of the style in which the nonfiction is written so as to make it more dramatic
and compelling" (Gutkind, 2004, p. 349). Here "creative" differentiates the
"style" of writing Gutkind does from other "styles" of nonfiction. "Style" could
be changed to the word "technique" or "method" or "way," and the sentence
would maintain a very similar meaning. "Genre" might be the most precise
word to show the relationship between "creative" and "nonfiction," and that
appears to be what he's getting at, his own approach of taxonomizing creative
nonfiction by naming its attributes: "dramatic and compelling," what other
"styles" of nonfiction are not.

   Style does indeed play a large role in making any piece of writing dramatic
and compelling, boring and pedantic, or somewhere in between. If a writer
learns how to analyze the stylistic decisions her favorite author makes at a
sentence level and gains a vocabulary to articulate that analysis, she can then
imitate these and integrate them into her compositions if she so chooses.
When Gutkind continues in his article, saying that "[w]e embrace many of the
techniques of the fiction writer, including dialog, description, plot, intimacy
of detail, characterization, point of view" a reader would learn what is possible
in creative nonfiction--an important lesson--but that reader would not learn
about style in the rhetorical sense, which, to me, is every bit as vital to their later
success as a writer.

Style as Magic

   This next set of style depictions seem impractical as style depictions, no
matter how beautifully they're written, simply because a student would not
likely be able to glean stylistic lessons from them. Craft essays are meant to
serve at least a partially pragmatic purpose. When André Aciman explains "I
write to give my life a form, a narrative, a chronology; and, for good measure,
I seal loose ends with cadenced prose and add glitter where I know things were
quite lusterless," I know that he's talking about style after the semicolon, but
he doesn't teach readers anything concrete about style (Aciman, 2005, p. 134).5
What does he really mean when he says "seal loose ends with cadenced prose"?
How does he do that? And how does he go about "add[ing] glitter"? What
constitutes glitter? Don't get me wrong, I enjoy reading his impressionistic
imagery, and I suppose I could ascertain suitable answers to these questions by
stylistically analyzing his craft essay, "A Literary Pilgrim Progresses to the Past."
That seems to defeat the point of a craft essay, though.

   Style theorist Winston Weathers would likely agree. In "Grammars of
Style: New Options for Composition," Weathers essentially explains the style
of creative nonfiction as "Grammar B," an alternative discourse with the

                                                                                                245
Fodrey

"characteristics of variegation, synchronicity, discontinuity, ambiguity, and the
like" (2010, p. 221). He might tell Aciman that one who writes using Grammar
B "must still be concerned with a rationale for his composition, a rationale
that informs the composition, if not with `order and sense,' then certainly
with `interest and effectiveness' in a kind of drama imperative" (2010, p. 237).
However, we have no way of knowing Aciman's writing rationale unless he
shares this with us more explicitly.

   Another example of style-talk in a magical context comes from Cynthia
Ozick's craft essay "She: Portrait of the Essay as a Warm Body." Ozick's title
informs readers that they will be gaining greater insight about the essay form
through an extended metaphor of the body, so I anticipate this move. She
writes that "the essay is by and large a serene or melancholic form. It mimics
that low electric hum, which sometimes rises to resemble actual speech, that
all human beings carry inside their heads--a vibration, garrulous if somewhat
indistinct, that never leaves us while we are awake" (Ozick, 2005, p. 204). This
description, housed in a loose, complex, interrupted sentence, leaves readers
with a poetic impression of style. I read the sentence, let it wash over me, and
try to recreate the metaphor in my mind. Style as a "low electric hum." For
those who think best in abstractions, this might be a fruitful way to understand
style, as something intangible and just out of reach. I can appreciate that point
of view for having once lived it, but I'm now convinced that rhetoric offers
us a better way. Students don't have to be content to cull a concrete lesson
from an impressionistic stylistic description that tells them the lyric essay "is
held together by the glue of absence, the mortar of melody, the threnody of
unspent inspiration" (Kitchen, 2009, p. 366). Instead, after gaining a stylistic
vocabulary from completing style activities in class or from studying a book
like Holcomb and Killingsworth's Performing Prose: The Study and Practice of
Style in Composition, they could appreciate Judith Kitchen's lyrical sentence as
one that expertly showcases the use of anaphora, asyndeton, and balance. Then
they could write their own sentences that exhibit similar qualities. Through this
inventive process, some may stumble upon ideas for future essays in which they
can use their Kitchen-inspired sentences.

Style as Voice

   As is true in Matthews's article explaining techniques to achieve authentic
voice in memoir, when other published craft writers discuss "voice" or the
production of "sound" in creative nonfiction writing, I find that they come
closest to describing style (or at least a concept directly connected to aspects of
style) in concrete terms that student writers might be able to find useful. For

246
                                                                                         Voice, Transformed

example, In "The Singular First Person," a craft essay in which Scott Russell
Sanders analyzes the rhetorical effectiveness of prominent essayists without
using rhetorical terminology, he explains, "[o]nce you have heard [Wendell
Berry's] stately, moralizing, cherishing voice, laced through with references to
the land, you will not mistake it for anyone else's. Berry's themes are profound
and arresting ones. But it is his voice, more than anything he speaks about,
that either seizes us or drives us away" (Sanders, 2004, p. 79). From this, we
learn possible characteristics of what voice/style can be--"stately, moralizing,
cherishing"--and we learn possible options for what voice/style can do--"seiz[e]
us or driv[e] us away." If a student read Sanders's essay in tandem with Berry's
"The Long-Legged House," that student could gain a deeper understanding
of the effects of Berry's style choices. This knowledge, in turn, could prove
generative when the student sits down to invent or draft a nature-themed essay
of his own even though Sanders does not demystify style at the sentence level.

   Voice also features prominently in Steven Harvey's "The Art of Self," located
along with Sanders's piece in The Fourth Genre textbook. Harvey's use of
"voice" could be directly substituted with either "style" or "discourse," as it is
discussed here: "Each of us has many voices--the voice for a friend, a colleague,
a student, a lover--and each voice is different. Personal essayists ... must
constantly adjudicate the voices in their hearts and choose the right language"
(Harvey, 2009, p. 345). This process of judging and choosing the best voice for
a particular essay is a key part of what he refers to as "shaping" or "fashion[ing]
a text," the way in which an "artist creat[es] a surrogate self " in writing (Harvey,
2009, p. 344). By acknowledging the conscious language decisions one must
make in order to put the most relevant and appropriate version of oneself
forward in a piece of personal writing, Harvey implies the rhetoricity of the
process even as he denies the importance of audience concerns. Even though his
article discusses style on an impressionistic level without many specific helpful
examples, he does manage to quickly yet eloquently combat the idea of an
unfiltered creative voice.

   The strong connection between voice and ethos development is undeniable
even in the most impressionistic descriptions, like Aciman's "cadenced prose"
critiqued above or Vivian Gornick's description of George Orwell's "persona" as
"something genuine that he pulled from himself, and then shaped to his writer's
purpose" (2004, p. 139). Enos explains that from antiquity to modern times,
the perception of "voice" in rhetoric has moved from that which presented
the truth to an audience to that which can facilitate "the acceptance of belief "
(1994, p. 187). Looking at voice in this historical context, we can call pure
authenticity into question, but that doesn't mean voice itself is a defunct
concept. The facilitation of belief for an audience comes from an ethos-generating

                                                                                                247
Fodrey

voice. Enos notes that "ethos cannot be separated from audience consideration
because part of the ethical appeal is one's stance, a textual manifestation of an
attitude and what Aristotle calls goodwill, the benevolent attitude of the writer
toward readers" (1994, p. 188). A writer does not need to have the primary
goal of persuasion in mind for this benevolent ethos to yield advantageous
results; Rosanne Carlo effectively argues this point in her chapter "Jim Corder's
Generative Ethos as Alternative to Traditional Argument." Indeed, voice, which
emerges from stylistic choices, as Enos demonstrates via a stylistic analysis of
Jim Corder's personal essayistic prose in her article, can allow a writer to engage
in "dialogic action, where both writer and reader are aware of, and enjoy, the
engagement" (1994, p. 194).

   This type of voice/style-privileging composition can indeed facilitate
a powerful identification that, in turn, can create the potential for certain
audiences to respond favorably to the writing at hand. Such a move in the
way we talk about the development of voice would broaden its scope in both
composition and creative writing. As Mayers explains:

         "Voice" ... might be viewed not as the enactment in language
         of unique self-qualities or an individual's artistic vision, but
         rather as a rhetorical device developed through conscious
         or unconscious absorption of, or resistance to, other such
         rhetorical devices. "Finding one's voice," then--the dream
         of many dedicated students of creative writing--may be a
         rhetorical rather than a spiritual exercise. (2005, p. 120)

   With a toolbox of, as T. R. Johnson calls them, "renegade" rhetorical and
stylistic devices in tow--"concrete strategies" that incite a "highly pleasurable
practice in which selves, texts, and worlds are experienced as dynamic,
interanimating processes"--students can control their muses instead of letting
their muses control them (2003, p. 344).

   I'm still critical of voice-talk in creative nonfiction craft essays, though,
because of the instances when writers insinuate or unproblematically explain
a process by which words flow freely from a true self onto the page, thereby
upholding what Louis T. Milic refers to as "psychological monism, which finds
its most common expression in the aphorism that the style is the man," a theory
that has long since been rejected by contemporary style theorists (1965, p.
67). One of my favorite pieces of recent craft writing to share with students is
the "Style" chapter in Becky Bradbury and Doug Hesse's Creating Nonfiction
textbook because of the numerous helpful examples and analyses they share of

248
                                                                                         Voice, Transformed

interesting punctuation usage, sentence rhythm, repetition, and point of view;
however, I pause every time I read the following excerpt from the chapter:

         Whatever the mode, whatever we create, our style expresses
         who we are at that moment in time. While we can't avoid be-
         ing aware of an audience (the reader, the viewer, the judge),
         we need to try to push that observer out of our mind's eye
         while we are working. (2009, p. 78)

   Part of me wonders if that passage promoting writer-based prose is included
in the chapter as a nod to dominant creative writing ideology before offering
suggestions on ways for students to vary their style even though that seems to
directly contradict the sentiment that "our style expresses who we are at that
moment in time." I shouldn't speculate, though. Even in this collection, Ellis,
who also claims a creative writing background, argues that "language can be
rhetorically fitting regardless of how well it matches audience expectations."
I will, however, fundamentally disagree that style choices should be made to
please the writer above all others because that is not a sustainable practice, and
I disagree even more so with the idea that it is a helpful pedagogical strategy to
both purport self expression and teach methods of stylistic improvement due to
the incongruence of these ideas. As Milic warned us in 1965, "the monistic view
of style ... cannot be allowed to infect the teaching of our subject, for it vitiates
all the available pedagogical resources of rhetoric" (1965, p. 126). From my
experience, it seems that students come into introductory creative nonfiction
themed classes--likely more often than they come into a "less creative"
composition class--with something like a monistic mindset, determined that
the point is to produce expressive writing for the self instead of personally-
situated writing for an audience or at least as some blend of expression and
rhetoricity. There's nothing inherently wrong with either point of view, but the
distinction between them is one upon which so much depends, especially for
"non-genius" students who have the most to gain from writing instruction.

STYLE PEDAGOGY IN ACTION

   In the first week of my Fall 2010 Advanced Composition class, I asked
my students in a short writing assignment to define style as a reaction to how
published writers have defined style, prior to our first class discussion on the
issue. They read the Bradbury and Hesse chapter as well as Milic's "Theories
of Style and Their Implications for the Teaching of Composition," Weathers's

                                                                                                249
Fodrey

"Grammars of Style" cited earlier, and an excerpt on style from Book III of
Aristotle's Rhetoric. What Dawn, one of the students, wrote in response to
Milic's explanations of psychological monism and rhetorical dualism6 highlights
the dominant response of her classmates as well, over half being creative writing
majors or minors like her and the rest a mix from other majors:

         A definition of style that I am comfortable with would be
         finding the way with syntax, tone, and word choice. It's the
         voice that readers hear when they read the work written on
         the page. The voice will change depending on how the writ-
         ing develops, but like a personality, the voice is always there
         ...

         I believe that good writing is something that cannot be
         taught but is something that is inherent. We are either good
         writers or we are not cut out from the correct cloth to be a
         writer. There are no workshops that can teach a bad writer to
         become a better writer nor are there books that can be writ-
         ten to mold someone. (Dawn, Short Assignment #2)

   Just as many of the aforementioned craft writers demonstrated, Dawn too
is able to eloquently articulate the possibility that someone can both be born a
good writer and somehow "[find] the way with syntax, tone, and word choice."
You either have the gift and know what sounds best or you don't have the gift
and, therefore, should not pursue a future in writing. It should come as no
surprise that I encountered a fair amount of resistance when I started to play
the audience card, made connections between rhetoric and creative nonfiction,
and asked them to write in "voices" not their own.

   I'm going to focus here on how I framed style for my students in the first
weeks of the semester, as that framing provided the foundation for all of the
style work and essay composing they did throughout the course. In order to
maintain the dual objectives of teaching the basic tenets of creative nonfiction
and sentence-level style from a rhetorical standpoint, I started lightly with the
"what is creative nonfiction" talk under the assumption that we could create a
dynamic list of sometimes contradictory characteristics as a class throughout
the semester (which we did). We spent a week on recognizing and practicing the
different sentence types (fragment, simple, compound, complex, compound-
complex) in class, which proved to be no easy task even for writers at an advanced
level. Simple sentences can at times be quite long through the connection of
many prepositional phrases and complex sentences can be quite short so long

250
                                                                                         Voice, Transformed

as a dependent and independent clause exists; that is a lot for a student to wrap
their mind around if they haven't had much formal grammar instruction. These
lessons on sentence types became reinforced as students completed a series of
copy and compose exercises for homework.

   Copy and compose is a style activity created by Winston Weathers and
described in his 1969 book Copy and Compose: A Guide to Prose Style. Students
are asked to copy a sentence by hand (my students type their sentences if that
is their preferred method) and then compose a sentence of similar length and
structure. Copy and compose practice gave students a chance to imitate with
the intent to internalize common grammatical structures and rhetorical schemes
found in some of the flash essays they had been reading from the anthology Short
Takes: Brief Encounters with Contemporary Nonfiction and the online journal
Brevity: A Journal of Concise Literary Nonfiction. They also worked in groups to
count the number of each sentence type in some of those under 1,000 word
essays. All of this was in preparation for their first assignment: 1) to conduct
and write a stylistic analysis of a published flash essay of their choosing that
looks specifically at how both sentence and essay-level choices come together
to work well in the piece as a whole, and 2) to write their own flash essay about
a place of personal significance that imitates the sentence and essay-level style
(but not the content or overall theme) of the essay they analyzed.

   Because students analyzed and wrote only flash nonfiction pieces in this
first five-week unit, they were able to concentrate their efforts on interpretation
of published writing, on form and language quality, and on the calculated
transformation of their voices, instead of lengthy text production. Hans
Ostrom had a similar experience when he asked his fiction students to engage
in an imitation of microstories. He explains that "students are invited by a
particular text to manipulate language in a similar way" and it is partially this
conscious shift in positionality and the resulting emphasis on language choices
that makes the activity such a fruitful one (1998, p. 168). In my class, asking
students to focus on places significant to them--topics they know intimately
in most cases--allowed me to maintain a location-based class thematically,
moving from personal spaces to community spaces to publication spaces over
the semester, but spend a significant amount of time on style in the first unit.

   In a reflection piece written directly after his submission of Unit 1 essays,
Larry, another student, said:

         [n]ot only has [the study of style] helped me to understand
         how others package and deliver meaning to the readers, but it
         has given me the ability to put this understanding to imme-
         diate and practical use. My writing in other classes has been

                                                                                                251
Fodrey

         dramatically improved. (L., Process Comment on Imitation
         Assignment)

   I agreed with this assessment even within the context of the relatively few
weeks that I had gotten to know his work because he initially did not vary his
sentence constructions very often or develop details in his writing beyond basic
descriptions. Because of his background in journalism, he had a tendency to
pack as much information as quickly as possible into his prose. But then he
turned in his flash essay about his visit to a slave house in Senegal, imitating
Salman Rushdie's "Water's Edge." In the essay he's standing in a room in the
Maison des Esclaves "designed to break the spirit and weaken the mind" of
America-bound African slaves. Of this space he writes, in part,

         Because these places were devised to physically, emotion-
         ally and psychologically prepare the captives for the harsh,
         inhumane conditions in the ship's cargo bay, they were
         purposefully designed to be cramped in space, barely toler-
         able in comfort with very little to no light. At the rear of the
         house, there was a single door of ominous foreboding. Slaves
         going through this portal knew it to be their last in Africa.
         Not a single person who passed through this door returned
         to their homeland, hence the proverbial name--The door of
         no return. (L., "Maison Des Esclaves.")

   Rushdie dwells on the details in "Water's Edge" with long complex sentences
mimicking the motions described like

         [b]efore that first creature drew that first breath there would
         have been other moments when other creatures made the
         same attempt and fell fainting back into the waves or else
         suffocated, flopping fishily from side to side, on the same
         seashore and another, and another. (2005, p. 65)

   So Larry had to make similar moves in order to write a successful imitation.
Although the writing is not in what Larry might consider to be his own voice,
he was obviously still happy with the end result, and so was I.

   Not everyone had such a positive experience. Nicole, another student,
immediately noted at the end of the unit that "[o]verall, I am glad we did this
assignment so I can incorporate some of [Ann] Daum's stylistic devices into my
writing, but I am looking forward to having my own voice again." (N., Process

252
                                                                                         Voice, Transformed

Comment on Imitation Assignment). Daum's tone in "Those Who Stay and
Those Who Go" is, as Nicole describes, "stoic," but Nicole picked a funny place
of significance to write about: her British grandmother's favorite Applebee's.
During the revision process, Nicole struggled to transform her lively prose into
something quiet and contemplative. In her case, the rough drafts were decidedly
better than what she submitted as her final because in each subsequent draft
the divide between form and content grew wider. Like lines delivered from a
poorly casted actor, the style from which her voice emerged created an ill-fitting
ethos for the topic at hand. She learned an important lesson from the process,
though: She should have picked a David Sedaris essay to imitate.

   I walked away from this unit with some lessons learned as well. Perhaps one
of the most surprising is that when students understand the rhetorical effects
of certain schemes like asyndeton and polysyndeton--speeding up or slowing
down a sentence, respectively--they will start using those schemes all of the
time--even in pass/fail short writing assignments--to achieve those effects, and
their writing as a whole becomes more enjoyable to read (the exception being
those who use the figures ad nauseum). Many students feared the fragment at
the beginning of the semester, claiming that it would hurt their ethos due to its
ungrammaticality. That is, until they realized many essayists use fragments quite
often to achieve writing that sounds more like the way people talk. Or think.

   I also wanted to see if some relevant claims made recently by contemporary
style scholars manifested themselves in practice. For instance Butler asserts that
"memory can be recalled, and focused, through stylistic resources" (2008, p.
148). I used this idea to inform how I introduced copy and compose, asking
students to hold their places of personal significance firmly in mind when they
created their sentences. Many of the sentences found a way into their prose,
sometimes exactly, sometimes in altered form. One student even created an
outline for their essay from their copy and compose sentences and built around
those sentences to compose their rough draft. Likewise, I found what Medzerian
argues in "Style and the Pedagogy of Response" to ring true to me, that "[t]o
adequately articulate our expectations to students through our commentary,
we must use language that is text-specific and that treats student writing as
comprised of conscious choices" (2010, p. 191). I found that I was able to
engage with student texts at a deeper analytical level than I had been able to in
the past and my students were able to understand my commentary and critiques
because we shared the common language of style.

   In the units that followed, the spatial elements of my pedagogy became more
prominent: My students became new journalists, researching by immersing
themselves in local spaces outside their comfort zones, and finally they became
publication-seeking writers, locating spaces for their work and creating pieces

                                                                                                253
Fodrey

appropriate for the rhetorical situations of those spaces. With an understanding
of style, and using sentence-level stylistic analysis as a revision exercise, the
majority of my students were able to meet these challenges and at times exceed
my and their own wildest expectations. For her final project, Dawn created
a deeply personal blog that documented her ongoing battle with postpartum
depression, and she shared it with other women online dealing with similar
issues. Larry wrote a series of flash essays with the goal of "shin[ing] a flashlight
on the Dark Continent so [his] readers can see the cultural diversity and
fascinating curiosities that can be discovered in Africa," and he won a creative
writing scholarship with one of those essays the following semester (L., "Final
Exam Essay"). Nicole created the "Ubuntu Memoir Project," on tumblr.com,
the "story of [her] life and who [she] is told through the stories of other people.
An autobiography of biographies" with the purpose of "showing the world that
we, as people, have such a great influence on one another, that we should use
that influence for good" (N., "Ubuntu Memoir Project").

   Starting with style, my students were able to see the importance of language
in terms of audience, and by the end of the course the majority of them were
not producing merely self-expressive writing. They were producing effectively
self-situated writing with voices that did not say "me, me, me" but "look at this
injustice I've seen and want to do something about" or "look at what I've done
and learned in my life that I can share with you so you can learn something and
do something in the world." Voices that "seek identification without sacrificing
conviction." Maybe my fall 2010 class was an anomaly and I will never again
feel the palpable energy of a group of writers creating something bigger than
the sum of their parts, but I will strive to regenerate that energy in every class
I teach.

CLOSING THOUGHTS

   The growing popularity of creative nonfiction is undeniable. Creative
nonfiction may not be central to English studies, but it does stand at the nexus
of creative writing, composition, and literature because it is increasingly studied
(and sometimes produced) in all three. According to the AWP Guide to Writing
Programs, as of March 2012, 127 MFA programs offer concentrations in creative
nonfiction--a significant rise from the thirty-five that Hesse reported from the
same guide in 1999 (2003, pp. 252). This seems to imply that more students
are becoming interested in writing fact-based prose that privileges narrative,
personal situatedness, and a literary style, which also means that more students
are reading and appreciating this type of writing. If students are demanding

254
                                                                                         Voice, Transformed

more courses in creative nonfiction, a variety of effective pedagogical options
should be available for those who are called upon to teach it. I've offered style
pedagogy as one such option.

   If style's reemergence into composition theory and practice takes hold,
which I sincerely hope it does, then style should logically emerge in creative
nonfiction as well in ways that highlight the rhetorical effects of stylistic
decisions. Writing in the various genres of creative nonfiction, after all, thrives
on sentences that sound authentic, like a human voice speaking. When students,
especially at the undergraduate level, understand how to analyze, imitate, and
successfully employ the devices utilized by their favorite writers in ways that
position those students as writers who could be published, as writers who can
imbue prose with the rhythms and figures of "creative" writing, they also realize
that they don't have to be literary geniuses to produce polished, engaging essays.
Composing this way is not magic, despite how it might feel.

NOTES

1. Like many who teach this type of writing, I do not particularly like the term "cre-
ative nonfiction," a term that defines the genre by what it is not and accomplishes little
beyond securing its province in creative writing instead of composition. I use it, though,
because "creative nonfiction" is currently the dominant way to describe fact-based prose
that privileges narrative, personal situatedness, and literary style. Also, I see the writing
process is an inventive, creative process, regardless of the end result, so I reject the idea
that some writing is inherently creative while other types are not.

2. A notable recent exception to this, which I read long after I designed the class de-
scribed herein, is Emily Brisse's "The Geography of Sentences" published in the March/
April 2012 Writer's Chronicle.

3. Dennis Rygiel first made an argument similar to this in his 1989 "Stylistics and the
Study of Twentieth-Century Literary Nonfiction." In this article Rygiel argues for stu-
dents to use a practical stylistic form of analysis, one that "derives its aim of systematic
description of language use" rather than impressionistic description when analyzing
nonfiction prose (30). He models this approach through an analysis of two E. B. White
essays and notes that his students routinely made the comment that they improved as
writers after studying stylistics. I see myself building on Rygiel's pedagogical ideas using
style theories from Enos, Winston Weathers, Paul Butler, T. R. Johnson, and others.

4. For more on the composition/creative writing split that landed creative nonfiction
more dominantly in creative writing programs than in composition ones, see Douglas
Hesse's "Who Owns Creative Nonfiction?"

                                                                                                255
Fodrey

5. I subscribe to Enos's definition of voice as that which emerges from style and has the
potential to create a transformative ethos; however, this definition comes from rhetori-
cal scholarship and is not used in creative writing craft texts where the idea of "voice"
is generally shrouded in ambiguity. See Bizzaro and McClanahan's "Putting Wings on
the Invisible: Voice, Authorship, and the Authentic Self " for a historical recounting of
the perception of authentic self and voice in creative writing and composition since the
late 1960s.

6. As a reader of this essay in the context of the anthology Contemporary Creative
Nonfiction: I & Eye, I do not know for certain whether Aciman's primary purpose was
to write a craft article or something else perhaps more lyrical or exploratory. However,
because his essay has been placed with other craft articles, I make certain assumptions
about the sort of demystifying information the writer is expected to divulge.

7. Milic explains that the view of rhetorical dualism " has always implied that ideas
exist wordlessly and can be dressed in a variety of outfits, depending on the need for the
occasion" (1965, p. 67).

REFERENCES

Aciman, A. (2004). A literary pilgrim progresses to the past. In B. Nguyen
   & P. Shreve (Eds.), Contemporary creative nonfiction: I & Eye (pp. 133-36).
   London: Longman.

Anderson, C. (1987). Style as argument: Contemporary American nonfiction.
   Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

The Association of Writers and Writing Programs. (2011, June 13). Official
   guide to writing programs. Retrieved from http://guide.awpwriter.org

Bizarro, P, & McClanahan, M. (2007). Putting wings on the invisible: Voice,
   authorship, and the authentic self. In K. Ritter, & S. Vanderslice (Eds.),
   Can it really be taught: Resisting lore in creative writing pedagogy (pp. 77-90).
   Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

Bradbury, B., & Hesse, D. (Eds.) (2009). Creating nonfiction: A guide and an-
   thology. Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's.

Brisse, E. (2012). The geography of sentences. The Writers Chronicle 44(5), 84-
   93.

Butler, P. (2008). Out of style: Reanimating stylistic study in composition and rhet-
   oric. Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.

Daum, A. (2005). Those who stay and those who go. In J. Kitchen (Ed.), Short
   takes: Brief encounters with contemporary nonfiction (pp. 54-59). New York:
   W. W. Norton & Company.

Dawn. Short assignment #2, August 31, 2010.

256
                                                                                         Voice, Transformed

Enos, T. (1994). Voice as echo of delivery, ethos as transforming process. In
   W. R. Winterowd, & V. Gillespie (Eds.), Composition in context: Essays in
   honor of Donald C. Stewart (pp. 180-95). Carbondale, Il: Southern Illinois
   University Press.

Gornick, V. (2004). The situation and the story. In B. Nguyen & P. Shreve (Eds.),
   Contemporary creative nonfiction: I & eye (pp. 136-39). London: Pearson.

Gornick, V. (2001). The situation and the story: The art of personal narrative.
   New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Gutkind, L. (2004). The Creative Nonfiction Police. In B. Nguyen & P. Shreve
   (Eds.), Contemporary Creative Nonfiction: I & Eye (pp. 349-54). London:
   Pearson.

Harvey, S. (2009). The art of self. In R. L. Root, Jr., & M. Steinberg (Eds.),
   Fourth genre: Contemporary writers of/on creative nonfiction (5th ed.) (pp. 344-
   345). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Hesse, D. (2003). Who owns creative nonfiction? In T. Enos, & K. D. Miller
   (Eds.), Beyond postprocess and postmodernism: Essays on the spaciousness of rhet-
   oric (pp. 251-66). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Holcomb, C, & Killingsworth, M. J. (2010). Performing prose: The study and
   practice of style in composition. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University
   Press.

Johnson, T. R. (2003). A rhetoric of pleasure: Prose style and today's composition
   classroom. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

Kitchen, J. (2009). Mending wall. In R. L. Root, Jr., & M. Steinberg (Eds.),
   Fourth genre: Contemporary writers of/on creative nonfiction (5th ed.) (pp. 364-
   367). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Kitchen, J. (Ed.) (2005). Short takes: Brief encounters with contemporary nonfic-
   tion. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

Larry. (2010). Process comment on imitation assignment, September 23, 2010.
Larry. (2010). Maison des esclaves. Imitation essay assignment, September 23,

   2010.
Matthews, S. (2009). Stepping through the threshold: Ways to achieve authen-

   tic voice in memoir. The Writers Chronicle 42(2), 72-80.
Mayers, T. (2005). (Re)writing craft: Composition, creative writing, and the future

   of English studies. Pittsburg: University of Pittsburg Press.
Medzerian, S. (2010). Style and the pedagogy of response. Rhetoric Review

   29(2), 186-202.
Milic, L. T. (1965). Theories of style and their implications for the teaching

   of composition. College Composition and Communication 16(2). 66-69+126.
Nicole. (2010). Process comment on imitation assignment, September 23,

   2010.

                                                                                                257
Fodrey

Nicole. (2010). Ubuntu memoir project. Final project. Retrieved from http://
   theubuntumemoirproject.tumblr.com

Nguyen, B. M., & Shreve, P. (Eds.) (2004). Contemporary creative nonfiction: I
   & eye. New York: Pearson.

Ostrom, H. (1998). "Carom shots": Reconceptualizing imitation and its uses in
   creative writing courses. In D. Starkey (Ed.), Teaching writing creatively (pp.
   164-71). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

Ozick, C. (2004) She: Portrait of the essay as a warm body. In B. Nguyen & P.
   Shreve (Eds.), Contemporary creative nonfiction: I & eye (pp. 200-05). Lon-
   don: Pearson.

Root, R. L., Jr., & Steinberg, M. (Eds.) (2010). The fourth genre: Contemporary
   writers of/on creative nonfiction (5th ed.). New York: Longman.

Rushdie, S. (2005). Water's edge. In J. Kitchen (Ed.), Short takes: Brief encoun-
   ters with contemporary nonfiction (pp. 65-67). New York: W. W. Norton &
   Company.

Sanders, S. R. (2004). The singular first person. In B. Nguyen & P. Shreve
   (Eds.), Contemporary creative nonfiction: I & eye (pp. 73-80). London: Pear-
   son.

Weathers, W. (1969). Copy and compose: A guide to prose style. Upper Saddle
   River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Weathers, W. (2010). Grammars of style: New options in composition. In P.
   Butler (Ed.), Style in rhetoric and composition: A critical sourcebook (pp. 219-
   38). Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's.

258
FIGHTING STYLES: THE
PEDAGOGICAL IMPLICATIONS
OF APPLYING CONTEMPORARY
RHETORICAL THEORY TO THE
PERSUASIVE PROSE OF MARY
WOLLSTONECRAFT AND MARY
HAYS

Luke Redington
Purdue University

I. WOLLSTONECRAFT AND HAYS: THE NEED FOR A STYLE-
CENTERED READING AND A PROPOSED METHODOLOGY

   For centuries, Mary Wollstonecraft was stigmatized and her pupil Mary
Hays was largely overlooked. Even though reformers borrowed directly and
abundantly from her ideas from the moment they appeared, nearly a hundred
years passed from the publication of Wollstonecraft's works until it became
common to cite her as an authority. Of Hays' place in history, M. Ray Adams
says, "Soon after the time of the French Revolution she became enveloped in
an obscurity which has never lifted" (Adams, 1940, p. 472). Writing in 1940,
Adams could hardly have guessed the robust return both authors would make
to the public consciousness. The past thirty years have seen exponential growth
in the amount of scholarship on both authors; Wollstonecraft's work alone has
been the subject of over 500 journal articles in the past twelve years. Although
Hays' writings may not be experiencing the same crescendo of scholarly
attention, she is now a fixture, along with her mentor, in at least three academic
disciplines. Literature studies, communication studies, and women's studies all
find rich and rewarding material in the fiction and creative non-fiction of both
pioneering authors.

   The relationship between Wollstonecraft and Hays has also sparked
immense interest. Much biographical scholarship has addressed Wollstonecraft's
mentoring of Hays and the subsequent advocatory role Hays would go on to

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.16  259
Redington

play for her mentor. Consequently, scholars such as Katharine M. Rogers have
undertaken comparisons of their work. Although their novels Maria, or the
Wrongs of Woman and The Victim of Prejudice are frequently compared works,
a large and growing body of criticism exists on each author's primary work of
persuasive non-fiction, Wollstonecraft's A Vindication of the Rights of Woman
and Hays' An Appeal to the Men of Great Britain in Behalf of Women. Such
criticism tends to compare the works' remarkably similar ideologies. I concede
the existence of significant similarities in their ideologies, but I seek to augment
current assessments of Vindication and Appeal by drawing attention to the
vastly different writing styles the two works utilize. Very little work to this effect
has yet been done. Miriam Brody has lucidly examined the social ramifications
of Wollstonecraft's stylistic choices, but scholarship that compares the two
authors' styles as a means of refining our conclusions about their ideologies is
still a pioneering endeavor.

   The absence of a comparative stylistic analysis is more remarkable given that
in the past forty years, style has become a major topic in rhetorical theory.
Especially in composition studies, renewed debates about writing style have
resulted in the overturning of ideas championed since the time of Aristotle.
Once thought a superficial matter of presentation, style is now largely
considered a politically potent, ideologically substantive feature of any carefully
crafted text. From this perspective, differences in style between these two early
feminists become very important. Since Wollstonecraft and Hays are back in
the spotlight and likely to remain, it is both inevitable and beneficial that their
centuries-old writings will be re-examined and assessed against the canons of
contemporary rhetoric. The stylistic re-assessment I undertake in this chapter
will evidence the value of the current emphasis on style by exemplifying the
sorts of discoveries this emphasis makes available. But more specifically, I want
the method of discovery to evidence my assertions about needed adjustments in
the pedagogy of writing style in college courses.

   In terms of contemporary scholarship, the leading work comparing the form
and content of A Vindication and An Appeal is Katharine M. Roger's 1987 article
"The Contribution of Mary Hays." Rogers overviews the structures, strategies,
and styles of both authors' main works of persuasive prose with occasional
reference to their fiction for additional examples of their argumentative
techniques. Rogers' purpose is two-fold. First, as the title of her article implies,
she wants to ensure that Hays not be "dismissed as a lesser Wollstonecraft"
but is instead recognized as an important feminist rhetorician in her own
right (Rogers, 1987, p. 131). Second, she contends that Hays' approach to
argumentation not only differs but also complements Wollstonecraft's. Whereas
Wollstonecraft critiques institutions and social systems, seeking to overturn

260
                                                                                              Fighting Styles

injustice on a macroscopic level, Hays focuses on domestic and relational
concerns. Wollstonecraft, Rogers notes, operates in the realm of the abstract.
Wollstonecraft hopes that if virtue can be defined similarly for both genders,
life will improve for men and women alike (Rogers, 1987, pp. 131-132). Hays,
though, consistently favors a pragmatic and specific approach. She concerns
herself with "how oppressively the double standard actually operates in married
life" (Rogers, 1987, p. 133). Rogers laments that specificity and pragmatism
did not remain flagship concerns in Hays' fiction, where Hays instead tended
toward sentimentalism and "a stupefyingly stilted style" (Rogers, 1987, p. 140).
Rogers concludes her comparative investigation succinctly:

         Hays's feminist works, then, complement the Vindication.
         She fleshes out Wollstonecraft's analysis with examples from
         daily life and lowers her rhetoric to a familiar no-nonsense
         tone. Together the two authors make the points that need
         to be made on the theoretical and domestic level. (Rogers,
         1987, p. 139)

   Rogers makes a compelling case. She shows that Hays' techniques, which might
appear overly simplistic to a modern reader, were the result of an adept awareness
of her audience. Rogers also rightly credits Hays for having a sense of which
arguments to simply dismiss, as she does with the essentialist pronouncements
found in the conduct literature of her time (Rogers, 1987, p. 135).

   However, there are several challenges I would like to pose to Rogers'
conclusion about the complementary nature of Wollstonecraft's and Hays'
agendas. First, Rogers makes an unjustified assumption about authorial
intention. Certainly, one must grant that, taken together, the two authors cover
a range of both theoretical and practical concerns. But there is no evidence
that Wollstonecraft and Hays collaborated to create, between the two of them,
a farther reaching treatise than either would have produced alone. Instead,
the little that is known about the life circumstances from which both authors
wrote the works in question suggests that they set out, independently and
simultaneously, to perform roughly the same task and yet produced two books
that differ greatly in their style. Perhaps a more useful question than whether
the works are complementary is whether they are compatible. That is, are the
ideals and goals Wollstonecraft and Hays promote sufficiently harmonious to
allow both agendas to be pursued without infringing on one another?

   I posit that their agendas are not as compatible as Rogers suggests, as an
application of current rhetorical notions of style will show. However, I would
like to address two possible objections to this methodological approach to

                                                                                                261
Redington

reading centuries-old texts. First is the charge of anachronism. It is reasonable
to wonder about the fairness of retroactively projecting today's stress on style
backward to the end of the eighteenth century. New literary theories frequently
inspire wildly divergent readings of venerated texts. A new theory is likely to
do this insofar as the assumptions on which it is based are accepted as valid
within pertinent discourse communities. It is on this basis that feminist critics
offer radically different readings of literary texts that have been commented
upon for millennia. Their readings are based in part on the premise that
women have consistently been slandered and objectified in literature and have
also been largely excluded from literary production and criticism. Therefore,
literary texts produced and read in any culture where these assumptions hold
true ought to be reconsidered, no matter how old or reverently canonized.
Hélène Cixous' 1976 treatise "The Laugh of the Medusa," derives much of its
force from its delineating and decrying of the various ideological biases that
have undergirded the repression and exclusion of women. Not surprisingly,
this leads Cixous to a consideration of how women are taught to write. She
admonishes women to find their own way of writing that frees itself from the
confining binaries and prejudices of the male dominated literary establishment.
"Woman must write woman," she demands (Cixous, 1976, p. 877). Cixous'
historical generalizations about the treatment of women have become widely
accepted in many academic discourse communities, and interpretations based
on this framework have likewise grown in acceptance. In fact, in 2008, Oxford
University Press published an anthology of feminist re-interpretations of Greek
myths appropriately titled Laughing with the Medusa.

   Thus, the argument about the applicability of a modern notion of style should
turn on the validity of its underlying premises. The foundational premise in view
here is that experienced writers skillfully affect their message through their rhetorical
techniques. Their style and their meaning are too closely related to be considered
separately. This view is discussed by rhetorician Louis T. Milic in his 1965 article
"Theories of Style and Their Implications for the Teaching of Composition." Milic's
only caveat about aesthetic monism is its tendency to problematize pedagogy for
beginning writers. They may need help, he cautions, in coming to grasp the range of
choices available to them for conveying nuances of meaning. But the two masterful
writers whose persuasive prose this chapter treats certainly do not fall into this
category. Their style is inseparable from their meaning.

   The second objection is most likely to arise from critics familiar with Milic's
theory of style. Milic's 1965 essay is by no means a manifesto in favor of
aesthetic monism. In fact, it sounds almost like the opposite. Writing at a time
when composition teachers in American higher education were considering
major changes to the Aristotelian approach to teaching rhetoric, Milic feared

262
                                                                                              Fighting Styles

that compositionists would blindly adopt "organic" theories of writing which
essentially claimed that students should write whatever they feel, and that all
expressions of feeling were inherently meaningful. Milic warned that this view
of writing, called aesthetic monism, would render teachers helpless to their
students. Novice writers, Milic argues, will be the first to claim they need help
expressing what they feel, and compositionists must not hesitate to introduce
them to techniques from classical rhetoric that have aided writers and speakers
for millennia. But regarding the analysis of literary texts, Milic makes a key
concession. He sees the need for a theory that can account for the effect of
the author's subconscious on his or her art and yet also assumes the author's
choice of style was deliberate (Milic, 1965, p. 20). That is, Milic grants that
the work of mature authors should indeed be regarded as the skillfully rendered
expression of what they feel, and thus meaningful in every aspect. If even this
most vociferous opponent of aesthetic monism admits its place in literary
analysis, then the case for using it in this fashion becomes quite compelling.

   Not only does Milic function as an important if unintentional advocate for
aesthetic monism, he also provides a useful definition of style. He describes
style as, "the relationship of the thing to idea and idea to word [which] is
left unexpressed" (Milic, 1965, p. 17). In other words, style is the holistic
communicative value of a literary text arising from the interrelation of what is
said, how it is said, and what is not said. Authors announce their content, but
they enact their style. Milic therefore offers a key insight by describing style as
a thing/idea/word relationship that is left unsaid. This view of style opens the
possibility that the most important component of a work may be the attitude
the author displays toward the audience or toward the subject matter. Reading
any text, but especially a rhetorically charged text, with Milic's definition of
style in mind, reveals aspects of embedded ideology that, paradoxically, may
go unnoticed when one is reading a text primarily to discern its ideology.
This view of style also suggests that methodologies for reading and writing
pedagogy can converge with beneficial results; Milic's particular argument
shifts from a question of student's frustrations with college writing assignments
to ruminations about their stylistic sensitivity as readers. The following style-
centered reading and analysis is intended to exemplify such a convergence.

II. A STYLE-CENTERED READING OF
WOLLSTONECRAFT AND HAYS

   With the case for aesthetic monism articulated and its view of style defined,
I would like next to look at the stylistic features of Vindication and Appeal,

                                                                                                263
Redington

particularly the ways in which differences in style may suggest differences in
meaning. Rogers began efforts along this vein in her discussion of what she
calls tone. She notes, as a matter of course, the differences in tone between both
authors but sees them merely as such (Rogers, 1987, p. 138). Since it is outside
the scope of this project to offer a stylistic analysis of both book-length texts
in their entirety, this essay will focus on passages from both that exhibit great
similarities in their announced content.

   Chapter 2 of Vindication, entitled "The Prevailing Opinion of a Sexual
Character Discussed," and Chapter 5 of Appeal, entitled "What Women Are,"
stand out as particularly apt passages for this type of comparison. Both chapters
describe women in eighteenth-century England as caught in a vicious cycle.
Women are acculturated to be childish--to feel rather than to reason--and
thus furnish proponents of status quo patriarchy with examples of the unfitness
of women to govern themselves or advance in society. Both chapters argue that
this cycle can and must be broken by offering women access to education.
Finally, both chapters outline specific ways that all of society would benefit
from women's education. (One of the later chapters of Vindication even
includes remarkably detailed plans for how coeducational schools should
operate.) Wollstonecraft and Hays shift the frame of reference for the debate
about women's education from the supposed intellectual ineptitude of women
to the actual oppression of the patriarchy. Thus, the passages I will discuss are
remarkably similar in the logical trajectory of their argument.

   Stylistically, though, the excerpts differ greatly. For example, each author
takes a very different tone when employing arguments based on historical
precedent. Wollstonecraft immerses herself in the debates about the nature of
women that had passed among English and Continental philosophers in the
two centuries leading up to her time, including the contributions of Bacon,
Milton, and Rousseau. The history that concerns her is the relatively recent
history of western thought about women's nature and role in society. She wants
to address the "many ingenious arguments [that] have been brought forward to
prove, that the two sexes, in the acquirement of virtue, ought to aim at attaining
a very different character" (1974, p. 39). That is, she wants to counter the
arguments that were used to bar women from education. Virtue, in the context
of Wollstonecraft's Enlightenment-laden lexicon, means something very much
like agency or self-actuation and is thus linked to the attainment of education.

   Having stated her main premise, Wollstonecraft frames the argument around
a sharp conjecture: "If then women are not a swarm of ephemeron triflers, why
should they be kept in ignorance [of the means of attaining virtue] under the
specious name of innocence?" (Wollstonecraft, 1974, p. 39). She next reviews a
number of passages from the aforementioned writers who her audience would

264
                                                                                              Fighting Styles

likely have held in high regard. She focuses especially Milton's Paradise Lost. She
challenges the representation of Eve as subservient by design and sees Milton as
having inadvertently helped her case. Milton certainly stresses the eternality and
spirituality of women in his rendering of the creation of Eve (Wollstonecraft,
1974, pp. 41-42). Milton's ontological view of women, then, suggests that
they stand equally ready with their male counterparts for education, or "the
betterment of one's soul," as it was often described in Enlightenment discourse.

   In its announced content, Wollstonecraft's passage simply calls for women
to be allowed access to education. However, the dexterous, erudite, polemic
style in which this passage is written accomplishes much more than this.
Wollstonecraft's style serves as her credentials to enter this discussion as an
Enlightenment intellectual. It puts her opponents on notice that she has raided
their rhetorical arsenal. Her style is thus one of the most important evidences
she can offer for her case that women can benefit from education as much as
men. Her style displays her acumen; it issues a challenge; it demands an answer.
She could have chosen any topic as the announced content of this discourse,
and written in this style, it would still pose the same challenge to educated men
who want to exclude women from their ranks.

   In stark contrast to Wollstonecraft's sophisticated style is the
straightforwardness of Mary Hays' persuasive prose. Here is a passage that
offers a wide-sweeping historiography of the detrimental effects of a civilization
denying education to a large portion of its society:

         We have for examples of this, only to contemplate the
         characters and conduct of the descendents of Egyptians, the
         Greeks, the Romans, and other nations, living under the
         same climates, and upon the very same soil, where their re-
         nowned ancestors flourished in arts, and triumphed in arms;
         and to consider to what a state of degradation and humilia-
         tion they are now reduced! (Hays, 1974, pp. 69-70)

   The social and historical essentializing found in this passage undermines
its validity as an argument based on historical precedent. Can any cogent,
pertinent analogies be drawn between the role that education (and exclusion
from it) played in the classical cultures Hays lists and the role it played in
Enlightenment England?

   So if the argument Hays forwards here is to succeed, it must do so more
on the basis of style than content, a style characterized by enthusiasm and
earnestness. Not only is the exclamation mark a clue to the high emotional
pitch of this prose, but the extended list of adverbial clauses that modifies

                                                                                                265
Redington

"living" gives the sentence a hymn-like rhythm. Furthermore, it is a relatively
long sentence but a short paragraph. This is typical of Hays' style throughout
the Appeal. By comparison, Wollstonecraft's sentences are longer, more
complex, and grouped into paragraphs whose relationship to one another plays
a greater role in advancing the linear progress of her argument. And, as noted,
this sentence's length is a function of the adverbial clauses. This is among the
most ideologically simple ways to achieve long sentences. In academic prose,
sentence length usually proliferates because of long noun clauses in the subject
position and the frequent use of other forms of subordinate clauses to reflect
complicated and contingent relationships among ideas. The communicative
effect of Hays' long but fairly simple sentences is reflected in her work's title;
she is indeed, from the stylistic perspective, making an appeal, a supplication.
As Rogers notes, the hallmark of Hays' stylistic strategy is repetition. Rogers
sees Hays as tapping into "the persuasive power of earnestness and gravity"
(1987, p. 134). Whereas Wollstonecraft bursts into the conversation on her
own intellectual merits, Hays politely but persistently knocks on the door.

   From these two passages, then, one can see that even when Wollstonecraft
and Hays address similar topics, their styles achieve different communicative
effects. Already this suggests a significant difference in their respective agendas
for women's rights. The question of how an underrepresented group can gain
an audience is sometimes the most important issue it faces. The agendas of Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. and Malcolm X, for example, differed sharply enough
on this point to prevent their working together toward common goals, since the
latter condoned violence under certain circumstances as a means of garnering
attention.

   I propose that there are also differences in the content of the agendas proposed
by Wollstonecraft and Hays. They may be considerably less compatible than
is commonly thought. For example, the following excerpt from Hays reveals,
both in its content and delivery, demure attitude toward oppression hardly
imaginable in Wollstonecraft:

         Women therefore, generally speaking, act a wiser and a better
         part as individuals, to keep within that boundary prescribed
         by their lawgivers. Within it they often contrive to do mis-
         chief enough; without it who can pretend to say where the
         mischief might end? For, candidly speaking, perhaps it would
         be dangerous to trust women all at once, with liberty in that
         extent which is their due.

         But it is to be regretted, that the temperance and good sense

266
                                                                                              Fighting Styles

         shewn by women, in submitting with so good a grace to inju-
         ries, which though they cannot redress, they nevertheless feel
         very severely; it is much to be regretted, that this temperance
         and good sense, is not attended with better consequences to
         themselves. (1974, p. 71)

   Here is incontrovertible evidence of Hays' gradualism; how would this ever
have operated smoothly alongside her mentor's revolutionary ardor? It is outside
the scope of this project to explore this and all other possible divergences in
agenda between Hays and her mentor, eminently useful as such an undertaking
would be. Instead, I wish to emphasize what the style of the proceeding passage
says about Hays' approach to alleviating women's suffering. The style of this
passage demonstrates Hays' unwavering resolve to remain civil at all times. In
light of the panoramic extent of the "injuries" Hays must have in mind, it is
very telling that she understatedly laments that this suffering "is much to be
regretted" (1974, p. 71). If there were ever a time that merited an unrestrained
outburst, this qualifies. Hays' choice to maintain her suppliant, long-suffering
tone even under these circumstances suggests that her commitment to civility
tops of her list of ideological priorities.

   Wollstonecraft's tone, by contrast, is the stylistic equivalent of a call to storm
the Bastille. In response to Rousseau's assumption that, "with respect to the
female character, obedience is the grand lesson which ought to be impressed
with unrelenting rigor," she exclaims, "What nonsense! When will a great man
arise with sufficient strength of mind to puff away the fumes which pride and
sensuality have thus spread over the subject!" (1974, pp. 50-1). This is an ad
hominem attack in the most literal, gendered sense of the term--an attack against
man. Wollstonecraft accuses her opponents of hubris, not merely faulty logic.
But the strategy works. It succeeds in part because the erudition of her style has
earned her the right to take an occasional jab at her opponents. Furthermore,
she follows this attack with a reiteration of her watertight postulation that if
men insist on defining the quest for virtue as a natural outworking of human
nature, they must include all humans in this quest.

   This comparison of their style shows that Wollstonecraft and Hays differ
in agenda because they differ so greatly in their relationship to their chosen
audiences. Wollstonecraft, of course, addressed Vindication primarily to
Talleyrand in the hopes that the French Revolution would result in advances
in the wellbeing of France's women in general and their access to education in
particular. Her choice to write in a high register of English, though, suggests
that Great Britain's educated elite is her primary audience, and these she feels
comfortable addressing as her equals. Rogers suspects that Hays' style is an

                                                                                                267
Redington

adaptation of the women's conduct literature with which the middle class
would have been familiar (1987, p. 135). This is an interesting choice on Hays'
part, given that her invoked audience is specifically the men of Great Britain.
The value of applying the perspectives of aesthetic monism to these texts is that
it allows an author's choice of agenda, choice of audience, and choice of style
to be seen as different facets of the same choice. The author decides who has
the power to positively modify the problem at hand and also how to present
himself or herself to that audience. Wollstonecraft and Hays differ in style in
part because they differ in their conviction of which segment of England's
population should take up the feminist cause. Style is never merely style.

   This perspective has numerous implications for the college writing classroom,
two of which I would like to delineate in the interest of incorporating style
more effectively into curriculum. First, the means through which conclusions
were drawn about the role of style in Wollstonecraft's and Hays' writing
may evidence why discussions of style can seem inaccessible, even esoteric to
students. If stylistic analysis typically utilizes, as it has here, historical context,
literary context, reader response criticism, audience analysis, rhetorical theory,
and grammatical scrutiny, then students can hardly be blamed for not knowing
what instructors have in mind when referring to style. If style truly arises from
all these factors, it is a more advanced concept than typically billed. To teach
style as a mere adjunct to the rudiments of grammar (as is often then case
in middle school) is therefore a curricular miscalibration. To teach style as a
component of audience awareness (common at the collegiate level) comes closer
to the mark, but still under-represents its complexity and value.

   Related to this issue of miscalibration is a question of curricular sequencing,
and it can be explained by making use of Benjamin S. Bloom's Taxonomy of
Educational Objectives. As writing teachers, we tend to feel most assured that
students are advancing in their understanding of style when we see its techniques
used with creativity and dexterity in their own writing. A cursory reference to
Bloom's taxonomy would seem to confirm this; to employ style in one's own
writing is to create, and creation is a part of synthesis, the second highest form
of learning. But a closer look at the taxonomy prompts two further questions:
Can the student explain her or his success? Can the student reproduce success
in a variety of topics and genres, and in relation to diverse audiences?

   Explaining one's own success requires a panoply of specialized vocabulary,
since style draws upon many facets of literary and linguistic analysis. Bloom
contends that possessing specialized vocabulary is a basic, foundational form
of learning; he groups it with "knowledge" at the bottom of his taxonomy.
The rationale for doing so, articulated in the following quote, seems directly
applicable to the question of how stylistic aptitude should be taught and

268
                                                                                              Fighting Styles

assessed. Perhaps Bloom's own style--his nearly belligerent use of repetition--
indicates a suspicion that educators will not initially share his emphasis on the
foundational importance of vocabulary:

         Each field contains a large number of symbols, either verbal
         or non-verbal, which have particular referents. These repre-
         sent the basic language of the field--the shorthand used by
         workers in a field to express what they know. In any attempt
         by workers to communicate with others about phenomena
         within the field, they find it necessary to make use of some
         of the special symbols and terms they have devised. In many
         cases it is impossible for them to discuss problems in their
         field without making use of some of the essential terms of
         that field. Quite literally, they are unable to think about
         many of the phenomena in the field unless they make use of
         these terms and symbols. (1956, p. 64)

   If Bloom's sweeping generalizations seem reliable, then students need to
be supplied a vocabulary of style as early as possible. This vocabulary could
eventually provide students with a framework that helps them to evaluate
(Bloom's highest form of learning) a variety of rhetorical situations and make
appropriate stylistic choices. In contemporary pedagogical terms, this would be
the level of development at which transference could reasonably be expected.
Even if Bloom's taxonomy is not taken as precisely reflective of a writer's
development, we may still do well to accept the premise that the accumulation of
vocabulary precedes (and provides) the ability to assess sophisticated challenges
and consistently reproduce results.

III. WRITING STYLE, IDENTITY, AND ETHOS

   Students may not feel particular enthusiasm for memorizing lists of
Greek and Latin vocabulary, but there may be a way to utilize their affective
development to foster cognitive development. Curriculum that highlights
connections between writing style and a sense of identity can show students that
they already have a vested interested in this topic by raising concerns they are
likely to have considered previously in history and social studies classes and in
their own interpersonal experiences. Wollstonecraft and Hays elaborate on the
relationship between their choice of writing style and notions of gender in their
society in ways today's audiences are likely to find interesting, even estranging.

                                                                                                269
Redington

Consequently, they are useful for helping scholars and students see the recursive
connection between identity and style as both enduring and current.

   Wollstonecraft lays out what she sees as the connection between style and
conceptions of gender in the introduction of Vindication, and she announces
her plan to trample these notions:

         I shall disdain to cull my phrases or polish my style;--I aim
         at being useful, and sincerity will render me unaffected; for,
         wishing rather to persuade by the force of my arguments,
         than dazzle by the elegance of my language, I shall not waste
         my time in rounding periods, or in fabricating the turgid
         bombast of artificial feelings, which, coming from the head,
         never reach the heart. I shall be employed about things, not
         words!--and, anxious to render my sex more respectable
         members of society, I shall try to avoid that flowery diction
         which has slided from essays into novels, and from novels
         into familiar letters and conversation. (1974, p. 23)

   So for Wollstonecraft, much is at stake in style. She posits herself as a
spokeswoman for all women (at least in Great Britain), and the respectability of
their collective reputation will rise or fall based on her ability to eschew fancy
talk for substantive ideas. Language practices in general are at stake, too, in her
view. She believes essays set the standard that should be emulated by authors
of other genres and then by casual speakers; therefore, the style of her essay is a
question of national importance.

   Wollstonecraft can be forgiven for overestimating the immediate social
impact of the style of her essay, but she did not underestimate the extent to which
her society viewed writing style as inherently gendered. In her 1996 essay "The
Vindication of the Writes of Women: Mary Wollstonecraft and Enlightenment
Rhetoric" Miriam Brody documents the pedagogical influences Wollstonecraft
would both appropriate and react against in crafting Vindication. First, Brody
notes that the gendered notions of style that pervaded Enlightenment rhetoric
have their roots in classical rhetoric. Ancient rhetoricians beginning with
Aristotle described good writing in exclusively male terms, praising its force
and productivity as its highest merits, Brody contends. Their metaphors were
also gender-laden, such as a builder making effective use of his tools and as a
legislator making good use of his wisdom. Brody puts special emphasis, though,
on the contributions Quintilian made to this notion. He made explicit the
correlation of good persuasive prose and natural masculinity in an extended
metaphor that describes ornamented, affected language as a well dressed eunuch.

270
                                                                                              Fighting Styles

He contrasted this with plain language, which he likened to the attractiveness,
strength and productivity of a virile man (1996, pp. 107-108).

   Brody contends that these gendered notions of rhetoric prevailed for
centuries, and most importantly for Wollstonecraft, they influenced the
Enlightenment thinkers under whom she studied. Thus, Wollstonecraft faced
not only the challenge of being a woman writer at a time when very few were
published, but in Vindication she participates in the most "masculine" category
of discourse: persuasive prose intended for the public arena.

   Brody sees Wollstonecraft as having met this challenge in three ways. First,
Wollstonecraft not only adopts but draws attention to her forthright style, as seen
in the previously quoted excerpt from the introduction of Vindication. Second,
she joined with her rhetorical predecessors in the condemnation of affected
femininity. She mitigates this attack, however, by focusing it particularly on
the habits and attitudes of upper class women. In Brody's view, this distinction
paves the way for Wollstonecraft's third technique, that is, the description of the
healthy, effective, unaffected woman who matches men in their ability to wield
the "masculine" traits of persuasive language. This new category or "genus," into
which she implicitly places herself, she calls "the exceptional woman" (Brody,
1996, pp. 112-113). To Brody's analysis, I would add that Wollstonecraft
uses style to distance herself from women in general and to align herself more
closely with the men with whom she seeks an audience. She saw style as central
to gender, and she chose to adopt a socially solitary role for the sake of her
rhetorical mission.

   Hays does not theorize about her style, but she does apologize for it. Worried
that her style, so conciliatory by comparison to Wollstonecraft's, will distance
her from men, she explains:

         I have heretofore, it is true, been pretty free in my observa-
         tions upon the conduct of men, where I think it absurd and
         capricious with regard to women; but I hope without acrimo-
         ny, for I am sure I feel none towards them. On the contrary I
         love them with all my heart as individuals. (1974, p. 93)

   It is possible to see the effects of gender and style operating in quite the
opposite ways here as in Wollstonecraft's text. The assumption that women must
be peacemakers (presumably at any cost) underlies the preceding excerpt, as
does the assumption that women must avoid even the appearance of acrimony.
Women are embodiments of pure love, in Hays' view, and this must be reflected
in their writing style. Many of the rhetorical techniques Wollstonecraft employs
become necessarily off limits in this view. The sarcastic pronouncement of

                                                                                                271
Redington

acquiescence, the bombastic rebuttal, and certainly the ad hominem attack do
not fit within Hays' construct of femininity.

   Although contemporary feminist rhetoricians would have much to say
about this patriarchal construction of womanhood, they too question the
ethics inherent in classical rhetoric. In her 1979 article "The Womanization
of Rhetoric," Sally Miller Gerhart goes as far as to claim that "any intent to
persuade is an act of violence" (1979, p. 195). She lists several tendencies within
the classical rhetorical tradition, many of which persist to the present day, that
she sees as inherently patriarchal and destructive. These include a proclivity for
conquest and competition, a disregard for the feelings and opinions of others,
and the assumption that one should value victory as a higher good than personal
growth and change. While Gerhart's equating persuasion with violence never
caught on--perhaps it was recognized as an attempt at persuasion--her critique
of the inherently patriarchal nature of Western rhetoric sparked a discussion that
continues to this day. Especially prominent in this conversation are Sonja K. Foss
and Cindy L. Griffin. Wanting to explore further the notion that rhetors should
embrace a willingness to grow and change as a result of argumentation, they
developed a framework called invitational rhetoric. Their 1995 article "Beyond
Persuasion: A Proposal for Invitational Rhetoric" includes recommendations
for maximizing the personal developmental potential inherent in exchanging
the classical, conflict-oriented model of rhetoric for a model that is "rooted
in equality, immanent value and self-determination" (1995, p. 5). Invitational
rhetoric has immediate implications for style. It necessarily favors conciliatory
word choices over inflammatory ones, for example. The use of a rhetorical
question meant to force an opponent to abandon his or her position, a stalwart
of classical rhetoric, has no place in the invitational approach.

   Wollstonecraft and Hays, then, fare very differently in an assessment of
the extent to which they embody the values of invitational rhetoric. With
Wollstonecraft, we arrive at an ethical impasse. Many of the stylistic techniques
invitational rhetoric eschews as hegemonic are commonplace in Wollstonecraft's
repertoire. But ironically, she adopted and co-opted these techniques from
classical and Enlightenment rhetoric on ethical grounds of her own, namely,
because they were the right tools to accomplish a worthy task that she was in
an exceptional position to undertake. If Wollstonecraft has a methodological
advocate among contemporary feminist rhetoricians, it may be Cixous, who
claims that women should consider themselves free to take anything that works
from the male-dominated world of writing and use it in their own way: "We've
been able to possess anything only by flying; [in French, "to fly" has the double
meaning "to steal"] we've lived in flight, stealing away, finding, when desired,
narrow passageways, hidden crossovers" (Cixous, 1976, p. 887). Writing two

272
                                                                                              Fighting Styles

centuries after Wollstonecraft, Cixous likewise collapses the question of ethics
into one of pragmatic necessity for the advancement of women. But Hays, from
the standpoint of invitational rhetoric, generally exhibits the conciliatory tone
that accords with a concern for the feelings of all participants in a debate. She
could be said to anticipate and embody this aspect of invitational rhetoric. The
premium she places on civility as exemplified in her ever hopeful, never spiteful
tone, also seems to accord with these principles.

   By overtly commenting on the rhetorical aims of their stylistic choices, both
authors highlight the functioning of the "economies of attention" William
Kurlinkus describes in this volume. Hays and Wollstonecraft both employ
style in an attempt to "get the audience to pay the right kind of attention."
The ethical components of "economies of attention" Kurlinkus outlines
can readily be demonstrated to college-level writing students. Even without
exposure to classical or contemporary rhetorical theory, they can appreciate the
conundrums these feminist authors faced as they sought the best styles to suit
their purposes. Certainly, students can describe instances of feeling that they
had to alter or fabricate a sense of self for the sake of a writing assignment. Even
in an age when educators seek to root prejudice out of language instruction, we
cannot help sending inadvertent messages about which dialects, preferences,
and attitudes are most welcome on the page. It is important to acknowledge,
then, the ethical advancement inherent in supplying students the agency to
shape their own written identities.

IV. THE TRANSITION FROM A STYLE-
CENTERED READING METHODOLOGY TO A
STYLE-CENTERED WRITING PEDAGOGY

   Rhetoricians and experienced writers will likely recognize the implications
for writing of this style-based reading methodology. Many may find in it echoes
of their own experiences when immersion in a body of literature helped them
find their voice(s) on the page. But college students, especially first and second
year students in mandatory composition courses, will need a manageable
process by which a guided reading experience can equip them to be style-
conscious authors. The following heuristic therefore seeks to encapsulate this
article's methodology into four sequenced steps that can be applied to a wide
range of artifacts in a writing classroom.

   In terms of preparation, the first two questions entail choosing an old
document whose stylistic features students will analyze. The instructor's choice
should be calibrated around the student's linguistic dexterity; the sample

                                                                                                273
Redington

document should be old enough to seem entirely removed from the student's
place and time, but not so old that the vocabulary and syntax significantly
obscure comprehension. Next, the instructor should be ready to offer an
historical overview of the artifacts' circumstances of origin.

1. What is the cultural and literary context of this document?

   Writing instruction about the persuasive prose of Mary Wollstonecraft should
probably begin with guided readings in Edmund Burke. As his speeches are less
intricate (by Burkean standards) than his essays, and since they take greater care
to explain their purpose and occasion, they provide an entry point for helping
students understand the social shifts and tensions of late eighteenth century
Great Britain. It would also show students the stylistic standard Wollstonecraft
adopted and then determined to exceed. When studying the persuasive prose of
Mary Hays, the obvious starting point is the conduct literature that proliferated
during her day and that established the style Hays would emulate.

   For first and second year students, I recommend choosing a document from
within approximately the past fifty years. The dearth of history instruction
generally in secondary education and the specifically rare use of primary
documents effectively preclude the possibility that any landmark essay will be
too familiar to play its role in this heuristic. In teaching Martin Luther King Jr.'s
"A Letter from the Birmingham Jail" at the university level, I have found that a
basic review of the challenges faced by the Civil Rights movement in the early
1960s is necessary. In any instance, the historical overview should eventually
focus on a discussion of the rhetorical situation that immediately surrounds the
document.

2. How should the author's stylistic choices be seen
in light of the historical and literary context?

   I have found that students' appreciation of King as an author and rhetor
elevates dramatically when they compare his letter to the pedantic style of "A
Call for Unity," the open letter from Alabama clergymen that prompted his
response. Without this comparison, and without considering King's letter as
having been written in jail, my students have sometimes perfunctorily described
its style as "sophisticated" and "well-read." With the comparison intact, students
are more frequently able to explain the role King's style plays in countering the
argument presented by the Alabama clergymen. Likewise, if students are to
appreciate Jonathan Swift's "A Modest Proposal," they may need exposure to
two or three samples of the writings of social activists from that time. When the

274
                                                                                              Fighting Styles

text is considered in isolation, Swift's condemnation of the English landholding
class is overwhelmingly clear. Only when seen in its literary context is it clear
that Swift's clinical, detached tone is a mockery of Enlightened social activists
who, in his view, had become numb to the human suffering they intended
to solve. This exemplifies the sort of significant but unstated meaning Milic
encourages literary scholars to discover through attentiveness to style, and it is
within the reach of beginning composition students.

   The use of an old document as the examined artifact offers several unique
advantages. First, it reduces the cognitive dissonance students feel when reading
about contemporary controversial topics. They do not have to work to clarify
or re-categorize their own position about the causes of starvation in eighteenth
century Ireland before examining Swift's stylistic choices. Similarly unlikely is
the prospect that Wollstonecraft's and Hays' call for women's education would
seem like anything other than a foregone conclusion. Comparing the styles of
old documents also counteracts the myth, often fostered inadvertently through
curricular omission, that style does not matter. Students will see that through
style, authors have been able to demonstrate credentials or assert membership
in a group to which their society denied them access. They will internalize the
ancient sense of "ethos" as the confluence of one's sense of self, character on the
page, and ethical standards. Finally, the use of old documents will challenge the
myth that style simply happens. Even when reading authors who claim to "write
the way they feel," students will be able to draw meaningful conclusions about
why an author's feelings were expressed in that manner at that point in history.
In the course of performing the first two steps, students will have assembled a
glossary of rhetorical techniques, or at least augmented their vocabulary of style.
It is advantageous for beginning students to hand-craft their own glossaries,
annotating them with examples.

3. How should an author's stylistic choices be
understood in today's cultural and literary context?

   The third step of this heuristic is intended to help students transfer their stylistic
awareness into the present day. Their glossaries become tools for examining a
variety of current samples of persuasive prose including op-ed pieces, political
speeches, and advertisements. It is common for courses in persuasive writing to
require at least one assignment based on a rhetorical analysis of a document or
artifact. Such an assignment could easily be altered to ask students to focus only
on the style of the artifact and to analyze its rhetorical impact.

   The sequencing of this step is also intended to help students put today's
conflicts in their historical contexts since their discoveries about stylistic

                                                                                                275
Redington

continuities or departures can lead to discoveries about ideological ones. It
also hoped that the previous two steps will have offered students means to
grapple with and more adequately express their cognitive dissonance. Well-
articulated cognitive dissonance is the basis, or at least the starting point, of
effective persuasive prose. This step in the heuristic can increase the chance that
students will find themselves productively invested in current affairs instead of
responding to cognitive dissonance with despondency and vapid writing.

4. How will my stylistic choices be understood
in today's cultural and literary context?

   The culminating process of transference is that students would apply their
stylistic awareness to their own writing in relation to a contemporary audience.
Obviously, this can be done with a completed text through a style-oriented
workshop. But it can also be fruitfully applied to an essay in its early drafting
stages. Writing instructors, myself included, typically prompt students to plan
the main points of an essay before attempting to generate a complete text. Yet
in doing so, we may be subverting deeply ingrained cognitive and creative
processes; upon reflection, it seems that in many rhetorical situations, locutors
crystallize their stylistic decisions before refining their content. Do we not enter
most verbal arguments with a fuller sense of how we feel (and thus our tone)
than of exactly what we will say? In the process of crafting written arguments,
then, students should be prompted early on to inventory their feelings about
their topic and to strategize about ways to channel their feelings into effective
stylistic decisions.

   Although this iteration of the heuristic is calibrated for first and second year
students, it can be adapted for application at various levels of university writing
instruction. In an intermediate class in persuasive writing, it could be used to
turn a favorite paper from the semester into a capstone project by refining its
sense of audience and ethos. In advanced and graduate courses, this heuristic can
be introduced early in the semester as a tool to guide the drafting process. I also
recommend adapting the level of transparency in one's pedagogy to the students'
maturity as writers. Beginning writers may only be able to see in retrospect
what they have gained through these guided reading activities, and they may be
initially distrustful that discussions of historical conflicts and literary techniques
will aid their present efforts. Graduate students, though, should appreciate the
opportunity to refine their methodologies and increase awareness of their own
metacognition. Finally, this heuristic accommodates adjustment in terms of its
scope. It can be used relatively quickly to illuminate students' understanding
of one document, or it could be the framework on which scholars conduct a

276
                                                                                              Fighting Styles

corpus analysis that seeks to catalogue and contextualize the stylistic decisions
in an entire body of literature, such as the essays and pamphlets of the American
Revolution.

   This project aspires to integrate formerly disparate pedagogical approaches.
Whereas Milic himself postulated that a different approach to style may
be needed for literary analysis and for writing instruction, a large degree of
harmony and transference seems possible. The application of the combined
reading and writing methodology presented here can help writers mature as
they become more eclectic, interdisciplinary, and holistic in their experience of
language. Integration--an indispensible step in development--can also help
student writers more clearly see their agency as individuals who can contribute
to the discourses that shape society.

REFERENCES

Adams, R. M. (1940). Mary Hays, disciple of William Godwin. PMLA 55(2),
   472-483.

Bloom, B. S. (Ed.). (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives (Vol. 1). New
   York: Longmans, Green and Co.

Brody, M. (1996). The vindication of the writes of women: Mary Wollstone-
   craft and enlightenment rhetoric. In M. J. Falco (Ed.), Feminist interpreta-
   tions of Mary Wolllstonecraft (pp. 105-23). University Park, PA: The Pennsyl-
   vania State University Press.

Cixous, H. (1976). The laugh of the Medusa. Signs 1(4), 875-93.
Foss, S. K., & Griffin, C. L. (1995). Beyond persuasion: A proposal for an in-

   vitational rhetoric. Communications Monographs 62, 2-18.
Gerhart, S. M. (1979). The womanization of rhetoric. Women's Studies Interna-

   tional Quarterly 2, 195-201.
Hays, M. (1974). An appeal to the men of Great Britain in behalf of women. New

   York: Garland.
Milic, L. T. (1969). Theories of style and their implications for the teaching of

   composition. In G. Love & M. Payne (Eds.), Contemporary essays on style (pp.
   15-21). Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman.
Rogers, K. (1987). The contributions of Mary Hays. Prose Studies 10(2), 131-
   142.
Wollstonecraft, M. (1792/1974). A vindication of the rights of woman: With
   strictures on political and moral subjects. New York: Garland.
Zaido, V. & Leonard, M. (2008). Laughing with the Medusa: Classical myth and
   feminist thought. New York: Oxford University Press.

                                                                                                277
STYLE AND THE
PROFESSIONAL WRITING
CURRICULUM: TEACHING
STYLISTIC FLUENCY
THROUGH SCIENCE WRITING

Jonathan Buehl
Ohio State University

INTRODUCTION

   Recent scholarship on style and writing pedagogy suggests that rhetoric's
third canon is experiencing a renaissance in composition studies. Anchored
by recent monographs (e.g., Butler's Out of Style, Holcomb & Killingsworth's
Performing Prose, and Johnson's A Rhetoric of Pleasure), rich collections (e.g.,
Butler's Bedford/St. Martin's anthology and Johnson & Pace's Refiguring Prose
Style) and numerous articles, this corpus attempts to reposition style as central
to the writing process and to writing pedagogy. But this refiguring neglects an
important site for style-centered pedagogy--professional writing curricula.1

   Whether its operating model is the single-shot service course or elective, a
minor, a major, or a concentration within a major, a professional writing program
should take style seriously. Unfortunately, professional communication texts
often present narrow conceptions of professional style. For example, in a study
of popular textbooks, Wolfe found that most general technical communication
texts prescribe universally avoiding passive voice. For Wolfe, the "injunction
against the passive" is a specific disservice to engineering students who will
likely write reports requiring passive constructions--traditional markers of
scientific styles (2009, pp. 355-358). She concludes, "In place of prescriptive
injunctions against particular styles, we need more thorough discussions of the
rhetorical considerations that prompt specific language uses" (2009, p. 358).

   Empirical studies confirm that responding to variable stylistic demands is
an important workplace skill. For example, Angouri and Harwood's case study
of style in a multinational consortium indicates that stylistic expectations
(e.g., the level of formality) for seemingly standardized documents (e.g.,
memos and minutes) vary widely, even within an organization. They suggest

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.17  279
Buehl

rethinking traditional model-based pedagogy: "Although models can serve
valuable awareness-raising purposes, writing teachers need to stress how and
why such models may bear scant resemblance to the templates and variations
students may encounter on the job" (2008, p. 58). All students must develop a
stylistic sensibility if they are to navigate the stylistic variability of professional
life; such a sensibility is especially important for students planning careers as
communication professionals.

   Students planning to compete for jobs as writers and editors must develop
stylistic fluency--a meta-mastery of style--if they are to adapt successfully to
the rhetorical situations they will face in ever-evolving workplaces. This chapter
argues that professional writing students can develop transferable stylistic
fluency by engaging style in those rhetorical spaces where science and writing
interact. However, using science to teach style requires reimagining how science
can fit into writing classes.

   When science and writing meet in teaching spaces, the pairing tends to be
stylistically monochromatic. Writing courses for future or working scientists
focus on technical genres and the conventions of scientific discourse. Writing-
intensive science courses also focus on formal stylistic conventions, whether
of school genres (e.g., lab reports for canned experiments) or documents
supporting novel research (e.g., reports and proposals). Science journalism
courses focus on styles of popular accommodation--news reporting, the "gee
whiz" style, etc. Finally, science-themed composition classes use science topics
when teaching students about general "academic discourse," but those students
rarely read or write scientific language (Moscovitz & Kellogg, 2005, p. 311).
In short, approaches to science and writing tend to fall on either side of a line
between "scientific writing" (or "writing science") and "science writing" (or
"writing about science").2

   I do not catalog these approaches to criticize them. Having taught science-
themed sections of first-year composition as well as scientific-writing courses for
both fledgling scientists at universities and scientists in industry, I can anecdotally
confirm that specific stylistic foci are often required by programmatic mandates
or pedagogical objectives. However, some courses and some students require
polychromatic approaches to science and style.

   Rhetorical situations involving scientific content demand stylistic flexibility.
When writing about science, a communication professional might read and write
prose in technical, explanatory, and wonder-inducing styles. As a consultant
and researcher, I've designed curricula for pharmaceutical companies wanting
stylistically consistent reports; I've been tasked with revising grant proposals
to make them more compelling; I've created marketing materials for research
institutions demanding "punchy," precise prose; and I've written histories of

280
                                                         Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

scientific discoveries to support my research on the rhetoric of science. Each
of these situations has distinct constraints demanding an adaptable proficiency
with prose style. Although most professional-writing students will not choose
careers engaging science, they all can benefit from working with its demanding
discourses in the context of a course. Moreover, science offers pedagogical
benefits.

   Science is an ideal conduit for teaching style for three reasons. First, the styles
of science communication have been well documented by rhetorical theorists;
this foundational work provides conceptual frameworks that support effective
teaching. Second, rhetorical situations involving science are stylistically complex.
Although discourses of science seem to sort into clear categories of prose style
(e.g., technical, explanatory, entertaining), these categories are highly variable
(e.g., the "scientific" register differs from field to field and from journal to
journal). Therefore, scientific topics are ideal for teaching students how to assess
and engage variation within marked styles. Third, scientific discourse is difficult
and "strange" for many students--even students in scientific fields. Contrary
to conventional wisdom, this strangeness is manageable and advantageous.3 By
reading, writing, and writing about scientific prose, students engage unfamiliar
discourse, which encourages them to apply newly learned strategies.

   The course described in this chapter capitalizes on the robust base of rhetoric-
of-science scholarship, the consistency and variability of the styles of science
discourses, and the beneficial difficulty of scientific prose. After explaining the
rationale for the course, I summarize its projects and activities and document the
merits of specific approaches with student-evaluation comments. Although this
course is designed as an upper-level elective, its assignments and strategies might
be productive in other contexts; course materials are reproduced in an appendix.

FROM THE RHETORIC OF SCIENCE
TO A PEDAGOGY OF STYLE

   Our understanding of the macro- and micro-level rhetoric performed in
both the genres written for scientists and the various genres "translating" science
for non-experts has grown dramatically over the past few decades. Pioneering
studies by rhetoricians (e.g., Bazerman; Gross), sociologists (e.g., Latour &
Woolgar; Myers), and linguists (e.g., Halliday; Swales) document the historical
development, epistemological orientations, and contemporary conventions of
technical scientific prose. Theorists have also explicated the rhetorical features of
popularizations (e.g., Fahnestock), textbooks (e.g., Martin), and press releases
(e.g., Graube et al.).

                                                                                                281
Buehl

   Although this corpus enhanced our understanding of the discursive
activities pervading and surrounding scientific activity, some scholars argue that
the relationship between this knowledge and composition curricula is vexed.
According to Zerbe, subfields of rhetoric and composition engage science in
partial and problematic ways:

         [E]ven when science becomes an area of interest ... rhetoric
         and composition does not engage science head-on: either
         scientific discourse itself is ignored in favor of texts that are
         merely about science, (as is the case with composition and
         technical communication), or scientific discourse is analyzed
         but issues of pedagogy, literacy, and culture are disregarded
         (as is the case with the rhetoric of science). (2007, p. 50)

   My course attempts to resolve the "silo" problems Zerbe identifies. It uses
the machinery of the rhetoric of science to support a sequence of activities
through which students engage--at a professional level--the practical
problems of reading and producing both scientific texts and accommodations
of science.

   Inspired by Fahnestock's observations on the rhetorical distinctions
between scientific communication and accommodations of science, my course
is structured by the tripartite division of Aristotelian genres (1998, pp. 332-
346). It contains a module on technical prose (forensic discourse), a module
on writing about science for decision makers (deliberative discourse), and a
module on popularizing science (epideictic discourse).4 In each, students apply
rhetorical theory to assess stylistic variety and to produce appropriate prose for
stylistically distinct situations.

Module 1: The Technical Prose Module

   In the technical prose module, students learn to assess unfamiliar styles,
they learn to recognize features and "problems" of scientific prose, and they
practice editing it. The module's major project asks students to comment on
research reports by graduate students studying educational psychology. A
colleague in that field invites her students to provide papers they plan to revise
for publication. These documents are rhetorically flawed; some contain errors
associated with learning English as a second language. My students analyze
the papers, edit them to conform to a specific journal's style, and compose
letters to the authors that explain corrections and recommend more substantive
rhetorical revisions.

282
                                             Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

Published text: "Dam Safety: Problems Text after "plain language" revisions
with Metal Materials"

Corrosion is a common problem                This document explains how to prevent
for spillway conduits and other              and repair safety problems for dams with
metal appurtenances. Corrosion is            metal parts.
the deterioration or breakdown of
metal because of a reaction with its         How can metal parts cause safety
environment. Exposure to moisture,           problems?
acidic conditions, or salt will accelerate   Metal parts create safety problems when
the corrosion process. Acid runoff           they fail. For example, a compromised
from strip-mined areas will cause rapid      spillway conduit can lead to the complete
corrosion of metal conduits. In these        collapse of a dam.
areas, conduits made of less corrodible
materials such as concrete or plastic        Which metal parts are potential safety
should be used. Soil types also factor into  risks?
the amount of corrosion. Clayey soils        Metal dam parts posing safety risks
can be more corrosive than sandy soils       include spillway conduits made of iron,
since they are poorly drained and poorly     smooth steel, or corrugated metal. They
aerated. Silts are somewhere in between      also include other appurtenances, such as
clays and sands. Some examples of metal      drain valves and sluice gates.
conduits include ductile iron, smooth
steel, and corrugated metal. Corrugated      All metal parts can be damaged by
metal pipe is not recommended for use in     corrosion.
dams since the service life for corrugated
metal is only 25 to 30 years, whereas the    What is corrosion and what causes it?
life expectancy for dams is much longer.     Corrosion occurs when metal deteriorates
In areas of acidic water, the service life   because of a reaction with the environment.
can be much less. Therefore, corrugated      Environmental factors that accelerate
metal spillway conduits typically need to    corrosion include exposure to moisture,
be repaired or replaced early in the dam's   salt, or acidic conditions.
design life, which can be very expensive.

Figure 1. Example of revising according to the Federal Plain Language Guidelines
produced by the Plain Language Action and Information Network (PLAIN). The
source text is a fact sheet authored by the Ohio State Department of Natural
Resources. To save space, some topics in the "before" column are not repre-
sented in the "revised" column. Although plain-language edits emphasize con-
cision, beneficial design changes (e.g., headings and generous spacing) often
increase document length.

                                                                             283
Buehl

   To prepare for this assignment, students study rhetorical features of scientific
articles, including stylistic features. We discuss grammatical "problems"
associated with technical scientific prose, stylistic issues related to writing about
numbers, and traditional ESL "trouble spots."5 Students also learn to assess
variation in technical styles through a quantitative norming activity inspired
by Leech and Short's work on stylistic norms and Corbett's style exercises from
Classical Rhetoric for the Modern Student (1990, pp. 404-421).

   In the norming activity, students determine the discursive norms of
educational psychology journals by coding and counting instances of specific
features of scientific prose, such as voice preferences, pronoun use, and the
Swalesian structures of introductions.6 They also identify other features, such
as average sentence length, passage length, and information about citations.
After accounting for these features in a small set of articles, students use
their data to develop style guidelines for their editing project. For example, if
quantitative analysis revealed a plethora of personal pronouns--anomalies for
"traditional" scientific language--then students could confidently advise their
editorial clients that personal pronouns are appropriate. Similarly, if each article
contextualizes its research by articulating how it "continues a tradition," then
students have data to justify revisions to their clients' introductions. Although
this exercise focuses on style in the discourse communities of educational
psychology, quantitative norming is a useful tool for any situation in which
"outsiders" approach unfamiliar and difficult styles.

   Compared to other fields, educational psychology is relatively accessible, but
its discourse is initially challenging for students. Once we discuss terms for the
features of scientific discourse, most students do reasonably well in diagnosing
problems in drafts. For example, Halliday's list of "grammatical problems" in
scientific English coupled with Gopen and Swan's discussion of cohesion helps
students determine if sentences are confusing because of syntactic, semantic, or
pragmatic problems.7 Once equipped with functional terminologies, students
approach this unfamiliar language with greater confidence.

   Although difficult, the technical editing project is a crucial first step. Editing
for scientific style makes students better readers of technical prose, and they use
these reading skills when accommodating scientific texts for other audiences.
Student evaluations confirm the importance of the project in the assignment
sequence.

   Many students mention that the first module was their least favorite,
but they appreciated its role. For example, one student wrote "I liked the
last [project] the best, but I learned the most from the first one." Another
recognized it as a necessary challenge: "Personally, I had the most trouble with
the first assignment, but I think it could be argued that it was simply a necessary

284
                                                         Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

struggle in learning how to write about science." Yet another student explained
how the first module increased scientific literacy: "We started with the hardest
assignment first, which taught me how to read science." Indeed, the ability to
read difficult technical prose is essential both for other course projects and for
science writing generally.

Module 2: The Deliberative Prose Module

   In the second module, students learn to describe science for decision
makers, and they practice writing both in the "plain language" style and in a
more energetic science-marketing style. They produce two related documents:
a memo for a legislative official and a marketing brochure describing the
same research. In completing both projects, students translate material from a
scientific style into a plain style and from a plain style into a more ornate style.

   Plain styles have a long and complex history in the rhetorical tradition
and in contemporary culture. (See Kurlinkus and Bacon, respectively, in this
volume.) Certainly, composition teachers must be wary of venerating some
version of the "plain style" as the ultimate or primary goal of writing courses.
Nonetheless, plain styles offer both rhetorical and pedagogical affordances.
Sometimes, a plain style is the right tool for a task; it can also help students to
notice differences between styles. For example, students can easily recognize the
differences between scientific prose and the "plain language" style.

   What I describe as the "plain language" style is the style advocated for in
the Federal Plain Language Guidelines, a document produced to help Federal
employees produce more accessible documents. This plain style does stress
writing precise and concise sentences in audience-appropriate vocabulary, but it
also emphasizes the importance of rhetorical arrangement and good document
design. My students apply these principles in their legislative memo assignment.

   In the memo assignment (a.k.a. "Defending Your Earmark"), each student
is assigned an article by an OSU professor and asked to imagine that earmarked
funding for the project has been scrutinized publically. The earmark's legislative
sponsors need "plain language" summaries they can use to generate talking
points to support the research. To prepare the students for science in plain
language, we first discuss occasions where plain language descriptions are
necessary. Specifically, we read case studies describing ethical, administrative,
and political issues that arise when science enters deliberative spaces.8 The
students also practice translating technical texts into "plain language" by revising
overly technical fact sheets distributed by a state agency. Figure 1 presents part
of one of these sheets--a document on dam safety. The published text (left
column) meets one prescription of the Federal Plain Language Guidelines: "use

                                                                                                285
Buehl

short sentences." However, it also suffers many of the problems that students
must learn to recognize when revising for "plain language." The revised text
(right column) reflects "plain language" advice for audience (e.g., "identify and
write your audience"), structure (e.g., "organize for the reader's needs," "use lots
of headings"), paragraphing (e.g., "cover only one topic in each paragraph"),
and grammar (e.g., "prefer the active voice," "don't turn verbs into nouns").
Typically, students do well in revising for sentence length and voice, but they
struggle with revising nominalized actions and organization. The revision
exercise gives me an opportunity to comment on students' facility with these
skills before they develop their memos.

   In the second graded assignment for Module Two (the science marketing
brochure), students work in groups to create documents about interdisciplinary
research areas (e.g., music cognition) that the University's Office of Research could
use in its development activities. The groups write about the research described in
the "Defending Your Earmark" memos, but they must transform four one-page
plain-language documents into two and a half pages of exciting prose.

   This assignment's rhetorical situation mimics a project I consulted on
for a different institution. A program executive wanted a library of one-page
"abstracts" to take to meetings with agency officials, foundation executives,
legislative directors, or other decision makers needing succinct but inspiring
summaries of the institution's capabilities. Each abstract was to describe an
emerging area of interdisciplinary research (such as nanotechnology) and to
demonstrate the institution's expertise in that area by summarizing the research
agendas of several scientists. Although described as "technical abstracts," the
promotional purpose of the documents demanded a promotional style. Indeed,
the initial efforts of my co-consultants were sent back for revisions because they
"read like boring magazine articles" and "were not `punchy' enough."

   To prepare students for the brochure assignment, we discuss strategies
for describing processes (e.g., Johnson's nested "black box" technique [134-
135]), tactics of definition (categorical, partition, example, etc.), and tools
for controlling sentence rhythm through alliteration, parallelism, and various
types of phrasal modification. Students then practice developing compressed,
evocative descriptions by producing profiles of rocks displayed in the University's
geology museum.

   The "writing about rocks" exercise begins with physical descriptions. The
class visits the museum, and each student gathers details about the appearance of
a rock. After drafting a description at the site, they return to the classroom and
research the chemistry, the formation, and the historical, cultural, or industrial
significance of the rock. They then revise their initial descriptions into profiles
appropriate for an institutional newsletter.

286
                                                         Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

   The process of describing the visible features of the rocks leads students to
generate evocative similes quickly; for example, "Dioptase is rough-looking,
like sparkly green dried-out sea coral or a mass of green candy Pop Rocks." This
practice with physical comparisons ties into deeper discussions of other figures
of comparison, such as analogy and metaphor.9

   Ken Baake's Metaphor and Knowledge: The Challenges of Writing Science
offers precise, productive descriptions of how metaphors work, how they work
in science, and which other figures of comparison offer alternatives to metaphor
(2003, pp. 62-78). Such theorized descriptions offer a vital grounding in the
figures of comparison.

   Figures of comparison are essential tools for science writers because these
authors often describe unfamiliar objects. For example, in the following passage,
Stacey Burling uses both simile and metaphor to describe images of a brain
destroyed by Alzheimer's disease:

         What struck [the Alzheimer's researcher] right away was
         what was not there. Slides from a normal brain would be
         solid pink. Many of these were dappled with white spots that
         made them look like slices of baby Swiss or leaves eaten down
         to the veins. The white holes were the abandoned homes of
         dead cells. (2007, p. 118)

   After discussing the uses of simple figurative comparisons, we discuss how
these figures can introduce ambiguities or create inaccurate associations. For
example, we discuss a press release whose metaphoric title--"A Dinosaur
Dance Floor"--originated in comments by a paleontologist when she
discovered a site containing hundreds of overlapping dinosaur tracks from
multiple species:

         Get out there and try stepping in their footsteps, and you feel
         like you are playing the game `Dance Dance Revolution' that
         teenagers dance on," says Marjorie Chan, professor and chair
         of geology and geophysics at the University of Utah. "This
         kind of reminded me of that--a dinosaur dance floor--be-
         cause there are so many tracks and a variety of different
         tracks."

         "There must have been more than one kind of dinosaur
         there," she adds. "It was a place that attracted a crowd, kind
         of like a dance floor."

                                                                                                287
Buehl

   In discussing the "dinosaur dance floor," students tease out the implications
of the analogy. Clearly, mappings between the domains of human and dinosaur
activity were at work as Chan thought about the site, and the phrase "dinosaur
dance floor" is certainly evocative. However, "dance floor" might generate
images of behavior unlikely to have occurred at the site; i.e., the dinosaurs were
not actually dancing around the watering hole that attracted them. Also, as
some students have noted, dancing often has romantic implications, which may
or may not pertain to this situation.

   Although an imprecise figurative description of dinosaur behavior might
not represent a major ethical concern, the example helps to transition the
discussion to cases where imprecise metaphors could have greater consequences.
Accompanying a discussion of comparative figures with Ceccarelli's study on
mixed metaphors in descriptions of genomic science helps students understand
the stakes of using metaphoric language that is both productive and partial. We
continue to discuss the benefits and ethical implications of figural language in
the third module on popularizations of science.

   Student comments on open-ended prompts often focus on two aspects
of the second module: writing in groups and practicing concise description.
Although many students dislike writing in groups--and vent that frustration in
evaluations--it is an important skill to practice. And some students found the
team-developed brochure to be the most useful assignment. According to one,
"The group brochure assignment was the most helpful because it got us working
in an interdisciplinary fashion." Other students have appreciated the scaffolding
assignments for this module. For example, one student wrote, "The [activities]
that taught me the most about concision while still being descriptive were the
writing about rocks and instructions assignments."

Module 3: Epideictic Popularizations of Science

   In the third module, students produce popularizations of scientific topics.
Each student must choose a publication venue and assess the typical stylistic
features of its articles. After locating story ideas and assessing potential venues,
students prepare "pitch" proposals, which I must approve before they write their
stories.

   To prepare for this assignment, we discuss a range of popular accommodation
styles--polemical essays, "gee whiz" science writing, health writing, broadcast
styles, and science on the Web. Students also practice stylistic assessment by
comparing many months' worth of science features from our local paper--
The Columbus Dispatch. When examining all of these examples, we discuss
the rhetorical features of popular science, tactics for creating compelling

288
                                                         Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

introductions, narrative structure, aspects of explanatory and contextualizing
visuals, and rhetorical figures beyond metaphors and similes. Learning about
rhetorical figures is especially important because these devices help students
gain control over style at the phrase and sentence level.

   An upper-division science-writing course is an ideal place to teach students
about figural language because of the consistency with which rhetorical figures
appear in science communication. As Fahnestock has shown, rhetorical figures
function as inventional resources in primary science communication (Rhetorical
Figures in Science), and figural patterns persist when science is translated for
non-experts ("Preserving the Figure"). Moreover, popular science articles
provide clear and provocative examples of a host of rhetorical figures.

   In my class, we spend half a session discussing the figural resources deployed
in just the titles of Dispatch science columns. These titles serve as examples that
help students learn to identify both specific figures as well as broader patterns of
figuration in a specific publication. For example, our discussions have revealed
that Dispatch authors tend to use titles with alliterative phrasing (e.g., "Aid, Abet,
Achoo," "A Mollusk Mystery," "Royal Research"), rhetorical questions (e.g.,
"Have You Seen This Frog?";"Can Animals Be Gay?"), and various substitutions
involving movie titles and other cultural allusions (e.g., "When Silkworm Met
Spider," "Magma P.I."). Less frequently deployed figures include antitheses
(e.g., "Shrinking Glaciers, Rising Oceans"), analogies (e.g., "Toxic Soup"),
and even rhymes forced through intentional error (e.g., "Boxes of Rockses").
(Additional examples are available online via the Dispatch's "Science Pages"
archives.) For their final projects, some students choose to write Dispatch-style
pieces, and they tend to appropriate the figural markings of the style effectively.
For example, a student paper about the rapid shrinking and projected demise of
the star Betelgeuse was punningly titled "The Life and Death of a Super Star."

   Practicing with rhetorical figures gives students more than strategies for
generating clever titles. For example, figures used in creating and managing
lists are important sentence- and paragraph-level resources. By discussing and
experimenting with asyndeton and polysyndeton along with incrementum,
gradatio, and lists seeming to lack any trajectory, students learn about the
conceptual and rhythmic consequences of listing. For example, in the following
sentence describing an Alzheimer's patient, Stacey Burling controls sentence
rhythm through nested lists, parallelism, and conjunction:

         Here was the essence of a man who had gone to Yale, loved
         a woman, fathered six children, loved ice cream and Mozart
         and e. e. cummings, favored questions over answers and
         change over complacency, hated camping, loathed golf, and,

                                                                                                289
Buehl

         over the last 20 years, had slowly lost the capacity to under-
         stand any of it. (2007, p. 106)

   Similarly, Matthew Chapman's polemical account of the Kitzmiller v.
Dover Area School District case is a rich source for rhetorical lists. In describing
stakeholders in this debate over teaching Intelligent Design, the author often
deploys figurally-managed series. For example, the following polysyndetonic
list emphasizes why Dover's curriculum-committee chair was unqualified to
make curricular decisions: "The chair of the curriculum committee was Bill
Buckingham, an ex-cop and corrections officer and self-confessed OxyContin
addict" (Chapman, 2007, p. 160). As the module progresses, we move from
identifying such stylistic devices to imitation and production.

   The popularization assignment offers productive opportunities for imitating
strong styles through short exercises and more elaborate activities. In one
exercise, students identify noteworthy passages from our reading and use them
as structural models for their own paragraphs. Longer modeling exercises
include an in-class exercise in which students draft seven different introductions
in thirty-five minutes. This activity generates much useful material, and student
comments suggest that the exercise is productive. For example, one student
mentioned that "the multiple introduction activity was particularly effective
for me; it really helped my project along." Many students recounted similar
experiences. Both of these modeling exercises are reproduced in the appendix.

   Overall, student comments about the third module have been extremely
positive. Students appreciate getting to choose the scientific topics they
write about. They also appreciate how earlier assignments build up to the
popularization article. One student noted, "The third assignment was the most
exciting, but all of the assignments played a role in helping prepare for the final
module."

CONCLUSION

   In "Science Communication in the First-Year Writing Course," Moscovitz
and Kellogg argue that scientific documents--what they call "primary science
communication" or PSC--can be included successfully as readings in FYC
courses. After making the case for the pedagogical value of PSC in first-year
curricula, they address four counterarguments: 1) Including PSC overspecializes
the composition classroom and emphasizes skills that might not transfer to other
contexts, such as humanities courses; 2) PSC resists standardized programmatic
frameworks--the rhetorical vocabularies grounding most FYC curricula; 3)

290
                                                         Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

PSC is just too difficult to read; and 4) PSC readings will not interest students
as much as readings from popular culture or humanities fields (2005, pp. 311--
319). Moscovitz and Kellogg convincingly refute each argument; in concluding
this chapter, I repurpose their refutations to reinforce the claim that an upper-
level course engaging scientific discourse is an ideal site for teaching style.

   First, transfer is a problem for any course, but good teachers can use
specialized content to teach transferable skills. Although Moscovitz and
Kellogg are concerned with the transferability of reading scientific discourse,
this argument is also valid for writing it. Writing (about) scientific discourse
provides students with opportunities to practice strategies--such as quantitative
norming and structural imitation--which they can use when approaching any
style. Moreover, by producing prose for diverse, stylistically distinct purposes,
students are better prepared for the diverse communication tasks they will
tackle in future positions. Finally, students themselves recognize that the skills
they learned while engaging science and style are both specific and transferable.
For example, one student mentioned that "Plain language style is useful in the
humanities as well as scientific disciplines." Another noted, "I never really write
much about science, so [the course] helped me branch out; it also taught me
valuable non-fiction [writing] skills."

   Second, rhetorical theory is robust enough to handle science. Rhetoricians
have spent decades analyzing scientific rhetorical situations, and their projects
are easily adapted for style-centered composition courses. Aristotelian genre
categories and rhetorical figures are but two of the resources from rhetorical
theory that help students understand style at the macro- and micro-scale. Terms
typically used in FYC--such as ethos, pathos, and logos--are easily extended
to discussions of both scientific writing and popularizations of science. For
example, Prelli's accessible discussion of scientific ethos demonstrates how this
familiar concept works in scientific situations (1997, p. 87-104).

   Once equipped with enhanced rhetorical vocabularies, students can
approach scientific discourse with confidence, and they recognize the power
of these conceptual systems. When asked to describe how the course made
students better writers, one student wrote that his or her writing skills had
been improved by "the rhetorical tools I learned, as well as learning about
problems like lexical density and syntactic ambiguity." Although recalling
sophisticated stylistic vocabulary in a course evaluation does not demonstrate
stylistic proficiency, it does indicate that this student gained a more nuanced
understanding of issues affecting prose style.

   Third, the difficulty of scientific discourse is overstated; difficult texts
are good for teaching. Both Moscovitz and Kellogg and Michael Zerbe note
that "impossible" scientific jargon is no more difficult than other advanced

                                                                                                291
Buehl

vocabularies we expect students to learn and use. For Zerbe, even the "language"
of statistics can be productively encountered in composition classrooms through
rhetorical vocabularies: "Statistics are essentially equivalent to Toulminian
warrants in a text" (2007, p. 49). Indeed, I have found that Toulmin's framework
helps students approach the rhetoric of numbers. Material from number-
minded style guides (e.g., Miller's Chicago Guide to Writing about Numbers) can
also help students compose texts engaging statistical concepts.

   In short, students can learn to approach and use strange styles. Scaffolding
assignments provide students with the tools and the practice they need to engage
difficult texts in longer assignments. Evaluation comments suggest that students
appreciate such sequencing. One student noted, "The short assignments helped
pave the way for the more difficult projects." Another noted that scaffolding
assignments made the larger assignments "less daunting." Moreover, students
see the value in working with difficult discourse. One student commented,
"The course pushed me to write about the unfamiliar."

   Finally, students are interested in science. According to Moscovitz and
Kellogg, many FYC students are highly interested in scientific topics, and we
should capitalize on that interest (2005, p. 319). Similarly, many students take
my course because they like science and want to write about it. Even those
students who only take my class to satisfy an elective in our professional-writing
minor tend to find the material on style engaging. By directing either their
interests in science toward style or their interests in style toward science, the
course helps students develop stylistic proficiencies, making them more effective
communicators and more marketable professionals.

NOTES

1. I use an expansive definition of professional writing: Any workplace writing. Pro-
fessional-writing courses include courses teaching general workplace literacies (such as
"service" courses called "business writing" or "technical writing") and courses for stu-
dents planning careers as technical writers, communications officers, etc.

2. Although some excellent scientific writing textbooks include material on accommo-
dating science for non-experts, typically that material plays second fiddle to technical
prose. For example, Penrose and Katz significantly expanded Writing in the Sciences for
the third edition, but they did not expand the chapter on accommodation. Moreover, a
chapter on procedures in the second edition was cut for the third, reducing the number
of marked styles treated in the book. Thus, the third edition is even more focused on
teaching research genres to upper-level science students--a purpose announced in its
preface (2004, p. xiv). Similarly, good writing-about-science guides neglect technical

292
                                                         Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

prose. For example, A Field Guide for Science Writers--required reading in my course--
offers good advice on science journalism, including advice on how to read scientific
articles when reporting on them (see Siegfried, 2006, pp. 11-17). However, it does not
discuss producing or revising "technical" genres.

3. One argument against teaching scientific discourse to "general" composition stu-
dents is that scientific prose is notoriously difficult for non-experts (Moscovitz & Kel-
logg, 2005, pp. 317-318). The "science is too hard" claim is refutable. Moscovitz and
Kellogg argue that the difficulty is overstated, and they point to examples of accessible
technical documents that FYC students can read (2005, p. 307). They also provide cri-
teria for selecting accessible texts (2005, p. 322). Alternatively, the "difficulty problem"
can be reframed as a pedagogical virtue. For Kelley and Bazerman, the "very strange-
ness" of scientific discourse "makes easier the task of explicitly introducing the genre
conventions, social practices, and linguistic features of scientific texts" (as quoted in
Moscovitz and Kellogg, 2005, p. 317).

4. In "Accommodating Science: The Rhetorical Life of Scientific Facts," Fahnestock
uses classical and contemporary rhetorics to account for the metamorphoses that occur
when writers adapt scientific content for popularizations. She demonstrates that genre
shifts (from forensic to epideictic), stasis shifts (from fact to value), and modality shifts
(from hedged claims to assertive or highly conjectural statements) are consistent trans-
formations with clearly identifiable markings (1998, pp. 332- 346). Fahnestock does
not address deliberative discourse in her article on epideictic popularizations; however,
science does generate deliberative situations with specific stylistic demands.

5. Scientists whose first language is not English often hire editors; therefore, consul-
tants should understand how to respond to ESL "errors." In my experience, however,
the most significant problems of scientists who struggle with writing are rhetorical rath-
er than grammatical--regardless of when they learned English.

6. Swales' work on research articles classifies consistent rhetorical moves used to con-
textualize research. In early work (1981), he marked these moves with just a numerical
scheme: move 1) establish the topic and significance, move 2) review previous research,
move 3) establish a gap in the research, and move 4) explain how the article fills the gap.
Later (1990), Swales developed an ecological analogy for what he relabeled the Create
a Research Space (CARS) model: move 1) identify the territory, move 2) identify a
niche within the territory, move 3) occupy the niche. Each move is comprised of a set
of variable, context-dependent steps (1990, pp. 140-143). Researchers have used both
schemes when analyzing discursive norms.

7. Halliday identifies seven features contributing to the difficulty of scientific prose:
interlocking definitions, technical taxonomies, special expressions, lexical density, syn-
tactic ambiguity, grammatical metaphor, and semantic discontinuity (1993, p. 71). Go-
pen and Swan apply Joseph Williams's advice on style to scientific writing (1990, pp.
550-558).

                                                                                                293
Buehl

8. These case studies have served as provocative readings: Schoenfeld's "The Press and
NEPA," Scott's "Limiting Prevention, Limiting Topos," Wadell's "The Role of Pathos in
the Decision-Making Process," and West's "How Not to Publicize Research."

9. For compelling arguments for teaching metaphor and analogy in technical com-
munication courses, see Giles (2008) and Graves (2005).

REFERENCES

Angouri, J. and Nigel Harwood, N. (2008). This is too formal for us...: A case
   study of variation in the written products of a multinational consortium.
   Journal of Business and Technical Communication 22(1), 38-64.

Bazerman, C. (1988). Shaping written knowledge. Madison, WI: University of
   Wisconsin Press.

Baake, K. (2003). Metaphor and knowledge: The challenges of writing science.
   Albany, NY: SUNY Press.

Bloom, D., Mary Knudson, M., & Marantz-Henig, R. (Eds.). A field guide for
   science writers. Oxford University Press.

Butler, P. (2008). Out of style: Reanimating stylistics in composition and rhetoric.
   Logan: Utah State University Press.

Butler, P. (2010). (Ed.). Style in rhetoric and composition: A critical sourcebook.
   New York: Bedford/St. Martin's.

Burling, S. (2007). Probing the mind for a cure. In G. Kolata (Ed.), The best
   American science writing of 2007 (pp. 106-120). New York: Harper Collins.

Ceccarelli, L. (2004). Neither confusing cacophony nor culinary complements.
   Written Communication 21, 92-105.

Chapman, M. (2007). God or gorilla. In G. Kolata (Ed.), The best American
   science writing of 2007 (pp. 158-185). New York: Harper Collins.

Corbett, E. P. J. (1990). Classical rhetoric for the modern student (3rd ed.). Ox-
   ford University Press.

A dinosaur dance floor. (n.d.). Eurekalert.org.
Dostal, E. (2009, August 2). When toads collide. The Columbus Dispatch. Re-

   trieved from http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/science/2009/08/02/
   sci_toadtoes.ART_ART_08-02-09_G3_HDEKORN.html
Fahnestock, J. (1998). Accommodating science: The rhetorical life of scientific
   facts. Written Communication 15, 331-349.
Fahnestock, J. (1999). Rhetorical figures in science. New York: Oxford University
   Press.
Fahnestock, J. (2004). Preserving the figure: Consistency in the presentation of
   scientific arguments. Written Communication 21, 6-31.

294
                                                         Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

Federal Plain Language Guidelines. (2010). Plain Language Action and Informa-
   tion Network. Retreived from http://plainlanguage.gov.

Ferenchik, M. (2010, January 10). New dimensions. The Columbus Dispatch. Re-
   trieved from http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/science/2010/01/10/
   sci_threedcam.ART_ART_01-10-10_G3_P3G7TMC.html

Giles, T. (2008). Motives for metaphor in scientific and technical communication.
   Amityville, NY: Baywood.

Gopen, G., & Swan, J. (1990). The science of scientific writing. American Sci-
   entist 78, 550-558. Retrieved from http://www.americanscientist.org/issues/
   pub/the-science-of-scientific-writing/

Graves, H. (2005). Rhetoric in(to) style: Style as invention in inquiry. Cresskill,
   NJ: Hampton Press.

Gross, A. (1990). Rhetoric of science. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Graube, M., Clark, F, & Illman, D. (2010). Coverage of team science by public

   information officers: Content analysis of press releases about the national sci-
   ence foundation science and technology centers. Journal of Technical Writing
   and Communication 40(2), 143-159.
Harris, R. A. (Ed.). (1997). Landmark essays on the rhetoric of science. Mahwah,
   NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1993). Some grammatical problems of scientific English.
   In M. A. K. Halliday, & J. R. Martin (Eds.), Writing science: Literacy and
   discursive power (pp. 69-85). Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Halliday, M. A. K. & Martin, J. R. (Eds.). (1993). Writing science: Literacy and
   discursive power. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Holcomb, C., & Killingsworth, M. J. (2010). Performing prose: The study and
   practice of style in composition. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University
   Press.
Hunt, S. (2009, September 27). A legacy preserved. The Columbus Dispatch. Re-
   trieved from http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/science/2009/09/27/
   sci_berra.ART_ART_09-27-09_G1_3RF66LD.html
Hunt, S. (2009, October 18). Visitors or residents? The Columbus Dispatch. Re-
   trieved from http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/science/2009/10/16/
   invasive_insects.html
Johnson, G. (2006). Explanatory writing. In D. Bloom, M. Knudson, & R.
   Marantz-Henig (Eds.), A field guide for science writers (pp. 132-137). New
   York: Oxford University Press.
Johnson, T. R. (2003). A rhetoric of pleasure: Prose style in today's composition
   classroom. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.
Johnson, T. R., & Pace, T. (Eds.). (2005). Refiguring prose style: Possibilities for
   writing studies. Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.

                                                                                                295
Buehl

Kolata, G. (Ed.). (2007). The best American science writing of 2007. New York:
   Harper Collins.

Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1986). Laboratory life. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
   University Press.

Leech, G., & Short, S. (1982). Style in Fiction: A linguistic approach to english
   fictional prose. New York: Longman.

Martin, J. R. (1993). Literacy in Science: Learning to handle text as a technol-
   ogy. In M. A. K. Halliday, & J. R. Martin (Eds.), Writing science: Literacy
   and discursive power (pp. 166-202). Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh
   Press.

Miller, J. (2004). The Chicago guide to writing about numbers. Chicago: Uni-
   versity of Chicago Press.

Moskovitz, C., & Kellogg, D. (2005). Communication in the first-year writing
   course. College Composition and Communication 57(2), 307-334.

Myers, G. (1990). Writing biology: Texts in the social construction of scientific
   knowledge. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.

The Ohio Department of Natural Resource; Division of Soil and Water Re-
   sources. (2001, March 24). Dam safety: Problems with metal materials.
   Retrieved from http://www.dnr.state.oh.us/water/pubs/fs_div/fctsht57/tab-
   id/4144/Default.aspx

Penrose, A., & Katz, S. (2004). Writing in the Sciences: Exploring the conventions
   of scientific discourse (2nd ed.). New York: Pearson.

Penrose, A., & Katz, S. (2010). Writing in the sciences: Exploring the Conventions
   of scientific discourse (3rd ed.). New York: Pearson.

Perry, M. (2006, March). Health secrets from the morgue. Men's Health 13.
   Retrieved from http://www.menshealth.com/health/health-secrets-morgue

Prelli, L. (1997). The rhetorical construction of scientific ethos. In R. A. Harris
   (Ed.), Landmark Essays on the rhetoric of science (pp. 87-106). Mahwah, New
   Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Schoenfeld, A. C. (1979). The press and NEPA. The case of the missing agenda.
   Journalism Quarterly 56(3), 577-586.

Science pages from 2010. (December 2010). The Columbus Dispatch. Retrieved
   from http://www.dispatch.com

Scott, J. B. (2008). Limiting prevention, Limiting topos: Reframing arguments
   about science and politics in the HIV prevention policy debate. n D. IZa-
   refsky, & E. Benacka (Eds.), Sizing up rhetoric (pp. 273-284). Long Grove,
   IL:Waveland Press.

Siegfried, T. (2006). Reporting from science journals. In D. Bloom, M. Knud-
   son, & R. Marantz-Henig (Eds.), A field guide for science writers (pp. 11-17).
   New York: Oxford University Press.

296
                                                         Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

Somerson, M. (2009, December 28). Get your 2009 Dispatch science pages
   here! The Columbus Dispatch. Retrieved from http://www.dispatch.com/
   content/blogs/science-environment/2009/12/get_your_2009_dispatch_sci-
   ence.html

Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cam-
   bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Swales, J. (1981). Aspects of article introductions. Birmingham, UK: University
   of Aston Press.

Wadell, C. (1997). The role of pathos in the decision-making process: A study
   in the rhetoric of science policy. In R. A. Harris (Ed.), Landmark essays on
   the rhetoric of science (pp. 127-150). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum As-
   sociates.

West, L. J. (1986). How Not to Publicize Research: The UCLA Violence Cen-
   ter. In J. Goldstein (Ed.), Reporting Science: The Case of Aggression (pp. 33-
   41). Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Wolfe, J. (2009). How technical communication textbooks fail engineering stu-
   dents. Technical Communication Quarterly 18(4), 351-375.

Zerbe, M. (2007). Composition and the rhetoric of science: Engaging the dominant
   discourse. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

APPENDIX: COURSE MATERIALS
ORGANIZED BY MODULE

   This appendix contains assignment sheets and exercises. Some details, such
as due dates and grading criteria, have been removed.

Module 1: Assessing and Revising Technical Scientific Prose

   Science-writing professionals are often asked to revise articles, proposals,
or other formal scientific documents written by and for experts even though
they are not experts on the scientific content. Such tasks might seem difficult;
however, research from the fields of rhetoric, writing studies, applied linguistics,
and technical communication provides concepts and tools that help writers
approach scientific texts successfully.

   For this assignment, you will critique a draft of a research report written by
an advanced graduate student in the field of educational psychology. The author
plans to revise the paper for publication. Your assessment and revision of the
document should guide the author in producing a more effective submission.

                                                                                                297
Buehl

Objectives

   In completing this assignment you will ...
    · Become familiar with communication practices in science
    · Become familiar with conventions of scientific prose
    · Practice analyzing variations in technical scientific prose
    · Practice writing about technical scientific prose
    · Practice revising technical scientific prose

Deliverables Description

   You will (1) produce an editorial critique in the form of a letter and (2)
produce an electronic revision of the author's draft.

   We will discuss how to track your changes to the draft. You do not have to
make the revised draft perfect, but you should demonstrate how the author
could fix the most significant problems. Comments can include questions.

   When planning, drafting, and revising the letter, consider the following
items:

    Audience
    The audience is a graduate student in the field of educational psychology.
    This person is accustomed to reading documents in this field; however, he
    or she may not have any formal training in scientific writing. You may need
    to explain the rationale behind some of your comments and revisions.
    Purpose
    Your letter should provide a candid assessment of the author's draft and
    offer sound revision advice.
    Your revision should identify problems in the text. Show how you fixed
    them or why you couldn't fix them.
    Constraints
    Your document must be at least four but no more than eight full pages,
    double-spaced. Maintain a courteous and professional tone; criticism
    should be constructive, and not nasty.
    Components
    Your critique should mention aspects of the text that are working well and
    draw attention to pressing problems. You might include comments on global
    rhetorical concerns (e.g., addressing the journal's audience appropriately,
    establishing exigence, etc.), genre concerns (e.g., using sources rhetorically,
    adhering to the IMRAD form, etc.), or stylistic concerns (e.g., tense, voice,
    hedging language, etc.).

298
                                                         Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

Exercise 1: Article Analysis

   For this exercise, you will analyze a research report to determine its structural
and stylistic features. In the next exercise, the "journal analysis," you will work
in groups to synthesize your findings. I will provide details for the "journal
analysis" on another sheet.

   Further Detail
   Our clients for Assignment 1 are not sure which journals are right for their
pieces. For example, the author of Document 1 is not sure if The Journal of
Experimental Education or Educational and Psychological Measurement is the
right venue.
   To determine the best venue and to guide revision, we need to gather
information from articles in these journals. This data will help us determine the
rhetorical norms of the publication.
   To distribute data collection, I've created groups based on the documents
you were assigned for Assignment 1. Each group will work on a different
journal; each member should analyze an article from a different issue of the
journal. Choose issues from the last two years.

   Getting Started
   Follow the steps described below. Record your findings. Bring an electronic
copy of your data DD/MM.

   Steps
   To complete the article analysis, complete the following steps:
   1. Confer with your group; each person should select a different issue of

       the journal.
   2. Select an article from your issue. The article should be an IMRAD ar-

       ticle, NOT a literature review or letter. If you are unsure if the article is
       appropriate, ask me.
   3. Title and abstract.
        How long is the title?
        How specific is the title?
        How many sentences are in the abstract?
        Tip: Use the "word count" tool in Word. You can copy and paste sections
        of text from Acrobat to Word.
   4. Introduction.
        Label segments of the introduction according to the "four moves"
        model.What is the sequence of moves?

                                                                                                299
Buehl

        Label segments of the introduction according to the CARS "moves and
        steps" model. Which step does the author use to "establish a niche" for
        his or her work?
        How long is the "literature review" section of the introduction? (word
        count)
        Tip: There may not be a specific heading of "literature review," so pay
        close attention to where summarizing ends and "occupying the niche"
        begins.
        How many citations are in the introduction?
        Determine the tense of the main verb in each sentence. Tally each tense.
   5. Methods.
        List this section's subheadings.
        Determine the voice for each main verb. How many are active? How
        many are passive?
   6. Results.
        Are the results purely descriptive?
        Are other rhetorical activities occurring? Use Thompson's list (125) to
        label and count any other "moves."
        How many visuals are included?
        How many are graphs?
        How many are tables?
        How long are the table and figure captions? (word count)
   7. Discussion.
        What strategies are used to qualify certainty? Keep a tally for modal
        auxiliaries, hedging verbs, and hedging adjectives and adverbs.
        Are limitations discussed? (Y/N)
        How many sentences are used to describe limitations?
   8. Personal pronouns and self reference.
        How many times do "I" and "we" appear in the text?
        Are authors ever referred to as "the author" or "the authors?"
        Tip: Using the "find" feature in Word or Acrobat can expedite this step.

Exercise 2: Journal Analysis/Style Guide

   For the previous exercise, you collected information about a journal article.
In this exercise, you will synthesize your findings with those of your groupmates
to create a style sheet for its journal.

   You will have class time to collate/compare your data. I will provide an Excel
file to organize your findings. Submit one document for your group.

300
                                                         Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

   Further Detail
   Imagine you are a managing editor who assigns projects to consultants. To
help your consultants "get a fix" on new projects quickly, you provide short
overviews of publications. You need to create such an overview for your group's
educational psychology journal.
   Consider what your consultants need to know about the audience, style,
and structure of research reports in this particular journal. For example, if your
group did not find any first-person pronouns (I, we, etc.), you should create a
tip about avoiding them.

Module 2: Summarizing Science for Decision Makers

   In the first module, we examined how science is communicated to experts
through the genres of research reports and proposals. In this module, you will
study issues related to communicating science to non-expert decision makers
by creating documents for two different audiences and two different purposes.

   First, you will summarize a research project for a government official who
needs to justify its funding. Second, you will work in groups to produce a
brochure promoting the unique capabilities of a research group at OSU. In
both documents, you will write about cognitive science.

Project Objectives

   In completing this assignment you will ...
    · Practice writing about science for decision-making audiences
    · Practice writing about complicated topics in short documents
    · Practice writing explanatory materials to support political deliberation
    · Practice writing marketing materials for an organization
    · Practice developing definitions and descriptions
    · Practice creating analogies and metaphors

Part I: Executive or Legislative Summary (a.k.a. "Defending your Earmark")

   Legislators and executives often need information about research to guide
policy decisions. In other cases, they need summaries of research to support or
oppose its funding.

   Many scientists rely on government money. Sometimes money comes from
grants, and sometimes it comes from congressional earmarks. In either case,
officials are often held accountable for these expenditures.

                                                                                                301
Buehl

   When denouncing earmark abuse in 2008, John McCain pointed to a
scientific example: "Three million to study the DNA of bears in Montana.
Unbelievable." In an interview with Sarah Palin, ABC anchor Charles Gibson
raised similar points about research funding in Alaska: "Governor, this year,
[Alaska] requested $3.2 million for researching the genetics of harbor seals,
[and] money to study the mating habits of crabs. Isn't that exactly the kind
of thing that John McCain is objecting to?" In these cases, earmarks were
supporting worthy research with practical benefits, but the projects were
portrayed as wasteful.

   In this assignment you will summarize a recent OSU research project for
a public official and his or her staff. Imagine that the official supported an
earmark for the project and must now justify the expenditure as valuable and
necessary. This official needs information to respond to claims that the project
squandered taxpayer money.

   Deliverable Description
   Audience
   Your audience consists of elected officials and political staffers. These readers
   probably have limited knowledge of cognitive science.
   Purpose
   You need to provide a clear assessment of the project and its benefits. Your
   document should succinctly summarize the research project and explain
   why it deserved funding.
   Constraints
   Your readers are very busy. They need a short description, no longer than
   one single-spaced page. The memo should be written in "plain language"
   style.
   Components
   Include a description of the study for a non-expert audience. Then, explain
   how the research contributes to the advancement of science and/or how it
   will lead to useful applications or social improvements.

Part II: Thematic Abstract/Marketing Brochure

   Because scientific research can be extremely expensive, research universities
like Ohio State provide resources to help faculty secure funding. The "business"
of this research support is complex. Research officials often communicate
directly with funding organizations to help define RFP requirements, to
develop new support lines, or to coordinate the needs of funding organizations

302
                                                         Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

with those of researchers. These officials often need "marketing" literature to
support their efforts.

   For the second Module 2 project, you will work in groups to produce
marketing materials for OSU's research development office. You will condense
and energize your summaries from Part I to create a two-page research brochure.

   The document must demonstrate the capabilities of OSU researchers in a
specific area of cognitive science, and it must communicate the significance of
this work in a descriptive and engaging style.

   Deliverable Description
   Audience and Purpose
   Your audience is comprised of intelligent non-experts. Although these
   readers are not specialists, they regularly read accounts of scientific subjects
   accommodated to their non-expert level.
   Your document will support marketing and development activities by
   succinctly describing the University's research capabilities. For example, a
   program officer might take it to meetings with agency officials, legislative
   directors, or other decision makers.
   The document should convey that this research is exciting and important.

   Constraints
   The document must fit on two and a half pages (single spaced). The prose
   should be accurate but written in an engaging style that emphasizes the
   novelty and uniqueness of the research.

   Components
   Introduction: The introductory paragraphs should indicate a clear exigence
   for the research area. Describe the problems approached and solved.
   Demonstrate why the work is important. Who are the stakeholders? What
   is at stake?
   Preview sentences: After the introduction, write a one- or two-sentence
   preview of each profile.
   Profiles: Profile titles should be descriptive, accessible, and interesting.
   Each research profile should be composed of two to four short paragraphs.
   Establish exigence as soon as possible. Introduce the researcher. Describe
   the problems the researcher is solving. Define significant unfamiliar terms.
   Explain why the research is unique, amazing, a significant advancement, etc.
   Explain important applications. End each profile with the names and email
   addresses of the researchers.

                                                                                                303
Buehl

Exercise 3: Writing in Plain Language

   In this exercise you will practice editing for the "plain language" style by
revising a policy document communicating scientific information.

  1. Skim The Federal Plain Language Guidelines to remind yourself of the
       style's features.

  2. Read the document called "Dam Safety."
  3. Determine its primary audience; think about the needs of that audience.
  4. Arrange the information into patterns that would help readers meet their

       needs.
  5. Create new section headings to help readers find information.
  6. Revise the text to conform to "plain language" style.
  7. Submit your file to the dropbox.

Exercise 4: Writing about Rocks

   In this exercise, you will practice developing definitions and descriptions by
writing about a rock for an audience of museum supporters.

   The Orton Geology Museum wants to include a "rock-of-the-month" feature
in its newsletter. Your job is to create one of these features. The newsletter is not
printed in color, and the museum has many supporters with vision disabilities,
so the description must work without photographic support. This exercise has
four parts.

   Part 1: Field trip
   Meet in the Orton Geology Museum on February X at XX:XX. We will only
stay for 45 minutes; please arrive promptly. When we convene, I will give you
the name of a display and a rock. Find the case; find your rock.
   Collect information about your rock by answering these questions. (You
may not be able to answer them all.)
   a. What kind of rock is it?
   b. Where is it found?
   c. What are some of the other rocks in the same display?
   d. Which minerals are contained in it?
   e. What process formed it?
   f. What color is it?
   g. What shape is it?
   h. What does its surface look like?
   i. What does it look like?
   j. What is interesting about it?

304
                                                         Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

   Before we leave the museum, write a paragraph describing the rock. Focus
on its appearance. Write whatever comes to mind as you look at the rock from
different angles.

   Part 2: Research
   Once we return to the classroom, research your rock. Answer the questions
you could not answer at the museum and search for interesting factoids.
Although Wikipedia is a place to start, you should also explore the geology sites
listed on Carmen.

   Part 3: Drafting descriptions
   a. Write a few categorical definitions. For each, (1) identify a category to

       which this rock belongs and (2) explain its place within the category.
   b. Revise your description from the museum; clarify the visual details.
   c. Write a short paragraph describing the rock's formation process.
   d. Create two or three different similes or metaphors to describe the rock.

       Which is more accurate? Which is more engaging?
   e. Write a few sentences identifying why this rock is interesting. Is it re-

       markably old? Is its formation interesting? Does it have an unusual ap-
       pearance? Does it have practical applications?

   Part 4: Creating an exciting profile
   Use the material from Part 3 to create a coherent profile of your rock. What
would interest a non-expert reader?

Assignment 3: Writing about Science for Public Audiences

   For the final project, you will write about science for a public audience. You
will decide the topic, the purpose of the document, the characteristics of the
audience, and the best communication channel to reach that audience.

   Project Objectives
   In completing this assignment you will ...
   · Practice writing about science for non-expert public audiences.
   · Examine different styles used to accommodate science.
   · Develop visual supports for textual accommodations of science.

   Deliverable Description
   Audience
   You will choose an appropriate audience addressable through a specific

                                                                                                305
Buehl

communication channel. These channels could include newspapers, magazines,
websites, broadcast outlets, museums, etc.

   Purpose
   Your document's purpose will depend on your audience, venue, and interest.

   Constraints
   We will discuss the constraints of your document in an individual conference.
Your document must be long enough for the job.
   Possibilities include ...
   a. Science journalism articles.
   b. Descriptive guides of new treatment options for diseases.
   c. Museum displays.
   d. Extended profiles of a researcher or facility.
   e. Documentary scripts.

   Modeling Exercise
   Find an interesting passage from today's reading. Point to it in your
discussion-post title. E.g., "[Title], Page 2, Paragraph 2." Use the passage's
sentence structure and style to develop a paragraph for your final project.
   Start by separating clauses and phrases to get a sense of their arrangement
and rhythm. For example ...

         Dr. Stier's assistant picks up a scalpel
         and begins the autopsy
         by drawing an incision from the pubic bone to the sternum,
         where he bifurcates the incision,
         cutting toward each shoulder to form a Y.

         In the wake of the blade,
         skin and fat part with a delicate hiss and crackle.

         The assistant rolls the flesh back from the chest,
         then snips the ribs with a tool akin to pruning shears.

         The bones part with a wet crunch. (Perry, 2006)

   Use the same structures to create your passage. For example ...

        Dr. Buehl picks up a document and begins the grading by numbering

306
                                                         Style and the Professional Writing Curriculum

        the paragraphs, which he then evaluates, writing comments in the
        margins. Under the pencil, redundancy and important detail separate
        with muffled scratches. He circles the unnecessary passives, then
        underlines weak verbs. Patterns emerge in the smudged graphite.

   Introduction Exercise
   In this exercise you will practice writing various types of introductions. You
will have five minutes to write each type. It is ok to think, but write while you
think.
   A. Write a three- or four-sentence CARS (Territory--Niche--Occupation)
introduction.

       "The topic of this story is X. X is interesting because... These are the
       problems of X. [and/or] These are the new developments of X. These
       problems/developments are interesting because... In my document, I
       explain the significance/novelty of X by .... "

   B. Write an introduction in the style of the brochures for Module 2. Imagine
the research is a specialization of OSU or another institution.

   C. Create a Dispatch introduction. First, describe the informative or context-
setting graphic and choose a hook sentence that suits your topic.

   Consider these examples:

       Novel oddity: [Toad pictures] "There are some things you don't send in
       the mail. That's why Terry Schwaner drove from Findlay to Phoenix to
       pick up a cooler filled with 400 frozen toad toes" (Dostal, 2009).

       Description of application: [3-D glasses picture and an info-graphic]
       "Battelle researchers are working with a Canadian company to create
       a camera that might change the way movies are made ..." (Ferenchick,
       2010).

       Person focus: [Pictures of creepy fish in jars and a picture of a scientist
       holding a shark.] "No roads lead to Tim Berra's favorite fishing spot on
       the Adelaide River. The OSU ichthyologist uses a small boat to get to the
       spot ...." (Hunt, 2009).

       Vivid scene: [Bug pictures and maps] "The beetle was black with white
       spots and sported whip-like antennae longer than its inch-long body. It
       was clear to workers that the bug, found scurrying across the concrete

                                                                                                307
Buehl

       floor at the Downlite factory in Mason, Ohio, didn't belong there"
       (Hunt, 2009).
   D. Describe a scene or process in vivid detail. If you described a scene in C,
describe a different scene or process.
   E. Tell your story as an author. Explain how you found this topic or describe
events involved in writing about it. E.g., "Looking for the Lie."
   F. Tell a story about a patient or other non-scientist. E.g., "Face Blind."
(Fabricate a plausible story if you don't have a good example for your topic.)
   G. Tell a researcher's story. E.g., "The Theory of Everything."

308
TOWARD A PEDAGOGY OF
PSYCHIC DISTANCE

Erik Ellis
Stanford University

          Address the most complicated problems in our culture, we ask
          students, but do it in short, sweet prose, we demand. While there
          is merit in being able to cut to the rhetorical quick, sometimes a
          complex sentence best conveys a complex idea.

                                                      --Nate Kreuter (2009, par. 3)

          A great secret of the academic humanities has been their quiet but
          consistent exclusion of the arts as an activity, as a practice.

                                                  -- Kurt Spellmeyer (2003, p. 23)

   In this chapter I will explore the theoretical significance and pedagogical
potential of the narrative, stylistic concept psychic distance, which is very
much rooted in the craft of writing as an activity and practice. Rhetoric and
composition, in its quest for disciplinary prestige, has for decades been slamming
the door on such craft-based approaches to teaching writing. As Douglas Hesse
has argued, "One quality occluded in composition's very important political and
social turns is that of writing as craft, as the making of textual artifacts whose
maker is important as maker" (2003, p. 263). Wendy Bishop noted in 2003,
"It has been more than a decade since craft--a word used regularly in creative
writing and rarely in composition--and style have been discussed with intense
interest" (2003, p. 263). No doubt many scholars consider the very word craft
embarrassingly unsophisticated and old-fashioned, like something Grandpa
would reminisce about while sipping Country Time lemonade on the porch.
After all, according to Robert R. Johnson, "Over the past two millennia, craft
has become a notion allied with `lower forms' of knowledge usually associated
with mere practice and the making of mundane artifacts" (2010, p. 674).

   Yet I find myself drawn to the term craft, even more than style, perhaps because
I entered rhetoric and composition from the "unrigorous" field down the hall--
creative writing. Rhetoric and composition may have thrived as a discipline by
turning its back on craft and style, but the teaching of composition has suffered.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.18  309
Ellis

Fortunately, although the ghost of disciplinary insecurity still haunts the halls
of rhetoric and composition, forever fleeing the jangly, rusty chains of current-
traditionalism and flying through walls to avoid critics' humiliating mockery of
"the enormous inertial mass of [practitioner] lore," renewed attention to style has
begun to repair the damage (North, 1987, p. 371). By focusing on an important
element of craft and style borrowed from creative writing--psychic distance--
we can improve the teaching of composition, help rejuvenate the idea- and style-
friendly genre of the essay in its Montaignian roots, and pry open the door to
new lines of inquiry. Psychic distance is not so much one among many "matters
of surface-level technique," as style is often characterized, as it is a powerful
rhetorical strategy with far-reaching implications (Mayers, 2005, p. 17).

PSYCHIC DISTANCE

   What is psychic distance? In The Art of Fiction: Notes on Craft for Young
Writers, John Gardner defines it as "the distance the reader feels between
himself and the events in the story" (1984, p. 111). In Writing Fiction: A
Guide to Narrative Craft, Janet Burroway uses the equivalent term authorial
distance, which she defines as "the degree to which we as readers feel on the
one hand intimacy and identification with, or on the other hand detachment
and alienation from, the characters in the story" (1996, p. 229). Gardner lists
the following examples to illustrate how a writer can adjust language to reflect
different degrees of closeness to a character's psychology or consciousness:

   · It was winter of the year 1853. A large man stepped out of a doorway.
   · Henry J. Warburton had never much cared for snowstorms.
   · Henry hated snowstorms.
   · God how he hated these damn snowstorms.
   · Snow. Under your collar, down inside your shoes, freezing and plugging

       up your miserable soul ... (1984, p. 111)
   The extremes of distance (sentence one) and closeness (sentence five) are
easy to spot, but the "mid-range" (sentences two to four) represents a wealth
of subtler distinctions. Gardner's sentences thus suggest the many rhetorical
possibilities at the fingertips of fiction writers--and nonfiction writers, if
we tweak the definition of psychic distance to mean the distance readers feel
between themselves and the events and ideas in the prose rather than in the
story, and if we consider the reader's identification with or detachment from the
author or subject rather than the characters. Insofar as "identification between
writers and readers is necessary prior to persuading people to other collective
actions," psychic distance is tremendously rhetorical (Warnock, 2003, p. 208).

310
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

   Making this shift from fictional to nonfictional psychic distance has the
advantage of simplifying a complicated rhetorical phenomenon in fiction. As
James Phelan explains in Narrative as Rhetoric: Technique, Audiences, Ethics,
Ideology:

         First, the phrase "narrative as rhetoric" means something
         more than that narrative uses rhetoric or has a rhetorical
         dimension. It means instead that narrative is not just story
         but also action, the telling of a story by someone to someone
         on some occasion for some purpose. Furthermore, [...] this
         basic configuration of teller-story-situation-audience-purpose
         is at least doubled in most narrative: there is the narrator's
         telling the story to his or her audience and then the author's
         telling of the narrator's telling to the author's audience.
         Consequently, the narrator's telling is part of the author's
         construction of the whole narrative, and in that sense, what
         is a matter of the telling at one level becomes a matter of the
         told the next. (1996, pp. 7-8)

   I will touch upon ways to apply such sophisticated understandings of
fiction to composition, but first I want to establish that studying and practicing
psychic distance can help composition students better understand and write
nonfiction.

   Composition faculty often foreground the rhetorical situation and the
rhetorical appeals, which are crucial and which figure prominently in authors'
decisions about psychic distance, but disproportionate attention to audience
and the conventions of academic discourse can prevent students from exploring
alternative forms of communication that are equally rhetorical but more subtle
and imaginative. I'm not talking specifically here about "personal" writing,
except in the sense that all writing is personal. Jim Corder makes this point
nicely in his essay "Academic Jargon and Soul-Searching Drivel." He argues
that:

         an academic paper (research) is not less opinion because it is
         empirical, and a personal essay (opinion) is not less empiri-
         cal because it is personal. A research methodology is made by
         humans, not given by God; it is constructed from the lumber
         of disciplinary metaphor and value, deriving from opinion;
         a personal essay may rest upon ten years of close empirical
         study. (1991, p. 315)

                                                                                                311
Ellis

   Moreover, according to Chris Anderson, "Rhetoric is by definition a form
of language acknowledging feelings and values not provable or quantifiable in
logical demonstration" (1989, p. xxiii). Psychic distance does not apply, then,
only to personal essays, creative nonfiction, and other overtly subjective genres.
Nor does it apply piecemeal to narrative beginnings of otherwise traditional
academic texts. The concept applies to all writing, insofar as writers can select
from many ways of articulating the same idea.

   If we consider Gardner's list of five sentences, traditional academic writing
tends to privilege the language of the first, with its more distant and "objective"
tone. Although psychic distance might at first seem synonymous with tone, I
see at least one important distinction. Namely, whereas tone usually implies
straightforward attention to, if not conformity to, readers' expectations--adjust
your tone to match your audience--psychic distance suggests a subtler and more
introspective attention to language and audience. Its foremost allegiance is to
the writer's ideas, not their reception. In an academic paper, if a student writes,
"The essay is so damn preachy and pretentious it makes me sick," one could
easily respond by pointing out that academic readers expect a more thoughtful
and rational tone--something more on the order of, "The author espouses
his political agenda so dogmatically and in such stifling, esoteric language
that the essay risks alienating many readers." In this example, a relatively clear
awareness of audience determines what tone is appropriate. If students key in
to an instructor's emphasis on tone, they might well write such a sentence to
begin with. Either way, the psychic distance in the new sentence is predictably
far, downplaying if not disguising the presence of the author and the author's
emotions. As a result, the sentence communicates clearly but remains essentially
flat. By contrast, with fiction and the kind of craft-based nonfiction I suggest
we teach composition students, writers arguably have much more freedom not
only to follow their intuition but also to select from among a greater array of
linguistic possibilities. These possibilities might not always meet an audience's
expectations, but they often enable writers to create an effective ethos that
transcends genre conventions.

   A second revision of the original sentence ("The essay is so damn preachy and
pretentious it makes me sick") might be: "The author is so busy deconstructing,
demystifying, interrogating, interpolating, negotiating, problematizing,
politicizing, and otherwise theorizing that he leaves nonspecialist readers in the
dust." This revision also eliminates the hostile and naïve tone of the original
sentence, and it goes a step further to capture, with its string of fifty-cent verbs,
the sensation of overwhelming erudition the student finds so objectionable. In
addition, the phrase "in the dust" enables the writer to maintain a compelling
subjective presence, or ethos, without sounding self-absorbed. In short, the

312
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

sentence allows readers to experience the writer's frustration, as opposed to
reading a bland report of it. Viewed from this perspective, the original sentence
suffered not so much because of its failure to attend to audience expectations
but because of its failure to do justice to the student's idea.

   If composition faculty would encourage this kind of reflective rhetorical
creativity, through the kinds of analysis and writing exercises I will describe
later, students would stand to become more confident and sophisticated writers.
In addition, such encouragement would teach the value of taking risks and
playing with language. If students remain unaware of this type of correlation
between form and content, or if we invalidate their shaky but well-intentioned
efforts to establish ethos, they will be inclined to learn a very different lesson:
that taking risks with language jeopardizes their credibility and that if they try
to play with language, they will pay. As a result, they will be more likely to
passively internalize the conventions of academic writing, churning out cookie-
cutter prose zapped of its original motivating energy and its potential power to
communicate except on the most basic level.

   What's so terrible about teaching students to communicate on a basic level?
Wouldn't students in first-year composition courses, at least, be doing well to
grasp the simpler concept of tone, complete with its focus on audience and
conventions? Although psychic distance might seem like a luxurious linguistic
indulgence best reserved for advanced composition courses, the concept can
be taught in simple ways that composition students at all levels can grasp and
apply. By examining how authors--including student authors--construct
works of fiction and nonfiction from the inside out, in terms of craft, rather
than from the outside in, in terms of disciplinary gestures and ideological
critique, students can learn how "writer-based prose" can simultaneously act as
"reader-based prose."

WRITER-BASED PROSE

   Writer-based prose, which Linda Flower has called a "failure to transform
private thought into a public, reader-based expression," has a bad reputation
that is largely undeserved (1979, p. 19). Such prose supposedly indulges the
selfish whims of the author while ignoring the practical needs of the reader.
Flower concedes that a writer-based approach "may be a useful road into the
creative process for some writers," but overall she dismisses it as "a dud for
communicating that information to anyone else" (1979, pp. 28-29). Of course,
it is possible to write in a way that is coherent only to the writer, and students
who have no awareness of audience often fall prey to this rhetorical trap.

                                                                                                313
Ellis

   But writer-based prose need not be solipsistic and arhetorical. In "Closing
My Eyes as I Speak: An Argument for Ignoring Audience," Elbow articulates a
two-pronged defense of writer-based prose. First he argues, "It's not that writers
should never think about their audience. It's a question of when" (1987, p.
51). He notes that writers can find it particularly helpful to ignore audience
in the early stages of composition, especially when writing for an intimidating
audience such as an instructor. "Students often feel they `don't have anything
to say,'" he points out, "until they finally succeed in engaging themselves in
private desert island writing for themselves alone" (1987, p. 214). Eventually
an audience will prove invaluable, but too much attention to audience early in
the writing process will often result in "a stilted, overly careful style or voice"
(Elbow, 1987, p. 52). So far so good, you might think--as long as we're talking
about inexperienced writers and as long as the writer eventually caters to the
audience. Then Elbow makes his more radical and controversial claim that
"writer-based prose can be better than reader-based prose" even for experienced
writers. He argues that writers who obsess about audience expectations "are
acting too much like a salesman trained to look the customer in the eye. [...]
`Damn it, put all your attention on what you are saying,' we want to say, `and
forget about us and how we are reacting' (1987, pp. 53-54).

   This idea that writer-based prose can be valuable not simply as a preliminary,
confidence-boosting strategy for novice writers but as a hallmark of authorial
integrity resonates well with psychic distance. When writers create more
intimacy of psychic distance--whether subconsciously as they write or
consciously as they revise--they are aligning their language first and foremost
to their consciousness (in all its socially constructed complexity) and to their
ideas, not their audience. Yet if writers are skillful enough and readers are
open-minded enough, such writing has tremendous potential to engage and
persuade. As Peter Vandenberg observes, "texts are often valued because they
violate audience expectations" (1995, p. 80). John Schilb calls such writer-based
choices rhetorical refusals--each one "an act of writing or speaking in which the
rhetor pointedly refused to do what the audience considers rhetorically normal"
(2007, p. 3). By helping writers to think about their stylistic choices in ways
that may appease or frustrate an audience and be rhetorically appropriate either
way, psychic distance thus reinforces Elbow's conclusion that

         [w]hat most readers value in really excellent writing is not
         prose that is right for readers but prose that is right for think-
         ing, right for language, or right for the subject being written
         about. If, in addition, it is clear and well suited to readers, we
         appreciate that." (1987, p. 54)

314
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

   This powerful concept--that language can be rhetorically fitting regardless of
how well it matches audience expectations--lies at the heart of psychic distance.

   I'm not suggesting that we urge students to forget about audience altogether.
Rather, I'm claiming that students could benefit from thinking about audience
in a subtler, more roundabout way. In "Audience Addressed/Audience Invoked:
The Role of Audience in Composition Theory and Pedagogy," Lisa Ede and
Andrea Lunsford examine Walter Ong's idea from "The Writer's Audience Is
Always a Fiction" that a writer can invoke rather than explicitly address an
audience.1 According to this view, "The central task of the writer is not to
analyze an audience and adapt discourses to meet its needs. Rather, the writer
uses the semantic and syntactic resources of language to provide cues for the
reader--cues which help to define the role or roles the writer wishes the reader
to adopt in responding to the text" (Ede & Lunsford, 1984, p. 184). As Russell
Long points out, this shift in perspective has major implications for composition
pedagogy:

         Rather than beginning with the traditional question, "who
         is my audience?", we now begin with, "who do I want my
         audience to be?" Rather than encouraging a superficial,
         stereotyped view of reader[s], we are asking the student to
         begin with a statement about the audience she wants to
         create. What attitudes, ideas, actions are to be encouraged?
         This leads directly to questions of method: what distance
         between reader and subject should be established? What of
         diction and the creation of tone? What pieces of information
         do I want the reader to take for granted? Which do I want
         to detail and emphasize? Such questions shift the burden of
         responsibility upon the writer from that of amateur detective
         to that of creator, and the role of the creator is the most im-
         portant and most basic the writer must play. (1980, p. 226)

   Invoking an audience, then, is an alternative way for writers to generate the
rhetorical power of identification. According to Gary C. Woodward in The Idea
of Identification, "In its highest form identification offers the potent sensation
of sharing another's consciousness. In the process, it diminishes the distance
between the alien and the known, providing a sense of `place' for ourselves in
the external world" (2003, p. 18). Whereas conventional rhetorical approaches
to identification stress the need to accommodate an audience's views, psychic
distance implies the paradoxical need to reach out to readers by inviting them
into one's own discourse.

                                                                                                315
Ellis

   As teachers of writing, we are very good at helping students understand
why solipsistic writing is unpersuasive. But students should also be aware of the
rhetorical pitfalls of thinking too much about audience. For example, if you write
only with readers in mind, you'll be inclined to give them only what they want--
or what you think they want. How many times have you read a student's essay
and yawned at its amateurish attempt to please you with its politically correct
analysis or interpretation? Who knows what the student actually thought of the
story, film, essay, political controversy, or what have you? In an attempt to please
you--the omnipotent reader--the student's own engagement and imagination
spiraled down the drain. Yet because the student's ideological sweet nothings
sound so good and because the essay shows evidence of the critical thinking and
audience awareness you've tried so hard to encourage, you might shake off the
fleeting impression that the paper was in fact not written by your student but
by Eddie Haskell, the obsequious, two-faced friend on the TV show Leave It to
Beaver. Gee whiz, Professor, affirmative action sure is valuable ... like my grade.

   Legendary New Yorker editor Wallace Shawn once expressed a similar
concern that excessive editorial devotion to audience can turn otherwise
curious readers into narrow-minded consumers. "Now the whole idea is that
you edit for a market and if possible design a magazine with that in mind,"
he said. "Now magazines aren't started with the desire for someone to express
what he believes." As a result, magazines reassure rather than challenge readers,
depriving them of opportunities to "learn and grow" (as quoted in Bagdikian,
1983, p. 54).

   Rather than consider the negative implications of such attention to audience,
writing faculty who put their faith in reader-based prose imply that the reader/
professor/customer is always right. "Unfortunately," Flower writes of narrative
approaches to academic writing, "most academic and professional readers seem
unwilling to sit through these home movies of the writer's mind at work" (1979,
p. 25). Anyone who thinks these readers' impatience is "unfortunate" should
respond to it with resistance, not resignation. Just as Shawn had the courage and
integrity to stand up for his dissenting opinion, I share Corder's view that "[s]
ince we don't have time, we must rescue time by putting it into our discourses
and holding it there" (1985, p. 31).

RESCUING TIME

   Of course, "rescuing time" is easier said than done. Yet scholars in rhetoric
and composition already acknowledge and accept the impossibility of keeping
up with the field today. There is simply too much scholarship--too many

316
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

books, too many journals, too many conferences. Rather than panic at this
situation and scramble to read everything, which we must therefore hope will
be presented to us as straightforwardly as possible, we should welcome a variety
of discourse choices, in keeping with the richness of our field. If one is going to
read a relevant journal of X number of pages anyway--or a stack of X number
of essays--what difference does it make, in terms of time, if those pages consist
of articles or essays? If anything, essays can be easier and therefore faster--not
to mention more enjoyable--to read. "They valued convenience and upheld
the status quo" would be a sad motto to inscribe on plaques and buildings
honoring our professional legacy. If we wish to establish and assert meaningful
disciplinary authority, we should advocate for causes in which we believe.
Particularly with respect to teaching, time should be a significant consideration
in our administrative deliberations. We should argue as adamantly for more time
to respond to and assess more complicated student essays as we argue for smaller
class sizes. If it is true that we often lose battles to reduce the size of classes, it is
at least not for lack of effort. Why pride ourselves on our disciplinary integrity
in one context and willingly sacrifice it in another?

   As difficult as it may be to admit, our demand for textual efficiency may
rest at least in part on our faulty association of "inefficient" texts with poorly
edited "home movies." Too often we dismiss such texts without giving them a
fair hearing. Flower's comment about home movies reminds me of a comment
I once overheard after watching Citizen Kane in a movie theater. As my friend
and I were leaving, basking in the film's brilliance, we overheard a teenager say to
his companion, "Wow--movies sure have come a long way since then." If your
standard for comparison and excellence is the fast-paced action flick, Citizen
Kane doesn't stand a chance. Elbow describes a similar situation often faced by
teachers. In "The Music of Form: Rethinking Organization in Writing," he notes
that "when we read student papers in stacks of twenty or more, we easily slide into
holding up each paper against a mental template of features that are supposed to
be there--rather than genuinely reading it through time. We are short of time"
(2006, p. 631, emphasis in original). As a result, "readers can be blind (deaf ) to
coherence that's actually in the text," albeit in subtler and more challenging forms
than we expect (2006, p. 632). Elbow wisely concedes that writers cannot blame
readers for failing to see coherence where it doesn't exist. After all, it would be
arrogant to invoke Montaigne's assertion that "[i]t is the inattentive reader who
loses my subject, not I" (as quoted in Klaus, 2012, p. 168). Still, this concession
hardly invalidates the insight that audience expectations are themselves socially
constructed, a fact we often forget. According to Pat C. Hoy II:

         Reading, we permit ourselves and our students to get waylaid

                                                                                                317
Ellis

         by theses and topic sentences instead of pausing to savor the
         twists and turns of the essayist's mind playing over rich mate-
         rial, entertaining doubt, wrestling with ambiguities. Tracking
         what we think of as the controlling idea, we tend to overlook
         what Stephen Jay Gould calls a hierarchy of ideas--the more
         elegant theory that accounts for the evidence and the compli-
         cations, facts as well as uncertainties. (2001, p. 353, empha-
         ses in original)

   To the extent that academic readers demand a "proper" tone--that is, the
tone they have been conditioned to accept as natural in a given rhetorical
situation--they blackmail writers into linguistic conformity.

   Sometimes this conformity is appropriate, but at other times it might
not be the most effective--or the most ethical--way to craft one's text. As
Chris Holcomb points out, "Things fall apart when the players--writer and
reader--fail to play their parts. Readers fail when they become too dismissive
or prematurely impatient, and writers fail when they become too intent on
dazzling" (Holcomb, p. 204). Just the same, I'll take a class of aspiring dazzlers
over a class of obedient conformists any day. As Ian Barnard wonders in "The
Ruse of Clarity," "Surely inexpert complexity is preferable to expert simplicity
if it is indicative of intellectual wrestling and scholarly ambition rather than the
complacency of comfort?" (2010, p. 446).

TONE IT DOWN?

   Unlike tone, psychic distance privileges the writer's perspective--not as a
vacuum-sealed celebration of romantic, dazzling individualism but as a way of
more closely aligning words, phrases, sentences, paragraphs, and entire texts with
the writer's ideas. If the writer fails at this admittedly difficult task, the audience
will say so--for example, during a workshop. Then the writer must decide how
much, or even whether, to revise. But if the writer succeeds, the audience will
welcome even the most unconventional stylistic choices--provided readers are
willing to engage the writer and look beyond the "mental template of features
that are supposed to be there" (Elbow, 2006, p. 631).

   As an example of writing whose power to resonate hinges on an audience's
willingness to enter an unfamiliar perspective, consider Jamaica Kincaid's essay
"On Seeing England for the First Time." After describing and reflecting on her
colonialist upbringing in Antigua, she recounts a recent trip to England to see

318
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

the places she had been indoctrinated to worship since she was a child. She ends
her essay with this sentence:

         The white cliffs of Dover, when finally I saw them, were cliffs,
         but they were not white; you would probably only call them
         that if the word "white" meant something special to you;
         they were dirty and they were steep; they were so steep, the
         correct height from which all my views of England, starting
         with the map before me in my classroom and ending with
         the trip I had just taken, should jump and die and disappear
         forever. (2000, p. 220)

   When I first assigned this essay in an upper-division composition course at
the University of Colorado at Boulder, most students--no doubt many of them
under the Anglophile spell of Harry Potter--were shocked and offended by
the rhetorical one-two punch of Kincaid's "audacious" postcolonial perspective
and her correspondingly unrelenting style. Granted, Kincaid wrote this essay
for Transition, a publication that The Village Voice has called "the only decent
forum for black intellectuals" ("Transition"). To the extent that my class had
no black intellectuals, they were not the intended audience. Therefore, some
would argue, it is irrelevant if a group of mostly white, relatively conservative
undergraduates fails to appreciate the essay's ideas or literary merit. Fair
enough--to an extent. Maybe I shouldn't have been surprised when the first
comment of class discussion was, "I don't see what she's so upset about,"
followed shortly by, "This was the worst essay I've ever read."

   But suppose Kincaid had written this essay for undergraduates. Or suppose
she had been invited to revise her essay to better suit its new rhetorical situation
of being published in The Best American Essays 2000, with its larger and more
general audience. If Kincaid had had such an opportunity, should she have
"toned down" her anger and resentment, repackaging it in more palatable prose?
Should she have written less emotionally, changing "should jump and die and
disappear forever" to "should perhaps be reconsidered"--the kind of suggestion
we might make for a student? I think not. Even if maintaining an intimate level
of psychic distance means that her essay enrages rather than enlightens most
students or other readers, perhaps that's the price she must pay for being true to
her experience and convictions. Maybe provoking readers is a realistic enough
rhetorical goal, given the level of audience resistance. Such provocation could
be more valuable in raising awareness of her perspective than the easy dismissal
that a more conventional version would be likely to produce. The alienation

                                                                                                319
Ellis

many of my students felt from Kincaid's implied author was likely a result not
of any rhetorical failure on her part to invite them into her consciousness via
close psychic distance, but of students' inability to engage a perspective that
threatens their identities. As Barry Kroll argues,

         If we focus too much attention on writing for an audience--
         whether conceived as a "target receiver," a "needy reader," or
         a "constructive participant"--we may narrow our view of
         composing, forgetting that writing is also an exploration of
         ideas, a quest for purpose, and a projection of oneself. (1984,
         p. 183)

   In other words, identification is a two-way street.
   But should we allow privileged white students to get away with creating
zoomed-in psychic distance when writing about the unfairness of, say,
affirmative action in higher education? Wouldn't it be a double-standard to
celebrate close psychic distance in the work of progressives while prohibiting
it among conservatives? I think the answer has to be yes. That doesn't mean,
though, that we should stand back and applaud any claim based on personal
experience, provided the author uses psychic distance skillfully. Candace
Spigelman advocates "the interrogation of assumptions as a means of evaluating
the arguments in personal experience stories" (2004, p. 102). Here is where
an audience steps in and helps writers evaluate the validity of their ideas. In
Kincaid's case, I imagine her assumptions would hold up quite well to critical
scrutiny, considering the wealth of postcolonial scholarship that confirms her
ideas and arguments. What about the student writer who assumes that racism
ended with the Civil Rights Act, thus eliminating the very premise of affirmative
action? Obviously this assumption would not withstand critical scrutiny. My
point here is that there's a big difference between a writer using a close degree of
psychic distance to explore a valid idea--whether invoking personal experience
or not--and a writer using a close degree of psychic distance to explore an
invalid idea. Insofar as the argument is sound, the skillful use of psychic distance
will tend to make the writing more engaging and persuasive, at least for readers
who have an open mind about the possibilities of academic discourse. Insofar as
the underlying argument is questionable, an audience has the duty to point this
out to the writer, usually during a workshop or instructor conference.
   Unless writers have at least the initial freedom to indulge "writerly" impulses
and to adapt their language not to an audience's expectations but to their own
ideas, they will be more likely to produce a picture of a mind conforming
rather than a mind thinking. Take insecure student writers and tell them to

320
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

fixate on audience, and what do you often get? Timid prose that seldom takes
risks, or if it does take risks, does so rarely and flinchingly. If we value safe,
predictable texts that are basically five-paragraph themes taken to a "new level,"
no problem. But if we believe "college-level writing instruction should ask
students to do something that is difficult, something that strives for more than
mere competence," and if we want students to explore their own ideas and take
rhetorical risks to create original, compelling essays, we should focus on psychic
distance more than tone (Heilker, 2006, p. 201, emphasis in original).

   Although I don't have much space to elaborate here, the (non-five-paragraph)
essay is arguably the ideal genre for composition students to apply the rhetoric
of style. According to Cristina Kirklighter in Traversing the Democratic Borders
of the Essay, "Instead of working toward definitive conclusions, as in an article,
the essay's spontaneity allows the writer to wander, to make connections in
unusual places, to emphasize discoveries instead of conclusions" (2002, p. 6).
Mind you, I'm as happy as anyone to teach students the conventions of writing,
say, a recommendation report in a business writing course, but I don't pretend
that such occasions offer writers a wealth of stylistic possibilities. On this point,
I disagree with Andrew Bourelle, who argues that:

         [...] when writers make decisions within disciplinary con-
         texts, those are stylistic decisions. A lab report that adheres
         to a specific sectional format, that contains passive sentence
         constructions, and that is written via a seemingly voiceless
         narrator--that, in other words, seems void of style--is still
         written with style. All students studying writing--not just
         those in first-year composition courses--could benefit from
         a closer look at the style in the types of writing they are sup-
         posed to emulate. (2010, p. 105)

   I agree that such genres contain style, which students can analyze and
emulate. And of course they offer some possibilities for stylistic choice. Yet we
should keep in mind Nora Bacon's point in "Style in Academic Writing" that
"different kinds of discourse permit different degrees of stylistic experimentation
and play" (this volume). When you contrast the stylistic potential of, say, a lab
report and an essay--a genre that Heilker has called "kineticism incarnate"--
you can see that the lab report locks student writers in a stylistic prison and
throws away the key (1994, p. 169). As a former composition student of mine,
Jeremey Logan, wrote in his stylistically engaging end-of-semester reflective
essay: "The best essays are like Bugs Bunny: They lean against a wall, cross one
leg over the other, and shoot you straight, while munching on a carrot. They're

                                                                                                321
Ellis

casual and comfortable. They convince you by not worrying if you're convinced.
The essayist ain't running for office, and he [or she] ain't selling windows."

Beyond Voice

   I've explained how psychic distance differs from tone, but how does it
differ from voice? And why would it be a more useful element of craft for
reclaiming the essay? As the most craft-based pedagogy, expressivism already
privileges voice--to its credit. As Christopher Burnham points out in A Guide
to Composition Pedagogies, "Expressivist pedagogy encourages, even insists upon,
a sense of writer presence even in research-based writing. This presence--`voice'
or ethos--whether explicit, implicit, or absent, functions as a key evaluation
criterion when expressivists examine writing" (Burnham, 2001, p. 19). Elbow
has called voice "the life and rhythms of speech" (1985, p. 291). Enos has explored
voice as "transforming ethos" that requires "dialogic action, where both writer
and reader are aware of, and enjoy, the engagement" (2007, p. 194). Robert
M. Gorrell has argued that voice "manifests itself by establishing a position in
space and time and by expressing a tone, an attitude toward the audience and
toward the subject matter" (1984, p. 158). Voice, ethos, tone, presence, style,
psychic distance. I tend to agree with Darsie Bowden that such "distinctions
are seemingly endless and often more confusing than illuminating" (1995, p.
187). Ultimately it's not the terms that matter so much as what you do with the
concepts. But by exploring psychic distance alongside voice, I hope to show that
there are some conceptual differences with practical implications for teaching.

   Clearly psychic distance and voice share much in common. I don't mean to
imply that the former should replace the latter as a key term in our professional
lexicon. As a rhetorical strategy that appeals to readers obliquely, psychic
distance resembles voice in Elbow's less popular sense that

         the music of prosidy enacts some of the meaning so that
         we "hear" it. It's as though the meaning comes to us rather
         than us having to go after it. So if a writer is skilled enough
         to write sentences that readers actually hear--hearing the
         accents, rhythms, and melody in the silent words on the
         page--readers will actually "hear" some of the meaning.
         (2006, p. 643)

   Work in linguistics on the poetic function of language supports this "latent
tendency, which may become patent in certain circumstances, for the sounds
of a given word to be congruent with (similar to) their meanings" (Waugh,

322
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

1985, p. 156). Understanding how to fine-tune psychic distance or voice can
help students--and scholars--pull off this rhetorical feat of enabling readers to
"hear" meaning, and not just with individual words.

   At the same time, psychic distance implies more of an invoked audience
than voice, and thus it invites if not demands even closer attention to the
relationships between language and meaning, form and content. It is certainly
possible to praise a piece of writing for its "strong voice" and then go into detail
about how the writer creates that voice, but it is equally possible--and perhaps
more common--to praise a "strong voice" or criticize a weak one without
specifying its subtle dynamics. However, when you praise or critique a piece of
writing for its use of psychic distance, you have little choice but to elaborate on
the details of language that create it.

   Of course, close attention to the details of language isn't everything. Elbow
makes this point when he explains why voice is a more useful pedagogical term
than style:

         To talk about style is to focus on the actual language and
         syntax itself. To talk about voice, on the other hand, is to
         be in a way more roundabout and imprecise, that is, to talk
         about how the words ask to be performed or spoken. (2000,
         pp. 169-70)

   He goes on to note that "students and untrained readers are often more
sophisticated in getting at how language works when they talk in terms of voice
than when they talk about textual style" (2000, p. 170).

   Psychic distance offers the best of both worlds. For writers, in particular,
it can create a comfortable balance between psychology and craft. It enables
them to think broadly about how closely they want their writing to mirror
their thinking--and therefore the degree of identification they wish to foster--
yet it also demands sentence-level attention to the nuances that will create
the desired distance. Another difference between voice and psychic distance
returns us to the question of audience. Just as students are often asked to adjust
their tone to their audience, Gorrell refers to "the importance of fitting voice
to audience" (1984, p. 157). Even Elbow argues "for crafting a voice that fits
the audience" ("2007, p. 179). He offers the example of a student who must
write "for a reader who wants a very restricted academic voice or register--a
reader who is not just uninterested in my presence but who will in fact be put
off if she feels too much contact with `me'" (2000, p. 215). Like Flower's reader
who is "unwilling to sit through these home movies of the writer's mind at
work," this reader in effect coerces the writer into conformity (1979, p. 25). In

                                                                                                323
Ellis

a characteristic attempt to embrace contraries, Elbow argues that it's possible to
"let the `wrong voice' have free reign, and then in late drafts adjust or get rid of
the offending bits but keep the energy" (2000, p. 216). No doubt this strategy
sometimes saves the day, but what about when a writer, such as Kincaid or an
ambitious composition student, wishes to write in such a personal voice--even
in a research-based essay that contains zero autobiographical references--that
conservative readers would object to the whole text, not just a few "offending
bits," no matter how sophisticated and talented the writer? In other words,
what if the text's energy is the "offending bit," in the form of a strong voice or
an intimate level of psychic distance? Must the writer conform and revise her
entire work? Of course it's up to her. She can cave in completely to audience
demands--and probably silence her voice the next time around. She can
change nothing and admit rhetorical defeat--and, if she's a student, risk a bad
grade. Or she can compromise. Compromise is often necessary and good, but
only when it's reciprocal. Unfortunately, many academic readers in positions
of power, including writing instructors, have no strong incentive to embrace
voice-driven writing, to meet voice-driven writers halfway--except in explicitly
personal essays, which are often followed by thesis-driven research papers that
forbid a strong voice and a narrative structure. In "`Playing Safe': Undergraduate
Essay Writing and the Presentation of the Student `Voice,'" Barbara Read, Becky
Francis, and Jocelyn Robson present research suggesting that "the unequal power
relationship between student and lecturer, constructed through hegemonically
dominant academic discourse, influences the way in which the student voice is
presented" (2001, p. 390). This fact bothers me to a degree that it doesn't seem
to bother Elbow. The main problem, as I see it, is that more academic readers
need to become better listeners, not that more writers need to lower their voices
or become ventriloquists. Jane E. Hindman has voiced a legitimate concern that
"our [reading] practices undermine, if not censure, innovative textual production,
disciplining their subversive potential" (2003, 14).

   More than tone or voice, psychic distance offers readers the two attitudes
that Carl Rogers claimed foster creative thinking: psychological safety and
psychological freedom. According to William Zeigler, "Psychological safety
means that one feels one's own worth is unconditionally assured, that one
fears no judgment or criticism, and that one is understood empathetically.
Psychological freedom means that one feels free to express oneself symbolically"
(p. 464). Whereas freewriting provides these conditions only initially in the
writing process, before writers subject their voice-driven writing to what is
often a gavel-wielding, voice-stifling audience, psychic distance preserves these
conditions even at the revision stage. That doesn't mean writers acquire a Get-
out-of-Audience-Free card. As always, readers need to assess an argument's

324
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

assumptions and evidence. In addition, audience remains crucial to the extent
that readers must evaluate how compelling a text is.

   The term psychic distance also has metaphorical appeal. I don't want to
overstate it, lest I fall prey to Philip Eubanks's cautionary note that "[t]oo often
writing scholarship alternates between assertions that a particular metaphor
is pernicious and speculations that another metaphor may be the answer to
all of our aspirations" (2001, p. 115). Still, just as voice has power in writing
because it helps us think of texts as vocal expressions, psychic distance has its
own unique power to evoke the visual/spatial metaphor of distance. In my
experience, composition students often welcome the term psychic distance--in
part, I think, because it helps them visualize themselves as writers in proximity
to readers, or as readers in proximity to--or at a great remove from--academic
writers. But again, this kind of audience awareness is a far cry from the kind of
deferential audience awareness often implied by tone.

   Finally, for scholars who criticize voice for its implicit association with
"authentic self," psychic distance might prove a more defensible term. Elbow
has made the case that:

         even if we are completely at odds about the nature of selves
         or identities, about whether people even have such things,
         and about the relation of a text to the person who wrote it,
         we have a good chance of reaching agreement about whether
         any given text has audible voice, what kind of dramatic voice
         it has, whether it has a recognizable or distinctive voice, and
         whether the writer was able to achieve authority of voice.
         (2000, p. 205)

   As Elbow has acknowledged, "I clearly failed to get people to use those
distinctions" (2007, p. 183). For scholars such as Frank Farmer, who feels that
we need "to deliver voice from its long romance with the true self " (1995, p.
318), and Bowden, who argues that "[t]he assumption that language is first and
foremost a social activity seems to be obscured by the use of voice [...]," psychic
distance could be more appealing, given its subtle but unmistakable relationship
to audience (1999, p. 65). In its very name, psychic distance reinforces the need
to negotiate the space between writer and audience.

   Of course, faculty can decide for themselves how much leeway students
should have to experiment with psychic distance in their writing. You might
agree with David Bartholomae that students "have to speak in the voice and
through the codes of those of us with power and wisdom" (1997, p. 610), or
you might agree with Berlin that

                                                                                                325
Ellis

         we are not simply offering training in a useful technical skill that
         is meant as a simple complement to the more important studies
         of other areas. We are teaching a way of experiencing the world,
         a way of ordering and making sense of it. (1996, p. 246)

Or perhaps you hold any number of other complicated, overlapping views
about the nature and value of academic discourse. But regardless of whether
you ask students to slavishly uphold or steadfastly subvert every convention--
or perhaps more likely fall somewhere in between--you can still use psychic
distance rhetorically to suit your particular purpose and pedagogy.

PSYCHIC DISTANCE IN THE CLASSROOM

   How can we help composition students internalize an awareness of psychic
distance? Of course one might take any number of approaches, in any number of
contexts. At the risk of sounding like "someone tell[ing] about their experiences
on drugs"--that is, someone who values classroom experience--let me outline
a few of the techniques I've used with some success at various curricular levels,
ranging from first-year composition to upper-division courses such as Topics in
Writing and Writing on Science and Society (Dworkin, 2004, p. 604).

   I often introduce psychic distance by giving students a handout (see
Appendix A) that shows Gardner's and Burroway's definitions, Gardner's list
of five sentences, and a short excerpt from Oscar Wilde's The Picture of Dorian
Gray. (Please take a minute to read this excerpt.) Because students sometimes
grasp the concept of psychic distance more easily by first considering examples
from fiction--perhaps because the definition of psychic distance comes to us
from creative writing--I explain the context of The Picture of Dorian Gray and
read the excerpt aloud, asking students to focus, in small groups, on the shift
in psychic distance that begins most noticeably in the third paragraph. Some
groups focus so much on the action in this paragraph that they fail to see the
shift in psychic distance. A student might say to me as I check in on his or her
group, "The language gets more intense. There are some really strong words
like groan, choking, and stabbed." I tell them that this is true, but I ask them
to think more about the relationship between language and identification.
"Why," I might ask, "does Oscar Wilde say `someone choking with blood'?
Why does he say `The thing was still seated in the chair'? Those are curious
word choices. Why would Wilde use this kind of language?" At this point
students sometimes veer in the opposite interpretive direction, noting the vague
language and concluding that Wilde is pulling back the psychic distance so that

326
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

readers cannot easily identify with him. Other groups hit the nail on the head.
Inevitably, though, even if it takes some encouragement, students point to more
examples of the suddenly distant language--"the outstretched arms," "the man
did not move"--and realize that it perfectly reflects Dorian's consciousness and
guilty conscience (Wilde, 1988, p. 123). The writing reflects his attempt to
distance himself mentally from his actions and from the humanity of his friend
turned victim.

   After making sure that students grasp the basic operation of psychic distance
in this admittedly sophisticated excerpt, we look at other details of Wilde's
language. As early as the first sentence of the second paragraph, in the phrase "an
uncontrollable feeling of hatred for Basil Hallward came over him," we can see
the relationship between Wilde's diction and Dorian's psychological withdrawal
from his emotions--and their moral implications. The fact that Wilde uses
Basil's full name in this sentence is significant. It mirrors Dorian's perception
that Basil is suddenly more of a stranger than a friend. In addition, the phrase
"came over him," with its implication that Dorian is unaccountable for his own
hatred, not only reinforces the conceit that the portrait is the controlling force
but also foreshadows Dorian's imagined absence from the scene of the crime.
Students benefit from considering the similar second-paragraph phrases "he
loathed the man" and "crushing the man's head down on the table" (Wilde,
1988, p. 123). Simply asking students why Wilde might have made these
language choices can elicit good responses and focus the discussion on psychic
distance.

   Whether or not readers consciously recognize this shift in psychic distance
as they read the novel is irrelevant, so long as they experience it. Although we
often teach students the paramount importance of writing for an audience, it
seems doubtful that Wilde dwelled on audience in the passage above. During
John Douglas's libel trial, after all, Wilde said, in response to questions about
the novel, "What concerns me in my art is my view and my feeling and why I
made it; I don't care twopence what other people think about it" (as quoted in
Holland, p. 80). According to Donald Lawler in An Inquiry into Oscar Wilde's
Revisions of The Picture of Dorian Gray, "the dominant motive underlying all
the important changes made by Wilde was an artistic desire to suppress an
underlying moral which Wilde considered too obvious and, for that reason,
distracting." Lawler notes that "such revisions were far from haphazard nor were
they made, as has commonly been supposed, either in self-defense following the
criticisms of the Lippincott's version or required to fill out the needed pages for
a full-length novel" (1988, p. 2). Wilde's additions to the ending "help to direct
our interest to the hero's mental state rather than to his moral state" (Lawler,
1988, p. 38). In other words, it seems that Wilde was not thinking much about

                                                                                                327
Ellis

pleasing his audience. He was too busy paying attention to Dorian and how
best to craft the scene so that it would be, in Elbow's words, "right for thinking,
right for language, or right for the subject being written about" (1987, p. 54).
Talking with students about how published writers such as Wilde seem to have
crafted their work without slavish attention to audience "demands" can help
them imagine ways that they, too, might appeal to readers in a roundabout
fashion by focusing more on issues of craft and less on the need to conform to
their professors' expectations.

   After students discuss psychic distance in The Picture of Dorian Gray, I read
students the section of the handout about how psychic distance translates to
nonfiction. Then I invite students to complete the short writing exercise on
the handout (see Appendix A). Hearing volunteers read their revisions of the
sentence "The weather is very cold today" helps students recognize the range
of possible language available to them when they consider psychic distance.
Their revisions often feature more visceral, embodied language than the original
sentence.

   Continuing with the handout, I briefly explain the unique advantages
of the term psychic distance--why it can be better than tone, voice, or style
(see Appendix A). Then I ask students to read and discuss the opening two
paragraphs of an essay by my former student Jeremy Kellogg, an undergraduate
at CU-Boulder. Students discuss the ways that Jeremy, in this rhetorical
analysis of a local commercial space, uses psychic distance to help readers
share his perspective as a man who feels uncomfortable in such a feminine
environment (Victoria's Secret). For example, we analyze the ways in which
his use of impersonal, "masculine" language reflects his feelings of discomfort
and alienation, and we discuss the rhetorical role and stylistic dynamics of the
military metaphor.

   Next I like to show students the title sequence of To Kill a Mockingbird.
Judging by the number of hands that shoot up when I ask who has read the
book or seen the film, it's a good example because it's familiar and creates a kind
of common ground. Before I show the title sequence, I make sure everyone
realizes that the film is told from the perspective of children, and I ask them
to keep an eye out for details that establish psychic distance. After showing the
clip, I ask students, "What did you see? What's going on with psychic distance
here?" They point out a number of ways the film invites viewers to share the
perspective of children. For example, even before we see the first image of the
film, we hear the slow, simple opening notes of a piano while the earth of
the Universal International© logo spins. It sounds like a child practicing the
piano. The crucial first image of the film shows a weathered cigar box, shot
from overhead, which is presently opened by a pair of young hands. Inside we

328
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

see two wooden dolls, several coins and marbles, a variety of crayons, and other
objects traditionally associated with childhood. The camera slowly zooms in
on the box, as if we have been invited to leave our adult concerns and join the
childhood world of play. We hear a child's voice humming idly, and an extreme
close-up reveals a small hand grabbing a crayon and proceeding to color over
invisible words on a page that reveal the film's title. We hear the crayon slide
across the paper.

   Throughout the sequence, we never see what this child looks like. To
have shown someone specific would have compromised the psychic distance,
snapping us out of the immediacy of the moment. Tight close-ups enable us to
identify far more closely. To children, of course, small objects are not so small,
but even more important than this literal fact is that the close-ups reflect the
intensity of children's playful imaginations--the large presence of small things.
The remaining shots of the sequence consist of more extreme close-ups of
childhood objects, such as crayons, marbles, and a whistle. Each shot is filmed
with the unrushed fluidity of a summer afternoon, a sensation furthered by the
choice of transitions--slow dissolves that give the impression of one moment
melting into the next. The sequence ends when a piece of paper drawn with
a bird is ripped down the middle, revealing a patch of black into which the
establishing shot of the town dissolves seamlessly, tree branches sprouting over
the frayed edges of the page. The title sequence lasts just three minutes, but it
packs a powerful lesson in the craft of psychic distance.

   The way I have analyzed this sequence might give the impression that I stand
in front of the class and pontificate about psychic distance. Nothing could be
further from the truth. Students are perfectly capable of analyzing many of
these subtleties of craft, and I invite them to do so. Their familiarity with film
and their attunement to visual rhetoric never fails to impress me. To build their
critical confidence and to help them better understand psychic distance--
and, more importantly, to apply their understanding of psychic distance--I
show students more film clips and ask them to analyze and interpret the use of
psychic distance.

   Because students always comment on the correlation between the opening
scene's close-ups and psychic distance, I like to follow To Kill a Mockingbird
with a short clip from Krzysztof Kieslowski's Bleu that features an important
close-up at a key moment in the film. Juliette Binoche's character Julie, a recent
widow seeking to block out all memory of the tragic deaths of her husband and
daughter, is thrown off guard momentarily by the sudden appearance of her
husband's assistant, who is in love with her. In the scene, which takes place in
a café, she rejects the man and he leaves. Then we see a very tight close-up of
her cup of coffee as she dips a sugar cube into its surface. The sugar cube slowly

                                                                                                329
Ellis

sucks up the coffee, and then she lets it fall into the cup. It's a quick shot, lasting
just a few seconds, but as Kieslowski explains in an interview on the film's
DVD, the close-up is a significant reflection of Julie's psychology. Sitting in
front of his editing machine, Kieslowski replays the clip and asks, "What does
this obsession with close-ups mean?" He explains:

         Simply that we're trying to show the heroine's world from
         her point of view, to show that she sees these little things,
         things that are near to her, by focusing on them in order to
         demonstrate that the rest doesn't matter to her. She's trying
         to contain, to put a lid on her world and on her immediate
         environment. [...] We made a very tight shot of the sugar
         cube sucking up the coffee to show that nothing around her
         matters to her--not other people nor their business, nor the
         boy, the man who loves her and went through a great ordeal
         to find her. She just doesn't care. Only the sugar cube mat-
         ters, and she intentionally focuses on it to shut out all the
         things she doesn't accept.

   Kieslowki's comments serve both to demonstrate the value of psychic
distance and to validate students' observations about film technique in To Kill
a Mockingbird.

   I sometimes ask students to analyze the relationship between film techniques
and psychic distance in clips from concert videos by Coldplay and The Dave
Matthews Band. The Coldplay video that I show uses chaotic camerawork
and fast-paced editing to mirror the fast pace of the music and to capture the
energy and immediacy of the concert experience, while the video I show by the
Dave Matthews Band uses slow dissolves and lengthy shots of the performers to
focus more on the musicianship. Each clip uses the language of film to create a
particular degree of psychic distance.

   Following up such an introduction to psychic distance with collaborative
presentations that ask students to analyze effective and ineffective examples
in print and multimedia can help ensure that the concept does not evaporate
from the class. One group of students presented two car-chase scenes from
popular films. Students argued that the first clip was much more effective in
inviting viewers to identify with the protagonist driving the car. The scene's
use of point of view and cinematography, such as shots of the driver shifting
gears and pressing the gas pedal, created a greater degree of intimacy, students
argued. By contrast, a different film that also featured a protagonist driving a
car in a chase scene tended to alienate viewers by "zooming out" the degree of

330
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

psychic distance. For example, the scene was filmed from many more points of
view, including that of frazzled pedestrians scurrying not to be run over by the
swerving vehicle.

   Another way to emphasize the importance of psychic distance is to include
the term as an explicit assessment criterion on writing assignments and grading
rubrics. Unless you follow through on your desire to reinforce the importance
of psychic distance by making it a vital part of the class vocabulary, students will
forget about it--and justifiably so.

INTERNALIZING PSYCHIC DISTANCE

   The goal of analyzing and experimenting with psychic distance is not to
train students to consult some mental psychic-distance yardstick every time
they write a sentence. Rather, the goal is to help them internalize an awareness
of psychic distance. I imagine that the majority of literary novelists--as opposed
to genre writers who follow clear, predictable formulas and whose works many
instructors duly disparage--do not write with more than a vague consciousness
of audience or psychic distance. Yet such inattention hardly diminishes these
writers' accomplishments or their works' rhetorical power. What difference does
it make to readers that Virginia Woolf, while writing To the Lighthouse, did
not ponder the fact that some of her sentences "contain unanchored tenses,
requiring an RT from a neighboring narrative present predicate" or that she
uses the linguistic elements of "semantic connector linking, temporal linking,
and the progressive aspect" (Ehrlich, 1990, pp. 97, 102)?

   The same process of internalization applies to professional writers of
nonfiction, including Woolf in A Room of One's Own, a work Pamela J. Annas
cites as an "example of powerful writing that can be produced out of the very
tension between writer and audience." Annas notes that "Woolf breaks all
the rules about thesis statements by burying hers in the middle of a two-page
paragraph and undercutting it by calling it `an opinion upon one minor point'"
(1985, p. 365). No doubt such masterful rhetorical moves did not fall into
Woolf 's lap from her heavenly muse, but neither did she most likely think,
"Aha, I'll disguise my thesis here to throw off the reader." Of course she made
rhetorical choices, but I'm suggesting that accomplished writers often make
these choices subconsciously and intuitively--as well as by consciously revising,
like Montaigne, to adjust psychic distance. According to Fenton Johnson,
author of nonfiction, novels, a memoir, and numerous essays in publications
such as Harper's, "When writing, I don't think a split second about the reader"
(Johnson, Fenton. personal interview, February 3, 2004).

                                                                                                331
Ellis

   Good writers are often too busy paying attention to their own ideas and how
best to express them to contemplate the rhetorical triangle. Subconsciously,
thanks to a cultivation of craft, these writers know exactly what they're doing.
Just as students can enrich their writing by internalizing linguistic structures
using the techniques of sentence pedagogies, they can also study and practice
shifts in psychic distance to cultivate an inner ear for what language will be most
appropriate in a given situation. As Robert J. Connors argues in "The Erasure
of the Sentence," when students internalize linguistic structures, they become
"free to engage in the informed processes of choice, which are the wellspring of
creativity" (2000, p. 102). Sharon A. Myers has refined sentence pedagogies to
focus less on the grammar of phrases and clauses and more on the "grammar of
words" (2003, p. 617). She argues that "words are much more real to students
than abstract rules" (2003, p. 621). Even more real, perhaps, are the words
and phrases and clauses that students attend to when they think about psychic
distance in particular sentences and paragraphs and texts. Because psychic
distance demands attention to context, it is more conducive to internalization.
Therefore if we invite students to explore ideas that sincerely interest them,
without shackling them to the rhetorical triangle, and if we encourage them to
pay attention to psychic distance--a very different kind of audience awareness--
then their writer-based prose will likely end up being reader-based as well.

   Attention to craft--and psychic distance in particular--has the potential to
expand students' understanding of rhetoric and to spark fresh interdisciplinary
scholarship devoted to narrative. "Art is better understood as a verb rather than
a noun," Spellmeyer writes in Arts of Living: Reinventing the Humanities for
the Twenty-First Century (2003, p. 167). Instead of "methodically dismissing
as irrelevant the inner experience of writing," composition instructors should
be fostering an "intensification of subjectivity" (emphasis in original). Ironically,
rather than theorize the "textual" world in a never-ending quest to zap false
consciousness, we might achieve better results in the classroom by considering
the perspective(s) of the artist. "The way in becomes the way out," Spellmeyer
writes (2003, p. 196). To the extent that psychic distance can help us and our
students find our way in--for example, into original, idea-driven essays and
into meaningful scholarly conversations--it deserves an active role in our
composition classrooms and scholarly journals.

NOTES

1. In "Representing Audience: `Successful' Discourse and Disciplinary Critique,"
Lunsford and Ede revisit their earlier essay and acknowledge that in it they had not
"consider[ed] the powerful effects of ideology working through genres, such as those

332
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

inscribed in academic essayist literacy, to call forth and thus to control and constrain
writers and audiences" (1996, p. 171). In both essays they note that "students have less
power than teachers and thus less freedom in some rhetorical situations than in oth-
ers" (1996, p. 170). Therefore, it seems that ideology tends to "control and constrain"
academic writers more than audiences.

REFERENCES

Anderson, C. (Ed.). (1989). Literary nonfiction: Theory, criticism, pedagogy. Car-
   bondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Annas, P. J. (1985). Style as politics: A feminist approach to the teaching of
   writing. College English 47, 360-72.

Bacon, N. (2013). Style in academic writing. In M. Duncan & S. Vanguri
   (Eds.), The centrality of style. Anderson, SC: Parlor Press.

Bagdikian, B. H. (1983, May). "The wrong kind of readers": The rise and fall of
   the New Yorker. The Progressive, 52-54.

Barnard, I. (2010). The ruse of clarity. College Composition and Communication
   61(3), 434-451.

Bartholomae, D. (1985). Inventing the university. In M. Rose (Ed.), When a
   writer can't write: Studies in writer's block and other composing-process problems
   (pp. 134-65). New York: Guilford. (Reprinted in Villanueva Jr., V. (Ed.).
   (1997). Cross-talk in comp theory: A reader (pp. 589-619). Urbana, IL.)

Berlin, J. (1996). Rhetorics, poetics, and cultures: Refiguring college English studies.
   Urbana, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Bishop, W. (2003). Suddenly sexy: Creative nonfiction rear-ends composition.
   College English 65(3), 257-75.

Bourelle, A. (2010). Teaching with style. Currents in Teaching and Learning
   2(2), 104-7.

Bowden, D. (1999). The mythology of voice. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.
Bowden, D. (1995). The rise of metaphor: "Voice" in composition pedagogy.

   Rhetoric Review 14(1), 173-88.
Burnham, C. (2001). Expressive pedagogy: Practice/theory, theory/practice. In

   G. Tate, A. Rupiper, & K. Schick (Eds.), A guide to composition pedagogies
   (pp. 19-35). New York: Oxford University Press.
Burroway, J. (1996). Writing fiction: A guide to narrative craft. New York: Harp-
   erCollins.
Connors, R. (2000). Erasure of the sentence. College Composition and Commu-
   nication 52(1), 96-128.
Corder, J. W. (1991). Academic jargon and soul-searching drivel. Rhetoric Re-
   view 9, 314-26.

                                                                                                333
Ellis

Corder, J. W. (1985). Argument as emergence, rhetoric as love. Rhetoric Review
   4, 16-32.

Dworkin, C. (2004). opinion: Mycopedagogy. College English 66(6), 603-11.
Ede, L., & Lunsford, A. (1984). Audience addressed/audience invoked: The

   role of audience in composition theory and pedagogy. College Composition
   and Communication 35(2), 155-71.
Ehrlich, S. (1990). Point of view: A linguistic analysis of literary style. London:
   Routledge.
Elbow, P. (1985). The shifting relationships between speech and writing. College
   Composition andCommunication 36(3), 283-303.
Elbow, P. (1987). Closing my eyes as I speak: An argument for ignoring audi-
   ence. College English 49(1), 50-69.
Elbow, P. (2000). Everyone can write: Essays toward a hopeful theory of writing
   and teaching writing. Oxford, UK:Oxford University Press.
Elbow, P. (2006). The music of form: Rethinking organization in writing. Col-
   lege Composition and Communication 57(4), 620-66.
Elbow, P. (2007). Reconsiderations: Voice in writing again: Embracing contrar-
   ies. College English 70(2), 168-87.
Enos, T. (1997). Gender and publishing scholarship in rhetoric and composi-
   tion. In G. A. Olson & T. W. Taylor (Eds.), Publishing in rhetoric and compo-
   sition (pp. 47-56). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Eubanks, P. (2001). Understanding metaphors for writing: In defense of the
   conduit metaphor. College Composition and Communication 53(1), 92-118.
Farmer, F. (1995). Voice reprised: Three etudes for a dialogic understanding.
   Rhetoric Review 13(2), 304-20.
Flower, L. (1979). Writer-based prose: A cognitive basis for problems in writ-
   ing. College English, 19-37.
Gardner, J. (1984). The art of fiction: Notes on craft for young writers. New York,
   Knopf.
Gorrell, R. M. (1984). Bottom as rhetorician: Voice and tone. Rhetoric Review
   2(2), 157-62.
Heilker, P. (2006). The essay: Theory and pedagogy for an active form. Urbana,
   IL: NCTE.
Heilker, P. (2006). Twenty years in: An essay in two parts. College Composition
   and Communication 58(2), 182-212.
Hesse, D. (2003). Who owns creative nonfiction? In T. Enos, & K. D. Miller
   (Eds.), Beyond postprocess and postmodernism: Essays on the spaciousness of rhet-
   oric (pp. 251-63). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hindman, J. E. (2003). Thoughts on reading "the personal": Toward a discur-
   sive ethics of professional critical literacy.

334
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

Holland, Merlin. The real trial of Oscar Wilde. New York: Fourth Estate, 2003.
Hoy, Pat C. (2001). The outreach of an idea. Rhetoric Review 20, 351-58.
Johnson, R. R. (2010). Craft knowledge: Of disciplinarity in composition stud-

   ies. College Composition and Communication 61(4), 673-90.
Kieslowski, Krzysztof. (1993). Krzysztof Kieslowski's cinema lesson. Bleu. Dir.

   Krzysztof Kieslowski. Perf. Juliette Binoche, Jerzy Fedorowicz, and Roman
   Talarczyk. Miramax, 1993. DVD. 2003.
Kincaid, J. (2000). On seeing England for the first time. In R. Atwan, & A.
   Lightman (Eds.), The best American essays 2000 (pp. 209-20). New York:
   Houghton Mifflin.
Kirklighter, C. (2002). Traversing the democratic borders of the essay. Albany, NY:
   SUNY Press.
Klaus, C. H. (2012). Essayists on the essay. In C. Anderson (Ed.), Literary non-
   fiction: Theory, criticism, pedagogy (pp. 253-70). Carbondale, IL: Southern
   Illinois University Press.
Kreuter, N. (2009, Spring). Style, student writing, and the handbooks. Com-
   position Forum 19. Retrieved from http://compositionforum.com/issue/19/
   style-writing handbooks.php
Kroll, B. M. (1984). Writing for readers: Three perspectives on audience. Col-
   lege Composition and Communication 35(2), 172-85.
Lawler, D. (1988). An inquiry into Oscar Wilde's revisions of the picture of dorian
   gray. New York: Garland.
Long, R. C. (1980). Writer-audience relationships: Analysis or invention? Col-
   lege Composition and Communication 31(2), 221-26.
Lunsford, A. A., & Ede, L. (1996). Representing Audience: "Successful" Dis-
   course and Disciplinary Critique. College Composition and Communication
   47(2), 167-79.
Mayers, T. (2005). (Re)writing craft: Composition, creative writing, and the future
   of English studies. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Myers, S. A. (2003). ReMembering the sentence. College Composition and Com-
   munication 54(4), 610-28.
North, S. (1987). The making of knowledge in composition: Portrait of an emerg-
   ing field. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.
Phelan, J. (1996). Narrative as rhetoric: Technique, audiences, ethics, ideology.
   Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Press.
Read, B., B. Francis, & J. Robson. (2001). "Playing safe": Undergraduate essay
writing and the presentation of the "student voice." British Journal of Sociology
   of Education 22(3), 387-99.
Schilb, J. (2007). Rhetorical refusals: Defying audiences' expectations. Carbondale,
   IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

                                                                                                335
Ellis

Spellmeyer, K. (2003). Arts of living: Reinventing the humanities for the twenty-
   first century. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.

Spigelman, C. (2004). Personally speaking: Experience as evidence in academic
   discourse. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Transition: An international review. (2008). Inscribe. Indiana University Press/
   Journals. Retrieved from http://inscribe.iupress.org/loi/trs

Vandenberg, P. (1995). Coming to terms: Audience. The English Journal 84(4),
   79-80.

Warnock, T. (2003). Bringing Over Yonder Over Here: A personal look at ex-
   pressivist rhetoricas ideological action. In T. Enos, & K. D. Miller (Eds.),
   Beyond postprocess and postmodernism: Essays on the spaciousness of rhetoric (pp.
   203-16). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Waugh, L. R. (1985). The poetic function and the nature of language. In K.
   Pomorska, & S. Rudy (Eds.), Roman Jakobson: Verbal art, verbal sign,verbal
   time. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Wilde, O. (1988). The picture of Dorian Gray. L. Lawler (Ed.), Norton Critical
   Edition. New York: Norton.

Woodward, G. C. (2003). The idea of identification. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Zeigler, W. (1985). The exploratory essay: Enfranchising the spirit of inquiry in

   college composition. College English 47(5), 454-66.

APPENDIX A: PSYCHIC DISTANCE HANDOUT

   Psychic distance is a term John Gardner uses in The Art of Fiction: Notes on
Craft for Young Writers. He defines it as "the distance the reader feels between
himself and the events in the story" (111). In Writing Fiction: A Guide to Narrative
Craft, Janet Burroway uses the equivalent term authorial distance, which she
defines as "the degree to which we as readers feel on the one hand intimacy and
identification with, or on the other hand detachment and alienation from, the
characters in the story" (229). Gardner lists the following examples to illustrate
how a writer can adjust language to reflect different degrees of closeness to a
character's psychology or consciousness:

         1. It was winter of the year 1853. A large man stepped out of a
              doorway.

         2. Henry J. Warburton had never much cared for snowstorms.
         3. Henry hated snowstorms.
         4. God how he hated these damn snowstorms.
         5. Snow. Under your collar, down inside your shoes, freezing and

              plugging up your miserable soul ... (111)

336
                                                                  Toward a Pedagogy of Psychic Distance

   Notice how these sentences take us progressively closer into the character's
perspective, into his head, so that we experience what he thinks and feels.

   Now consider how psychic distance works in three paragraphs from Oscar
Wilde's The Picture of Dorian Gray.

        Context: Dorian never ages, but a portrait of him does. The portrait
    reflects his moral corruption. In this scene Dorian's friend Basil is trying to
    persuade him to repent and change his sinful lifestyle. Dorian doesn't want
    to hear it.

        1. [Basil:] "You have done enough evil in your life. My God!
             Don't you see that accursed thing [the portrait] leering at us?"

        2. Dorian Gray glanced at the picture, and suddenly an
             uncontrollable feeling of hatred for Basil Hallward came over
             him, as though it had been suggested to him by those grinning
             lips. The mad passions of a hunted animal stirred within him,
             and he loathed the man who was seated at the table, more than
             in his whole life he had ever loathed anything... . He rushed
             at him, and dug the knife into the great vein that is behind the
             ear, crushing the man's head down on the table, and stabbing
             him again and again.

        3. There was a stifled groan, and the horrible sound of someone
             choking with blood. Three times the outstretched arms shot
             up convulsively, waving grotesque stiff-fingered hands in the
             air. He stabbed him twice more, but the man did not move.
             Something began to trickle on the floor... . The thing was still
             seated in the chair, straining over the table with bowed head,
             and humped back, and long fantastic arms. Had it not been
             for the red jagged tear in the neck, and the clotted black pool
             that was slowly widening at the table, one would have said that
             the man was simply asleep.

   How and why does the psychic distance change, especially in the third
paragraph? Point to details of language.

How Does Psychic Distance Translate to Nonfiction?

   Fiction writers who think about psychic distance have many rhetorical
possibilities at their fingertips. But so can nonfiction writers, if we tweak the
definition of psychic distance to mean the distance readers feel between themselves
and the events and ideas in the prose (rather than in the story) and if we consider

                                                                                                337
Ellis

the reader's identification with or detachment from the author or subject (rather
than the characters). To the extent that identification between writer and reader
is a prerequisite for persuasion, psychic distance is very rhetorical.

   Now it's your turn to experiment with psychic distance. Revise this sentence
so that it more intimately captures the experience of a cold day.

   1. The weather is very cold today.
   Your revision:

Why Psychic Distance?

   Psychic distance can help writers identify with and persuade readers.
Arguably it has some advantages over these (also useful) terms:

   · Tone, which can imply conformity to an audience's expectations, thus
       sacrificing authorial integrity.

   · Voice, which can imply a neglect of audience, thus privileging individual
       expression.

   · Style, which can imply excessive attention to the details of language,
       thus obscuring the Big Picture.

Example of Psychic Distance in Nonfiction

   From a student's rhetorical analysis of a local commercial space:

          Your mission, should you choose to accept it, is to infiltrate enemy
          territory and conduct a thorough and covert reconnaissance of
          the area. You will gather intelligence on the physical layout of
          the compound and find anything you can about enemy tactics,
          techniques, and procedures. Due to tight security of the enemy
          perimeter, our only option is to send you in alone. Understand that
          if things go sour, we won't be able to conduct an extraction to get
          you out. Good luck--we're all counting on you!

          It was on this fateful day that I was about to go where no man
          had ever gone before--the secret stronghold of women: Victoria's
          Secret. However, I wouldn't be going in alone after all. I'd found
          someone on the inside; her name was Vanessa, and she had agreed
          to let me in quietly and serve as my cover throughout the mission.
          She was going to help me explore this commercial space so that
          I could find out how the enemy ... I mean the customer ... is

338
          engaged by the store's marketing and selling scheme.

How Does Psychic Distance Translate to Multimedia?
   Let's look at some examples.

                                                                                                 339
    WHAT SCORING RUBRICS

    TEACH STUDENTS (AND

    TEACHERS) ABOUT STYLE

      Star Medzerian Vanguri
      Nova Southeastern University

   This collection argues that style should be considered central to the enterprise
of composition, from how we theorize the work we do as a discipline to how
we teach students to write. While the other chapters in this section provide
ways to enact such a style-centered pedagogy, this chapter investigates a place
where style already exists in many composition classrooms: the scoring rubric. I
submit that grading style is teaching style, and that part of making style central
to our pedagogies is recognizing the pedagogical function of our evaluation of
student writing, and how it shapes students' understanding of what effective
writing is. This means not just actively and consciously bringing style into our
classrooms, but also interrogating the places where it silently lurks.

   By examining how style is graded, we can better understand our processes
as evaluators of writing, specifically how the ways we read and comment are
captured in a final score and how those scores reflect greater ideologies about
what constitutes good writing. Studying the process of grading further helps us
understand how students internalize their performance as writers. For students,
a final grade is a synecdochal representation of their performance that defines a
semester-long experience well after the course has ended. Despite its influence,
however, grading has been underemphasized in assessment scholarship in
favor of the processes of reading and responding to student writing. Of the
scholarship that addresses grading, "almost none confronts the task of actually
deciding how to assign a grade" (Speck & Jones, 1998, p. 17). Process-oriented
approaches to assessment stigmatize grading as merely a chore--not a part of
the writing process, and certainly not a legitimate area of scholarly inquiry. Pat
Belanoff famously calls grading "the dirty thing we have to do in the dark of our
own offices," a practice that takes place behind closed doors, in isolation (1991,
p. 61). Even more significant than our field's general devaluing of grading,
though, is our lack of agreement about which features of student writing we
value. This can be seen in a long history of low inter-grader reliability and
single-grader consistency (White, 1994); even as a field of writing teachers, we
cannot agree on what constitutes "good" writing. While this inconsistency can
be explained in part by our inclination as rhetoricians to favor appropriateness

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0476.2.19  341
Vanguri

(to genre conventions, audience, purpose, etc.) over fixed "rules" about what
makes writing good, the fact still stands that the process of grading writing
remains grossly under theorized.

   In an effort to understand just how we assign style a grade and how we
convey our expectations for effective style to students, I have analyzed scoring
rubrics that I collected from composition teachers of various levels of experience
and within a variety of institutional contexts nationwide. Because scoring
guides are an attempt at standardizing grades and thus increasing inter-grader
reliability and consistency from student to student and paper to paper, they
serve particularly well as a site for analysis of grading practices. Further, all
the rubrics that I have collected have been used in a composition classroom,
making them genuine artifacts that were created by teachers, for students, and
for specific writing assignments. As such, they provide insight into actual beliefs
about style and how those beliefs are communicated to students.

   What happens when the values that guide our judgments about style are
placed into a format that compartmentalizes them into discrete criteria and
assigns grades to them? What is gained or lost when we attempt to standardize
and quantify good writing? Do our values remain intact? In order to address
these questions, in this chapter I provide a history that establishes an important
relationship between scoring guides and the concept of style in student writing.
I then offer several definitions of style that emerged from my analysis of style's
place within the rubrics and argue that based on those definitions, there are four
key evaluative terms used to describe effective style: appropriateness, readability,
consistency, and correctness. Finally, I argue that even when we tend to see style
as global, we are restricted in how pedagogical our assessment can be because
of the very structure of the rubric and the type of evaluation that the rubric
encourages.

HISTORY OF STYLE AND RUBRICS

   Rubrics and writing style have been intimately related throughout the
history of writing assessment, making rubrics a useful place to begin a study of
how style is graded. According to Bob Broad, "Modern writing assessment was
born in 1961," when Factors in Judgments of Writing Ability was published by
the Educational Testing Service (ETS) (2003, p. 5). The authors of the study,
Paul B. Diederich, John W. French, and Sydell T. Carlton, sought to "reveal
the differences of opinion that prevail in uncontrolled grading--both in the
academic community and in the educated public" (1961, "Abstract"). To do so
they recruited fifty-three readers in six fields--English, social science, natural

342
                                                                                             Scoring Rubrics

science, law, professional writing and editing, and business--to grade three
hundred essays written by college freshmen. By choosing random readers and
classifying their comments, Diederich, French, and Carlton developed fifty-five
categories that were divided into seven main topics: ideas, style, organization,
paragraphing, sentence structure, mechanics, and verbal facility (1961, p.
21). From these seven topics, the authors of the study decided on five factors
that they felt best represented the readers' comments, acknowledging that the
readers may or may not agree with these characterizations because they did not
identify them as such:

         I. Ideas: relevance, concise-wordy, clarity of ideas, quantity of
         ideas, development, too brief or long, persuasiveness, ending,
         generality

         II. Form: spelling, clarity of expression, organization, coher-
         ence of ideas, reader agreement, analysis, maturity

         III. Flavor: quality of ideas, style (general), mechanics (gen-
         eral), originality, interest, beginning, sincerity, information
         and illustrations

         IV. Mechanics: punctuation, grammar, sentence structure,
         phrasing, idiom

         V. Wording: general, word choices, logic, clichés, jargon-
         slang (1961, p. 24)

   This taxonomy initiated the birth of the "rubric" as we currently know
it. Further, it established an important relationship between rubrics--as
representations of value-systems--and style.

   When Diederich, French, and Carlton condensed their seven topics into
five "factors," style was repositioned from its own category to a component of
the category "flavor." The flavor category is characterized by "a predominant
emphasis on style and interest; a weaker emphasis on sincerity; and an emphasis
... on the quality of ideas--ideas that will sell an article rather than ideas that
will pass an examination" (1961, p. 37). That is, this category represents writing
that is enjoyable to read. Furthermore, the comments on style that make up the
factor of flavor have to do primarily with the "personality expressed in writing
(forceful, vigorous, outspoken, personal, inflated, pretentious, etc.) rather than
with the word choices and felicities of expression associated with [the "wording"

                                                                                                343
Vanguri

category]" (1961, p. 36). Not only did Factors in Judgments of Writing Ability
establish a relationship between rubrics and style, then; it also instilled a notion
of style as "personality" within the context of the rubric.

   This study also illustrates the difficulty of assessing style in student writing:
"It is likely that Factors IV and V can be measured by objective tests well enough
for a practical judgment, but we see no way at present to measure Factors I, II,
and III reliably, either by objective tests or by essays" (1961, p. 42). This could
be the result of the conception that the "idea," "form," and "flavor" categories
represent creative aspects of writing. The authors note that while the word
"creative" itself did not appear enough in the readers' evaluation of the essays
to be acknowledged in their study results, the description bearing the greatest
similarity to creativity, "originality," was mentioned most frequently in Factor
III, "Flavor." Cherryl Smith and Angus Dunstan reflect this romanticized notion
of writing as a primarily creative endeavor when they argue that "[t]he writing
student is not asked simply to learn about writing but to create it" (1998, p.
164). They elaborate on the idea that writing is a creative process, an art rather
than a skill, and point out the subsequent problem this creates for assessment:

         Writing courses ... can be considered to be much like other
         courses in the creative or performing arts, music or drawing
         or dance, in which the student's entire assignment consists of
         producing original work rather than mastering a particular
         body of knowledge... . Traditional grading is not appropriate
         for a creative activity and the result of this mismatch is that
         we have adopted ... evaluation tools that are ultimately in
         conflict with our own pedagogical goals. (1998, p. 164)

   This passage is useful when combined with Diederich, French, and Carlton's
problematizing of style assessment because it illustrates the conflict, or
"mismatch," that can exist between our beliefs about what constitutes effective
style and how we assess it. If we value style as a productive art, rather than
mastery of "a particular body of knowledge," then the means by which we
assess it should allow for the encouragement of that productivity; it should be
pedagogical as well as evaluative.

   Furthering the notion that style is creative is another finding by Diederich,
French, and Carlton that "the factors do not run along occupational lines ...
with one exception: the three readers with highest loadings on the factor called
"Flavor" ... were all writers or editors" (1961, p. 42-43). That is, of the six fields
that comprised the essay readers (one of which was college English teachers),

344
                                                                                             Scoring Rubrics

the group "writers and editors" most noticed stylistic features of student
writing. Susan Miller's oft-cited 1982 study, "How Writers Evaluate Their
Own Writing," reports similar findings. Her study analyzed the ways in which
three groups--professional writers, undergraduate and graduate students, and
teachers and professionals in writing programs and publishing--self-evaluated
their writing. Miller found that "[w]ith the exception of the English professors
and graduate students attending the Big Ten writing directors' conference, none
of the writers interviewed, student or professional, noted specific qualities of
the sentences, form, dialogue, plot, or style of a piece" (1982, p. 180). The
findings of these two studies--that those involved in commercial industry were
more focused on style (i.e., effect), while those in academia were focused on
ideas and precision--highlight the relativity of values related to writing and
writing assessment and the contextual nature of value systems.

   The historical connection between style and rubrics established by Factors
in Judgments of Writing Ability marked style as an aspect worth considering in
our evaluations of student writing, albeit one that is complex and inextricably
linked to value systems guiding conceptions of good writing. Because rubrics
are often created programmatically and then used in individual classrooms
with little modification, they may encourage teachers who otherwise would not
acknowledge or teach style to consider it in their evaluations of student writing.
While this may increase style's presence in the classroom, it can also perpetuate
negative and/or outdated notions of style:

         If ... checklists are included in required texts for composi-
         tion classes and alluded to in teachers' injunctions and paper
         responses yet are not being taught in the composition class,
         they become a means of mystifying the act of writing ...
         [y]et if the items on style checklists are taught in composition
         classes, those classes become current-traditionalist purveyors
         of context-free standards for writing. (Howard, et al., 2002,
         p. 216)

   Howard's statement illustrates the double-bind that exists if instruction and
evaluation do not work together and if/when they are guided by problematic
notions of style. However, while our commentary on student writing is shaped
by and limited to our experiences with writing, reading, and teaching, rubrics
allow us to move beyond personal experience and impressions by requiring
specificity. We can see rubrics, in this sense, as not merely tools for assessment,
but also for teacher education. Rubrics have the ability to guide teachers to

                                                                                                345
Vanguri

particular qualities of writing that otherwise may have gone unnoticed, and to
teach students at least one definition of good writing.

TREATMENT OF STYLE IN SCORING GUIDES

   To better understand how style is defined, approached, taught, and evaluated
in various classroom situations, I collected assignment sheets and scoring rubrics
from composition teachers nationwide and conducted interviews to further
clarify and elaborate on the teaching documents and the rationale for their
use. On May 5, 2009, I made an initial request for these teaching documents
via the Writing Program Administration listserv (WPA-L), which had 2,648
subscribers at the time of my query. I asked specifically for one assignment sheet
for an essay of any genre (i.e., research, narrative, analysis, argument, reflection,
etc.) and any level (i.e., first-year composition, advanced composition, etc.)
and the corresponding grading sheet for that essay. One week later, I contacted
individual composition instructors at institutions of various types, regions,
and program sizes and asked them to post the same request to their Writing
Program listservs.1 On May 30, I followed up on the WPA-L to ask once more
for participants.

   As a result of these multiple requests, I received 120 total rubrics with
corresponding assignment sheets. In a few instances, the grading criteria
were embedded into the assignment sheets and therefore I received only one
document from participants rather than two. Some participants sent materials
for more than one assignment, as well. One hundred twenty represents the
total number of rubrics I received, taking these other factors into account. After
analyzing all 120 rubrics, I narrowed the documents down to the twenty-three
that included the word "style." Those 23 are the subject of my analysis here.

   Of these rubrics, 21 provided scores for individual subskills and are therefore
considered analytic rubrics. The other two rubrics are holistic, grouping criteria
together under the larger headings of letter grades ranging from A to F. While
analytic rubrics are designed to provide information that holistic scoring cannot,
they are often problematic in practice despite their prevalence here. As Edward
White points out,

         [t]here is as yet no agreement (except among the uninformed)
         about what, if any, separable subskills exist in writing ... [and]
         [r]eliable analytic writing scores are extremely difficult to
         obtain, because of the lack of professional consensus about the
         definition and importance of subskills. (1994, p. 233)

346
                                                        Scoring Rubrics

   Most often, the scores in these analytic rubrics were in the form of descriptive
words or phrases, such as excellent, good, needs improvement, and unacceptable.
Letter and number scores were the next most frequent, and two of the rubrics
used a combination of descriptions and numbers. The number of categories
in the rubrics ranged from two to 11, within which there were subcategories
in several of the rubrics. Despite this range in number of categories, however,
the style category was located in the bottom half of the rubric in all but one
instance.2

Absence

   Of the 120 scoring guides collected, only 23 included the word style.3
This means that in over eighty percent of the rubrics, features of writing that
could be considered stylistic were either not assessed or were identified by
synonymous terms. A reason for this absence could be the general resistance
to style in our discipline in recent history. If we are not talking about style as a
discipline and therefore not explicitly teaching it, style will not likely turn up in
departmentally created rubrics to be used in composition classrooms or in those
created by teachers to reinforce their assignments' expectations.

Table 1: Abbreviated Rubric- Style and Expression

            Competency             Fails to Meet Meets  Exceeds

                                   Competency Competency Competency

                                   F to D  C            B to A

Style and   Uses stylistic
Expression  options such as
            tone, word choice,
            sentence patterns

            Writing is clear and
            precise

            Sentence meaning
            is clear

            Sentence structures
            generally are correct

            Reflects current
            academic practices,
            including non-
            sexist language

                                                                 347
Vanguri

   However, that the word style is absent in the majority of the rubrics that I
collected is not necessarily because it is not valued or assessed, but that it is not
being called style. This may be less a result of a devaluing of style, and more
an effect of the structure of rubrics themselves. That style is often not called
style and is, instead, replaced with terms that better suit our discipline's current
values is an observation that has been made by style scholar Paul Butler, and
this idea is reinforced by the very nature of the rubric as an assessment method.
Because it is the work of rubrics to compartmentalize features of prose into
discrete categories and to assign them individual scores, concepts as broad as
style may be broken down into subcriteria for the sake of the rubric. When the
word style is not present, then, it may be because the elements that constitute
effective style, according to the creator of the rubric, are replacing it. Because
I am concerned here with how we define the word style and communicate our
expectations for stylistic effectiveness to students through the use of that word,
however, the remainder of this chapter will explore only those instances in
which the term itself is used.

Presence

   When the word style was present, there was little agreement on what it
meant. From the 23 rubrics that used the word style, I identified seven main
definitions for the term, determined by the placement of style in the list of
criteria and within the descriptive standards for a given assignment. The
most frequent characterizations of style in the rubrics I analyzed were style as
eloquence and style as rhetoric, each occurring in eight of 23 rubrics. Style was
also defined as tone, mechanics, sentence structure, documentation, and word

Table 2: Abbreviated Rubric- Style and Readability

Style     Readability Readability

A         Essentially error-free. Demonstrates control except when using

          sophisticated language.

B         Demonstrates emerging control, exhibiting frequent errors that

          make reading slightly difficult.

C         Demonstrates developing control, exhibiting error patterns and/or

          stigmatizing errors that make reading difficult.

D         Repeated weaknesses in mechanics, spelling and/or grammar, dem-

          onstrating a lack of control.

F         Mechanical and usage errors are so severe that ideas are hidden.

348
                                                                                             Scoring Rubrics

choice, in that order of frequency. These characterizations of style, when listed
from the most to least frequent, also tended to move from global to local, with
eloquence, rhetoric, and tone comprising the most popular characterizations
of style, and mechanics, sentence structure, documentation, and word choice
comprising the least. I will explore each of these characterizations of style with
examples from the rubrics I collected, in order to highlight the implications of
these definitions of style on our evaluations of student writing.

MAJOR THEMES

   In eight of the 23 rubrics, style was equated with eloquence, which includes
references to expression, grace, and readability. Perhaps obvious because of the
longstanding association of grace with style in Joseph Williams' work, as noted
by other authors in this collection, this theme was also the most prominent in
the interviews I conducted with teachers, which indicates that the teachers both
valued expression and were aware that they assess expression in their students'
writing. In other words, this category and its prominence in the rubrics appears
to reflect most closely teachers' actual values. One of the eight rubrics had a
criterion explicitly titled "style and expression," while the others related effective

Table 3: Abbreviated Rubric- Style and Rhetorical Effectiveness

Rubric        Style
Beginning
Competencies  The style is appropriate for the rhetorical context and the
Developing    language choices suit the audience.
Competencies
              The writing is clear and language is appropriate to the rhetori-
Practicing    cal context and audience but may call attention to itself in
Competencies  minor ways (e.g., the purpose of this paper is ... ; I feel that
              ... ; etc.). The student is beginning to use language in a way
Accomplished  that is appropriate for the particular discipline and/or genre in
Competencies  which the student is writing.

              The writing is clear and language use is precise. The student
              makes above average use of language in a way that is appro-
              priate for the particular discipline and/or genre in which the
              student is writing

              The writing is clear and language use is precise. The student
              makes proficient use of language in a way that is appropriate
              for the particular discipline and/or genre in which the student
              is writing.

                                                                 349
Vanguri

style to readability and grace. The one rubric that contained the criterion "style
and expression" included five subcriteria, or competencies, that are evaluated on
a scale ranging from "fails to meet competency" to "exceeds competency" with
corresponding letter-grade scores (Table 1). This rubric functions differently
than the others analyzed here because it does not include descriptive standards
for every score category; instead, scores for each of the subcriteria are indicated
to students by check marks in the appropriate boxes. The grouping together
of style and expression in this example treats them as one criterion that can
be achieved by the same means. While this may not have been the intent of
the creator of this rubric, the lack of definition between the two criteria makes
the referent of the subcriteria unclear. It cannot be determined whether "non-
sexist language," for instance, is a concern related to style or expression, or
both. Further, the inclusion of "sentence patterns," "sentence meaning," and
"sentence structures" in the subcriteria for "style and expression" suggest that
effective expression and style are achieved at least partly by local-level writing
competencies and are evaluated by their correctness and clarity. This conception
of style differs dramatically from those of the other rubrics in this category,
despite the fact that they all relate to expression in writing.

   In the instances in which style was its own criterion or was included within
a descriptive standard for another criterion, it was defined as grace and/or
readability. In two rubrics, style is defined by way of grace, while in two others,
grace is defined by way of style. When style is defined as graceful writing,

Table 4: Abbreviated Rubric- Style and Audience

Rubric        Assignment's Audience
Great (10-8)
              The paper is written in a style and genre applicable to the
Good (7-5)    assignment's audience, which are members of the scientific
Competencies  community.
Fair (4-2)
              The paper is written in a way that either the style or genre is
Grim (1)      not applicable to the assignment's audiences, which are mem-
Total         bers of the scientific community.

              The paper is written in a way that the style and genre have
              problems which make the paper not applicable to the as-
              signment's audience, which are members of the scientific
              community.

              The paper is written in a genre that does not fit the purpose of
              the paper, nor does it meet the needs of the intended audience.

350
                                                                                             Scoring Rubrics

grace describes local-level writing features. For example, within a criterion
titled "Prose," the descriptive standard for A-level work is that the writing
"exhibit stylistic grace and flourishes (subordination, variation of sentence and
paragraph lengths, interesting vocabulary)." That is, writing will be graceful
when sentences and paragraph lengths are "varied" and when vocabulary is
"interesting." In another example within a holistic rubric, A-level writing is
described as such: "The style is energetic and precise: the sentence structure
is varied and the words are carefully chosen. How the writer says things is as
excellent as what the writer says." Again, varied sentence structures and word
choice are the primary factors contributed to graceful, or "energetic," style. In
this case, the description of words as "carefully chosen" is slightly more specific
than the former description of "interesting," but both assume that there is a
universal standard for graceful style.

   In other instances, grace was defined by way of style. One holistic rubric
includes a category titled "Grace" that includes "organization, sentences, source-
use, and style" as its subcriteria. The expectations for performance for each of
these qualities are not defined. But what is significant is that this particular
rubric measures the degree to which several aspects of the prose ranging from
global to local (organization, sentences, source-use, and style) embody grace.
Grace, then, is not a quality related solely to sentences or words, but rather
one that describes prose as a whole. Another rubric includes the criterion "how
gracefully you present your writing (including grammar and style)." Grammar
and style act as the subcriteria, or means, to creating graceful writing. That
grace is defined two different ways means that how we frame the relationship

Table 5: Abbreviated Rubric- Style and Ethos

Style  Ethos

A      Sentences are clear and concise; may use advanced vocabulary; dem-

       onstrates knowledge, credibility, and trustworthiness.

B      Sentences are mostly clear and concise; diction is generally appro-

       priate; tone is mature and appropriate to audience, subject, and

       purpose; demonstrates knowledge and credibility.

C      Sentences show some variety and complexity; may use words inac-

       curately; leaves some question about knowledge and credibility.

D      Uneven control; sentences are simplistic; diction is inaccurate; tone

       is inappropriate for audience, subject, and purpose; creates questions

       about knowledge and credibility.

F      Superficial and stereotypical language; oral rather than written lan-

       guage patterns, erodes confidence in knowledge and credibility.

                                                                              351
Vanguri

between style and grace is meaningful. When style is graceful, it is because it is
functioning at the sentence level in a way that is appealing to a reader. When
style is a component of grace, however, it is but one contributing factor to an
overall effect.

   Categorized under the larger heading of "eloquence" is another conception
of style: readability. Despite readability being an effect of writing and not a
quality that can be created by a writer, in one of the examples of style as readable
writing, readability is defined in terms of an author's control over his/her prose
(see Table 2). What this assumes is that when a writer is in control, his/her prose
will be error-free and thus easier to read. In another example, style is defined as
"[h]ighly readable, engaging prose that provides evidence of the writer's ability
to think critically and read/view/listen closely." In this instance, readability is
not defined as control over error but rather a reflection of the writer's thinking
and analytical processes.

   What is significant about the category of style as eloquence is that
expression, grace, and readability are all related but interact in complex ways
that are based in the element of control. Expression is something a writer does,
a way of describing a writer's control over his/her prose; grace is a quality a
writer embodies but that serves the aesthetic desires of a reader; and readability
lies solely with the reader but is expected to be somehow created by a writer.
In these three conceptions, which are all related to each other by way of the
rubrics, varying degrees of control are represented, as is the expectation that
style is a way to relate to a reader.

   Rhetoric was another characterization of style occurring eight times in the
23 rubrics. To demonstrate how I arrived at the characterization of style as
rhetoric, I use segments--the heading columns and the relevant row only--
of three rubrics to demonstrate the relationship between style and various
rhetorical aspects of writing. In the first example, the criterion on which the
student writing is evaluated is style and the descriptive standards that outline
expectations for stylistic performance are rhetorically focused (see Table 3).
That is, whether or not a student paper meets the "beginning competencies"
or the "accomplished competencies," or any level in between, for the criterion
style, is based on how rhetorically situated the student's style is. In this particular
example, the emphasis on rhetoric can be seen in the use of the terms audience,
context, and genre. What is of particular importance in this rubric is not only
how each level of competency is defined but also how the expectations for
stylistic performance change as competency levels increase. In the transition
from beginning to developing competencies, the expectations become much
more specific, moving from "appropriate" style to that which is clear and
appropriate "but may call attention to itself." The word audience also becomes

352
                                                                                             Scoring Rubrics

much more specifically defined as "the particular discipline and/or genre in
which the student is writing." In the transition from developing competencies
to practicing competencies, clear writing becomes clear and "precise" writing,
and language use develops from "call[ing] attention to itself " to "above average."
The specificity of the teacher's expectations similarly shifts just as the standards
from writing that calls attention to itself to that which is above average do.
Specific examples are given for writing that calls attention to itself while no
examples are given for the already ambiguous description of "above-average"
writing.

   Finally, as the rubric progresses from practicing to accomplished competencies,
there is one minor change in the descriptive standards--from "above average"
to "proficient" use of language. Again, the expectations are expressed in terms
of value judgments, which can already be assumed by the titles given to each
category, instead of referring to textual features of the student writing. Here, the
most specific descriptive standards are those in the "developing competencies"
category, which appears to correlate with a C or D grade. More importantly, the
categories all seem to be communicating to students the same basic standards,
just with varying levels of specificity. That is, the "beginning" competencies (of
style that is "appropriate for the rhetorical context" and "suit[s] the audience")
are essentially the same as the "accomplished" competencies, except that the
accomplished competencies are more accurately defined within the rubric.

   In another rubric that equates style with rhetoric, "audience" is one of the
criteria on which the writing is being evaluated while style is included in the
descriptive standards (see Table 4). That is, in this rubric, style is a term used to
define what constitutes audience awareness. Even though style is not the criterion
being evaluated here, it is defined though this rubric in relation to audience and
genre, two recurring rhetorical concepts. Here, style and genre are defined as
ways in which a writer can and should reach an audience. As in the last example,
the expectations change as competency levels change (in this case, decrease,
from "great" to "grim"). "Great" consideration of audience requires that the
essay "is written in a style and genre applicable to the assignment's audience;"
both style and genre must be considered. Attention to audience is "good" when
either style or genre is "not applicable to the assignment's audiences." So, style
and genre are no longer joint considerations, but rather they are interchangeable
and given equal value, such that a "good" paper is one that uses a style applicable
to audience or uses a genre applicable to audience. The "fair" essay is one that
has style and genre problems and therefore is "not applicable" to the intended
audience. Style is dropped out of the "grim" category altogether, suggesting that
either "grim" writing would not embody style anyway, or that it ceases to be an
important consideration at that grade level.

                                                                                                353
Vanguri

   In another example of style as rhetoric, "ethos" is a subcategory of the
criterion "style" (see Table 5). So implicit in the structure of this rubric is that
ethos is one contributing factor to style and that effective style is that which is
rhetorically situated, a point Rosanne Carlo explores in the first section of this
collection. Because style is defined in terms of ethos here, we can look to the
descriptive standards that measure the effectiveness of the writer's ethos to see
how they relate to specific stylistic features of the student prose. For instance, the
descriptive standards for an A-grade include "clear and concise" sentences and
"advanced vocabulary," as well as the demonstration of "knowledge, credibility,
and trustworthiness." We can assume, although not stated outright, that there
is a causal relationship between how students use sentences and vocabulary
and how knowledgeable, credible, and trustworthy they appear to be in their
writing. In the B-grade and D-grade categories, tone is also a consideration and
is measured according to its maturity and appropriateness for the rhetorical
situation of the writing assignment.

   These examples illustrate three ways in which the theme of style as rhetoric
was communicated through the rubrics I analyzed. While they all measured
different criteria--style, audience, and ethos, respectively--they used the term
style in regard to rhetorical concepts including audience, context, ethos, and
genre.

   In all eight of the rubrics that defined style as rhetorical, including
the three discussed here, stylistic effectiveness was evaluated according to
appropriateness. In the first example, effective style is that which is appropriate
for context, audience, and genre. Appropriateness for audience and genre are
also considerations in the second example. And in the third, diction and tone
were judged on their appropriateness for the assignment's particular rhetorical
situation. What these rubrics reveal is that when style is tied to rhetoric, it is also
evaluated according to appropriateness. To make language choices appropriate
is to understand the conventions of the genre and the needs of a particular
audience. As a result, what is being evaluated in these instances is students'
understanding of the effects of their prose, more so than individual stylistic
features.

   In six instances, style was defined by how it is "heard." In five of the six
rubrics, the word tone was used to describe style while in the other instance,
effective style was defined more broadly as that which "pleases the eye and ear."
Despite the fact that sound metaphors such as tone describe the reaction of a
reader, rather than the actions of a writer, tone was described twice as a tool,
something to be "used" by the writer. In one instance, good writing is that
which "uses stylistic options such as tone, word choice, sentence patterns."

354
                                                                                             Scoring Rubrics

While tone is certainly achieved by the relationship between a subject and writer
and is accomplished by word choice and sentence patterns, the listing of tone,
word choice, and sentence patterns together as "stylistic options" treats them
all as tools a writer can control and "use" to create a particular style. All three
"stylistic options" are given equal weight, instead of word choice and sentence
patterns being "stylistic options" that contribute to tone. Another rubric defines
good writing as that which "uses a formal, academic tone, devoid of the words
"you," "thing," and other informal styles." Again, tone is "used," but in this
case, it is defined in terms of formality, which itself is even further defined by
specific words (you and thing) that should be avoided. Using tone as a tool,
then, requires avoidance of "informal styles" created by specific word choices.

   If tone is a tool to be "used" by a writer, other rubrics offer insight into
the ways it should be used. Two rubrics contained categories that pair style
with tone and describe effective use of style and tone as consistent ("style and
tone consistent" and "consistent style and tone"). In another example, writing
should "maintain an articulate tone." The word maintain, like consistent,
assumes a degree of control and regularity. Perhaps the most relevant premise
apparent in this grouping of rubrics, then, is that when style is defined as tone, it
becomes a tool a writer can use and that must be used consistently. Consistency
as a measure of tone is a carry-over from the sound metaphor itself; it is the
conceptualization of tone as a tool that one uses that disturbs the metaphor.
Evaluating a criterion that resides solely with the evaluator on the basis of the
writer's control over it, however, presents conflicting expectations to students
and a challenging assessment task to teachers. It is not the conceptualization
of style as tone that is problematic here; when style is tone, it is inherently
audience-based and therefore rhetorical. Rather, the concern is the placement
of an audience-based criterion into a structure that purports to evaluate a
student writer's use of particular "tools." The major themes analyzed here begin
to illuminate the ways in which our values (specifically, a rhetorical notion of
style) are communicated to students when placed into the scoring guides that
are supposed to accurately represent and quantify them.

MINOR THEMES

   The other conceptions of style present in the rubrics were much more
local, defining style as synonymous with, or the result of, mechanics, sentence
structure, documentation, and word choice. While these themes emerged in
the other categories already discussed, they were all framed as means to a more

                                                                                                355
Vanguri

global conception of writing. For example, style, when equated with tone (a
global feature), is created by word choice (a local feature). In the rubrics I discuss
in this section, however, style was equated directly with local features of writing.
This suggests that unlike the more global conceptions of style as rhetoric,
expression, and tone, these local conceptions define stylistic effectiveness by
adherence to rules. Style is not evaluated by appropriateness, readability, or
consistency, but rather by correctness.

   Style was defined as mechanics six times in the rubrics. In four of these
instances, style was grouped with a term that suggests this relationship: two
rubrics included categories titled "style and mechanics," another included a
"style/grammar/format" category, and yet another had a "style/conventions"
category under which the descriptive standard of "mechanical precision"
was listed. It can be assumed that when qualities of writing are lumped into
one category together, the creator of the rubric sees them as parallel, if not
synonymous. In another example, the criterion style fell under a larger category
titled "language use and mechanics," signifying that style and mechanics were
not synonymous but that "appropriate style" is one element that contributes to
effective language use and mechanics. The opposite was also present, a category
called style under which "correct use: sentence fragments, run-on sentences,
misspelling, usage, punctuation" were listed. While all of the rubrics that
conceive of style as mechanics also impart a rules-based notion of style, this last
example does so more obviously through the phrase "correct use." Also relevant
is that many of the features listed after "correct use"--"sentence fragments,
run-on sentences, misspelling, usage, punctuation"--are negative and therefore
cannot be used correctly.

   Style was defined in terms of sentence structure in five instances. In one rubric
it was simply listed as "sentence structure" within the criterion heading "style."
In the others more specificity was given as to what qualifies as effective sentence
structure: maturity ("mature style"), variety ("varied sentence patterns"), clarity
("sentence meaning is clear"), and correctness ("sentence structures generally are
correct"). Despite these qualitative terms, there is still little indication of what
constitutes maturity and clarity. Variety and correctness are slightly more specific
but still depend on a knowledge of how to vary sentence patterns and compose
a structurally "correct" sentence. One rubric that lists "sentence-level issues" as a
subcriterion under the heading "Style and Language" provides more insight, as it
offers a list of descriptive standards on which the prose will be evaluated:

   · Varies sentence length (avoids short, single sentences in favor of stylistic
       variation that includes compound-complex sentences)

   · Uses effective parallel structure

356
                                                                                             Scoring Rubrics

   · Does not overuse "to be" verbs (is/are/was/were, etc.)
   · Remains consistent in point of view, without switching between 1st, 2nd,

       ("you"), and 3rd person
When style is defined at the sentence-level, as these examples and others show,
it is equated with correctness and, therefore, with a student's ability to follow
specific rules in his/her writing.

   Four times, style was defined in terms of documentation style, or proper use
of MLA or APA formatting. This use of the word style is perhaps the broadest,
though, because it refers not to the concept of style, but to the concept of a style,
or a way of doing something. Twice in categories titled "style," the descriptive
standards for the category involved documentation. In one rubric "MLA
format in heading, paging, Works Cited" were listed as stylistic concerns. In
another, "Uses MLA citation conventions without error (at least eight sources
are cited in the Works Cited page)" was a descriptive standard within a style
category. Style also appeared as a descriptive standard for the criterion of
documentation, as well. In one category explicitly called "documentation,"
effective documentation was defined by "appropriate style accurately used in
documenting sources." In an "incorporation of research" category, style was also
listed as a standard. This use of the term style, because it relates to a method
versus traditional rhetorical style, is conceptually very different from the others
this chapter explores. However, its prominence in the rubrics is an argument in
itself for its inclusion in this chapter. Its presence in these rubrics also further
illustrates the ambiguity of the word style and the consequences of basing our
evaluations of writing on a term with so many meanings.

   The phrase "word choice" was actually present in more rubrics than any other
language feature analyzed here, but it was the least popular characterization
of style. That is because although word choice was mentioned in ten of the
23 rubrics, it was grouped with other writing features. Word choice was
the primary descriptor of style in only three instances. In only one of these
instances, descriptions were provided for what constitutes effective or ineffective
word choice once. In this example, "word-level issues" included writing that is
"correct in terms of diction and usage, avoids wordiness, avoids cliché, shows
sensitivity to gender, ethnicity, religion, class, nationality, and disability, [and]
offers effective sensory detail and figurative language." The other two times, the
criteria were simply listed as "diction" and "word choice," with no indication
as to what makes its use effective or ineffective. Word choice, when considered
an element of style, was never described with specificity and never held a
prominent place in the rubrics. It was listed, in every instance, as a single item
in a list of equally vague criteria.

                                                                                                357
Vanguri

CONCLUSIONS

   From the definitions of style conveyed by the rubrics emerge four evaluative
criteria for style: readability, appropriateness, consistency, and correctness. When
style was equated with eloquence, its effectiveness was judged by the readability
of the prose, including the reader's enjoyment of it. In the rubrics where style
is seen as inherently related to rhetoric, appropriateness is the primary criterion
for effectiveness. Style is not developed by adherence to rules but rather by an
awareness of genre and audience expectations. Tone was another term linked to
style, suggesting that style is not only created, but also heard. This conception
of style is tied to audience perception and thus creates a reciprocal relationship
between writer and reader, or listener. Finally, in the more local conceptions of
style, stylistic effectiveness is determined by correctness, or how well the student
writer follows a particular and universal formula. What all of these conceptions
and their related evaluative criteria reveal is that there is little agreement on
what we mean by style, at least within these rubrics, and that each definition we
attribute to style results in its own expectations for effectiveness.

   Despite the prioritization of global conceptions of style in the rubrics, the
form of the rubrics themselves matters: When global conceptions of style are
placed into an assessment method that serves to compartmentalize and quantify
aspects of writing that are conceptually bigger than the rubric allows for, they are
reduced to the same quantification as local writing concerns. That is, the rubric
in itself restricts how we can evaluate style, regardless of how we conceptualize
its value. What this means is that we are more specific about those aspects
we value least (according to their frequency in these rubrics) while we are less
specific about the qualities we value most. Qualities like eloquence, rhetorical
appropriateness, and tone are less quantifiable when placed into the context of
a rubric than are the qualities we value less about style--mechanics, sentence
structure, documentation, and word choice.

   While this critique can be made about rubrics in general, it is especially
relevant to style, as rubrics that are created programmatically often supply
the word style for teachers who otherwise would not consciously assess it.
Consequently, teachers are forced to acknowledge style's presence in student
writing and to assess it, perhaps without even knowing how to define it or what
it constitutes in student writing. This means that a rubric's confining structure
has the potential to impede how teachers and students alike understand style.

   Further, the rubric, restricted by its form, may not serve a pedagogical
function beyond designating right and wrong, despite its users' intentions.
Building on the premise of this chapter, that assessment is a form of style
instruction (and often the most explicit form students ever receive), the fact

358
                                                                                             Scoring Rubrics

that rubrics do not teach students how to reproduce the style we value means
that they may serve more as judgmental measures than instructional ones. This
is a limitation of rubrics in general, one that is further enhanced by a term
whose ambiguity already poses problems for assessment. Assessing style in a way
that is productive for students, then, requires much more than conceptualizing
style in ways that move beyond mere form. It requires assessment practices that
allow us to express our values and to teach students how to achieve them.

NOTES

1. Institutions include University of Maine, Duke University, University of Alabama,
Highline Community College, University of Hawaii, Mount Union College, Fort
Lewis College, Columbia University, Madisonville Community College, and Denver
University.

2. In seven of the 23, it was the bottom category, in nine the second-to-last, in six the
third-to-last, and in one it was in the second of four categories.

3. In fourteen of these 23 rubrics, style was a criterion, and in nine, it was a descriptive
standard. I use the term criteria to refer to the features of writing assessed by the rubrics
(typically falling in the left-most column) and descriptive standards to refer to the state-
ments that describe expectations for performance for each criterion.

REFERENCES

Belanoff, P. (1991). The myths of assessment. Journal of Basic Writing 10(1),
   54-66.

Broad, B. (2003). What we really value: Beyond rubrics in teaching and assessing
   writing. Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.

Butler, P. (2007). Style in the diaspora of composition studies. Rhetoric Review
   26(1), 5-24.

Carlo, R. (2013). Jim Corder's reflective ethos as alternative to traditional argu-
   ment: Style's revivification of the writer-reader relationship. In M. Duncan
   & S. Vanguri (Eds.), The centrality of style. Fort Collins, CO/Anderson, SC:
   The WAC Clearinghouse/Parlor Press.

Diederich, P. B., John W. French, J. W., & Carlton, S. T. (1961). Factors in
   judgments of writing ability (ETS Research Bulletin 61-15). Princeton: Edu-
   cational Testing Service.

Howard, R. M, Beierle, H., Tallakson, P., Taggart, A., Fredrick, D., Noe, M.,
   & Peterson, M. (2002).What are styles and why are we saying such terrific

                                                                                                359
Vanguri

   things about them? In C. R. McDonald, & R. L. McDonald (Eds.), Teaching
   writing: Landmarks and horizons (pp. 214-27). Carbondale: Southern Illinois
   University Press.
Miller, S. (1982). How writers evaluate their own writing. College Composition
   and Communication 33, 176-83.
Smith, C, & Dunstan, A. (1998). Grade the learning, not the writing. In F. Zak
   & C. C. Weaver (Eds.), The theory and practice of grading writing: Problems
   and possibilities (pp. 163-70). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Speck, B, & Jones, T. (1998). Direction in the grading of writing? What the
   literature on the grading of writing does and doesn't tell us. In F. Zak & C.
   C. Weaver (Eds.), The theory and practice of grading writing: Problems and
   possibilities (pp. 17-29). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
White, E M. (1994). Teaching and assessing writing (2nd ed.). Portland, ME:
   Calendar Islands.

360
THE CENTRALITY OF STYLE

In The Centrality of Style, editors Mike Duncan and Star Medzerian
Vanguri argue that style is a central concern of composition studies
even as they demonstrate that some of the most compelling work in
the area has emerged from the margins of the field. Calling attention
to this paradox in his foreword to the collection, Paul Butler observes,
"Many of the chapters work within the liminal space in which style
serves as both a centralizing and decentralizing force in rhetoric and
composition. Clearly, the authors and editors have made an invaluable
contribution in their collection by exposing the paradoxical nature of
a canon that continues to play a vital role in our disciplinary history."

Mike Duncan is an assistant professor of English at the University
of Houston-Downtown, where he teaches undergraduate and graduate
courses in professional writing and rhetoric. He has published articles
on style and related issues in journals including College English, JAC,
and Rhetoric Society Quarterly, as well as in edited collections.

Star Medzerian Vanguri is an assistant professor in the Division of Hu-
manities at Nova Southeastern University. She teaches first-year com-
position and courses in writing and rhetoric at the undergraduate and
graduate levels. Her research interests include style, discourse analysis,
authorship, and classroom writing assessment. Her article, "Style and
the Pedagogy of Response," in the journal Rhetoric Review, explores the
intersections of these interests.

Perspectives on Writing         W
Series Editor, Susan H. McLeod

The WAC Clearinghouse

Fort Collins, CO 80523
wac.colostate.edu

Parlor Press

Anderson, SC 29621
w w w.parlorpress.com

ISBN 978-1-64215-047-6
