The Alchemy of
Assessment and

    Evaluation
THE ALCHEMY OF
ASSESSMENT AND
EVALUATION

From Lead to Gold

JESSICA KAHLOW

Mavs Open Press
Arlington
The Alchemy of Assessment and Evaluation Copyright  2024 by Jessica
Kahlow is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.
DEDICATION

 This book is dedicated to everyone who's ever read
    directions and still had no idea what to do.
CONTENTS

About the Publisher               ix

Mavs Open Press

About This Project                xii

Jessica Kahlow

Acknowledgments                   xiv

Jessica Kahlow

Part I. Assessments

1. Assessment vs. Evaluation      3

Jessica Kahlow

2. Selecting Aligned Assessments  6

Jessica Kahlow

3. Assignments                    36

Jessica Kahlow

4. Discussions                    55

Jessica Kahlow
5. Quizzes                             86

Jessica Kahlow

6. Choosing the right tool             112

Jessica Kahlow; Tamika M. Porter; and
Malikah R. Nu-Man

7. Subject Expertise and Evaluation    125

Jessica Kahlow

Part II. Generative AI and
Assessments

8. Instructors' Use of AI in Teaching  141

Jessica Kahlow

9. AI Rubrics                          182

Jessica Kahlow

Bibliography                           203

Links by Chapter                       213

Image Credits                          215

Errata and Versioning History          217

Mavs Open Press
                                                      ABOUT THE PUBLISHER | IX

ABOUT THE PUBLISHER

   Mavs Open Press

If you are an instructor who is using this OER for a course,
please let us know by filling out our OER Adoption Form.

About Mavs Open Press

Creation of this resource was supported by Mavs Open Press,
operated by the University of Texas at Arlington Libraries
(UTA Libraries). Mavs Open Press, operated by the University
of Texas at Arlington Libraries (UTA Libraries), offers no-cost
services for UTA faculty, staff, and students who wish to
openly publish their scholarship. The Libraries' program
provides human and technological resources that empower
our communities to create or adapt open educational
resources (OER). Course materials published by Mavs Open
Press are openly licensed using Creative Commons licenses to
allow for revision and reuse and are offered in various digital
formats free of charge. Mavs Open Press also supports the
publication of open-access journals authored and edited by
UTA faculty, staff, and students.
X | ABOUT THE PUBLISHER

About OER

OER are free teaching and learning materials that are licensed
to allow for revision and reuse. They can be fully self-
contained textbooks, videos, quizzes, learning modules, and
more. OER are distinct from public resources in that they
permit others to use, copy, distribute, modify, or reuse the
content. The legal permission to modify and customize OER
to meet the specific learning objectives of a particular course
make them a useful pedagogical tool.

About Pressbooks

Pressbooks is an open source, web-based authoring tool based
on WordPress, and it is the primary tool that Mavs Open Press
uses to create and adapt course materials. Pressbooks should
not be used with Internet Explorer. The following browsers
are best to use with Pressbooks:

   Firefox
   Chrome
   Safari
   Edge
            ABOUT THE PUBLISHER | XI

Contact Us

Information about open education at UTA is available online.
Contact us at library-open@listserv.uta.edu for other inquires
related to UTA Libraries publishing services.
XII | ABOUT THIS PROJECT

ABOUT THIS PROJECT

   Jessica Kahlow

Overview

This book details the difference between assessment and
evaluation, assessment types, assessment design, and types of
evaluations.

Creation Process

This book has been put together using reputable sources in
the field of online learning and the author's experiences as an
instructor and instructional designer.

About the Author

Jess Kahlow, PhD is an Instructional Designer in the Center
for Distance Education at the University of Texas at Arlington
(UTA). She is also an Adjunct Associate Professor in the
College of Education at UTA, where she teaches graduate
courses in Instructional Learning Design and Technology. She
also researches how technology impacts communication
                                                       ABOUT THIS PROJECT | XIII

processes and experiences in professional and educational
settings.
XIV | ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

   Jessica Kahlow

Lead Author

Jessica Kahlow, PhD, University of Texas at Arlington

Author's Note

After being assigned to teach a course on Assessment and
Evaluation, I began looking for course materials while listening
to the newly released album by Taylor Swift. The lyric, "The
Professor said to write what you know" inspired this book
because I couldn't find any resources that said what I wanted
students to take away from this new course. So, I took Taylor's
advice and wrote what I knew.

Additional Thanks to...

I'd also like to acknowledge my friend Amanda for keeping my
mental health in mind when I told her about this project. I
didn't listen, but maybe I should have. But again, "Honestly,
who are we to fight the alchemy?"
                                                                    ASSESSMENTS | 1

PART I

ASSESSMENTS
2 | ASSESSMENTS
                                             ASSESSMENT VS. EVALUATION | 3

1.

ASSESSMENT VS.
EVALUATION

   Jessica Kahlow

Assessments

Assessments in education encompass the process of gathering
information about student learning to measure what students
know, understand, and can do. These assessments can be
formative, providing ongoing feedback to improve learning, or
summative, evaluating student learning at the end of a unit or
course. As an educator, I've moved away from relying solely
on quizzes for assessment. While quizzes offer quick snapshots
of student understanding, I've found that projects and other
creative assessments allow students to apply their knowledge in
more meaningful and diverse ways, fostering deeper learning
experiences.

Evaluations

In contrast to assessments, evaluations involve making
4 | ASSESSMENT VS. EVALUATION

judgments or interpretations based on data collected. They
extend beyond measuring individual student performance to
assess the effectiveness of entire courses, programs, policies,
or interventions. At the end of each semester, I encourage
students to complete course evaluations. These anonymous
surveys provide valuable feedback that is read by various
stakeholders to evaluate teaching effectiveness and course
impact. Students need to understand that their honest yet
professional feedback contributes to ongoing improvements in
educational quality.

Differences Between
Assessments and Evaluations

Program evaluations are crucial for ensuring that educational
programs achieve their intended goals. For example, they help
assess the impact of new curricula. Teacher evaluations focus
on evaluating the effectiveness of teaching methods, while
institutional assessments measure overall school performance.
Assessments primarily focus on student learning and
understanding, providing the foundational data needed for
evaluations. Evaluations, in turn, use this data to make
informed judgments about program effectiveness and
outcomes, encompassing a broader scope beyond individual
student performance.

Assessments and evaluations are indispensable tools in
                                             ASSESSMENT VS. EVALUATION | 5

education, each serving unique yet complementary purposes.
By understanding their distinctions and leveraging their
strengths, educators can create a more effective and engaging
learning environment that supports student growth and
achievement. Through thoughtful assessment practices and
robust evaluation frameworks, we can continuously enhance
educational quality and meet the evolving needs of learners.
6 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

2.

SELECTING ALIGNED
ASSESSMENTS

   Jessica Kahlow

Assessment is a crucial element in enhancing the overall
quality of teaching and learning in higher education. What
and how students learn depends to a major extent on how
they think they will be assessed (Biggs & Tang, 2007). All
assessments lead to some amount of student learning, but a
fundamental challenge lies in stimulating the right kind of
learning. Therefore, it is important that assessment practices
are designed to send the right signals to students in shaping
the effectiveness of student learning - about what they should
learn and how they should learn.

From a student's perspective, the relationship between
learning and assessment often comes down to one thing: a
grade (McMorran, Ragupathi and Simei, 2015). This problem
arises simply because an assessment is usually about several
things at once and Boud (2000) refers to this as `double duty'.
It is about grading and about learning; it is about evaluating
student achievements and teaching them better; it is about
                                     SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 7

standards and invokes comparisons between individuals; it
communicates explicit and hidden messages.

Assessment has multiple purposes that include providing
feedback on learning, facilitating improvement, measuring
achievement, motivating learning, and maintaining standards.
Always worry about the quality of assessments rather than
their quantity. Well-designed assessment tasks will influence
how students approach the problems and thereby improve the
quality of their learning. Thus, the level of student
engagement and the amount of time students invest in any
given learning experience is directly related to how much the
student believes they will benefit from this experience.

It's a good reminder here for how to determine the assessment
type before you start creating all the assessment details.

 1. In the middle section of the wheel, find the action verb
      your objective uses.

 2. Once you find the location of your verb, look at the
      outer portion of that section and review the assessments
      listed.

 3. Choose an assessment.
 4. Check yourself: What if you don't see an assessment you

      want to use? Do you see the assessment you do want to
      use under a different section of the circle? If so, it looks
      like there may be a problem with the alignment of your
      objective and assessment. Perhaps you need to rewrite
8 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

      your objective to use a different action verb.

Crawford, Stephen (2012). Aligning Assessments with
   Learning Objectives. http://teachonline.asu.edu/2012/10/
   aligning-assessments-with-learning-objectives/.
                                    SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 9

Types of Online Assessments

Assessment   Examples           Possible
Type                            Tools

Written      Essays, Case       Canvas
Assignments  studies,           Assignments,
             Reflections,       Canvas
             Journals, Article  Rubrics
             Reviews,           Microsoft
             Literature         Word,
             Reviews            PowerPoint,
             Proposals,         Blogs/wikis,
             Research Papers,   etc.
             Reports,
             Summaries,         Canvas
             ePortfolios        Discussions

Online       Presentations,     Canvas
Discussions  Peer Reviews,      Quizzes,
             Case Studies,      H5P,
             Analysis,          Quizlet,
             Reflections, etc.  Genially, etc.

Graded       Online Quizzes     H5P,
Quizzes      (MCQs, MRQs,       Quizlet,
             FIBs, T/F,         Genially, etc.
             matching,
             ordering),
             in-video quizzes,
             short answer
             questions

Ungraded     Online Quizzes
Quizzes      (MCQs, MRQs,
             FIBs, T/F,
             matching,
             ordering),
             in-video quizzes
10 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

According to the constructive alignment theory by Biggs and
Tang (2007), assessment tasks (AT) and teaching-learning
activities (TLA) are designed to ensure that students achieve
the intended learning outcomes (ILO) and develop cognitive
skills at a range of levels. The learning outcomes for a topic/
unit are the criteria against which instructors make judgments
about student learning. The introduction of a series of in-
class teaching-learning activities and online tests/assignments
that allow students to practice applying information, and the
repetitive use of these skills that are spaced in regular intervals
makes a difference in students' learning.

Assessment tasks need to be aligned to the learning outcomes
we intend to address for a particular topic, and an appropriate
AT should indicate how well a student has achieved the ILO(s)
it is meant to address and/or how well the task itself has been
performed. A range of assessment types ensures that students
develop all of the intended learning outcomes and also
provides opportunities for students to demonstrate their
learning.

Well-designed assessments set clear expectations, establish a
reasonable workload, and provide opportunities for students
to self-learn, rehearse, practice, and receive feedback. However,
when designed poorly they can be a major hindrance to
thinking and learning in our students. Assessments should be
able to provide students with feedback on their progress and be
able to help them identify their readiness to proceed to the next
                                    SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 11

level of the module. Therefore, assessment tasks need to be
aligned with intended learning outcomes (ILOs) and should
be designed in such a way that they:

 1. Elicit higher-order cognitive skills
 2. Develop a consequential basis for test score

      interpretation and use
 3. Are fair, and free of bias
 4. Can be generalized and transferable, at least across

      topics within a domain
 5. Ensure the quality of content is consistent with the

      best current understanding of the field
 6. Recognize the comprehensiveness, or scope, of content

      coverage
 7. Are high-fidelity assessments of critical abilities
 8. Are contextualized and meaningful to students'

      educational experiences.
 9. Are practical, efficient, and cost-effective

The above set of criteria is not exhaustive but provides a
guideline that is consistent with both current theoretical
understandings of validity and the nature and potential uses of
new forms of assessment (Linn et al, 1991; Darling-Hammond
et al., 2013).

Bloom's Taxonomy of educational objectives (Table 1) can also
serve as a useful reminder when designing assessment tasks.
Holtzman (2008) provides a quick summary of the six levels in
12 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

Bloom's taxonomy, and how these six skill levels build on each
other.

When following the Quality Matters (QM) Rubric, you'll find
the recommendation to make sure assessments are varied,
sequenced, and suited to the level of the course. Here's what
each of those mean:

 1. variety: According to QM, "... provide multiple ways
      for learners to demonstrate progress and mastery, and to
      accommodate diverse learners". Some students may do
      better at written assignments because multiple choice
      tests give them test anxiety. Vice versa, some students
      may struggle with written assignments (maybe English is
      their second language) and so they prefer multiple choice
      tests.

 2. sequence: According to QM, "... assessments are
      sequenced so as to promote the learning process and to
      build on previously mastered knowledge and skills
      gained in this course and prerequisite courses.
      Assessments are paced to give learners adequate time to
      achieve mastery and complete the work in a thoughtful
      manner." For example, students may start off with
      simple quiz questions to identify key concepts from the
      week's readings. Then, once they have mastered
      identifying and recalling information about the
      concepts, they are ready to apply the concepts on a
      discussion or real-life example problem. Another
                                   SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 13

      example is sequencing of a final project. Students may
      start by turning in an outline, then an introduction and
      bibliography or a first draft, and then the final version of
      the project.
 3. suited to the level of the course: While you do want
      to make sure assessments reflect varying levels of
      cognitive engagement in every course, the level of the
      course can dictate how much it is skewed. For example,
      in a lower-level course it may be ok for most of the
      assessments to measure students remembering basic
      facts; but, assessments in an upper-level course should
      include more assessments that are at the application level
      or above.

How to Complete the Course
Map

The course map provides a detailed outline of your entire
course. Its purpose is two-fold. First, it helps make sure you
and your instructional designer (ID) are on the same page as
you begin putting your course into Canvas. Second, it helps
show alignment for both students and the QM review process.
So, it's an important first step, and you can't move on to
developing your course until your ID approves your course
map.

It is a lengthy and time-consuming process, and most course
14 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

maps need to be reviewed by the ID 3-4 times before they are
complete. Most course maps end up being at least three pages
long. It is important that you stick to your course map as you
develop your course, but you can make changes to it; we'll ask
for a finalized course map at the end of the process.

This guide will help you develop your course map.

Course Outcomes

Make sure course objectives are measurable (use verbs from the
lists below).

Below is a list of measurable verbs from Bloom's taxonomy
that are most often used for course and module objectives.
                     SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 15

Knowledge Understand Apply       Analyze Evaluate Create

classify  compare    apply       analyze   appraise collabo

define    contrast   calculate classify    argue            constru

describe  describe   change      compare assess             create

enumerate differentiate combine  contrast  critique         design

identify  discuss    collect     correlate debate           develop

label     distinguish complete diagram decide               facilita

list      explain    compute differentiate estimate integra

locate    group      demonstrate dissect   evaluate make

match     interpret  explain     distinguish grade          manag

name      order      illustrate estimate judge              plan

recall    organize   interpret explain     justify          prepar

recite    outline    practice    illustrate measure presen

record    paraphrase relate      order     predict          propos

repeat    summarize solve        organize rate              simula

select    translate  use         separate  recommend write

Table adapted from UTA Center for Distance Education.
(2023). CDE Measurable Verbs. https://uta.instructure.com/
courses/143147/pages/measurable-
verbs?module_item_id=7039880. CC BY-NC-SA 4.0.
16 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

      Action Verbs to Avoid because they
      are NOT measurable

       There are some action verbs that should be
       avoided. Those are:

             understand
             reflect
             demonstrate understanding
             become aware of
             increase awareness of
             explore
             know
             learn
             appreciate
             demonstrate an appreciation of

       These verbs are not the task students will be
       doing to demonstrate mastery on the graded
       assignment. For example, to measure
       understanding, students might be identifying on
       a multiple choice test or explaining on a written
       assignment, and therefore identify or explain is a
       better action verb.
                                   SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 17

Module Outcomes

Focus on what you want students to have learned by the time
they finish the module. A good place to start thinking about
these might be your textbook chapters; they often have
objectives already listed at the beginning of chapters.

Your module objectives should also use Bloom's verbs and they
should use a verb at the same level or lower than the course
objective. For example, if the course objective starts with
"analyze" a module objective could include any verb from the
analyze, apply, understand, or knowledge categories.

Make sure they are measurable (use a verb from the lists
provided above).

Make sure there is only one module objective per row. This
means that each module will have more than one row.

Make sure they're not tasks. If they are tasks, then they are
likely an activity or an assessment (see below).

Materials (readings, videos, etc.)

Materials include anything that you give students to learn the
materials. This includes textbook chapters, journal articles,
other reading materials, recorded lectures, other videos,
podcasts, etc.
18 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

Be sure to list out each reading separately and say what it is. For
example, "Read textbook chapter 3."

Selecting inclusive instructional materials

It is also important to include a variety of instructional
materials so that your course isn't entirely text-based.
According to Quality Matters, there should be "options for
how they [learners] consume content, e.g., reading an article
or text, viewing a video, listening to a podcast." Some students
digest content better when watching versus reading and vice
versa.

Variety doesn't just mean variety in text versus audio/video,
but also in perspectives. It's good to provide content from
multiple authors and multiple perspectives (if multiple
perspectives exist). This culturally responsive pedagogy is a
part of having variety among your course materials. This is
also things like making sure your course isn't completely text-
based, citing your sources, having current materials, and
having a variety of assessments, preferably one per module,
even if it's a low-stakes assessment.

Whether you are curating or developing content, it is
important to always consider the inclusivity of the materials.
Read each item below to learn more about how to make sure
your instructional materials are inclusive.
                                   SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 19

1. Select content that engages a diversity of
ideas and perspectives

One of the best ways to make sure your content is diverse
and inclusive is to choose interesting, engaging, and relevant
content. When choosing readings, texts, and other materials,
think about whether any perspectives are missing or
underrepresented. You want students to be able to think about
course materials from a variety of different perspectives. So, it's
important to recognize how your choice of materials reflects
your perspectives, interests, and possible biases. Always
analyze the content of your examples, analogies, and humor;
too narrow a perspective may ostracize students who have
differences.

If you do assign something that could be problematic or that
uses stereotypes, be sure to point out those shortcomings and
consider supplementing those readings with other materials
that show other perspectives. This also encourages students to
critique content, which also helps promote critical thinking.
You can also use this as an opportunity to teach students about
the conflicts present within the field by incorporating those
diverse perspectives.

2. Select content by authors with diverse
backgrounds

When selecting course content, include materials written,
created, or researched by authors of diverse backgrounds
20 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

relevant to the topics in the course. For example, if all of the
articles in your course were conducted by male European or
American scientists, you may send a message (even if
inadvertent) to students that there is no scholarship produced
by women and people of color, or perhaps worse, that you
do not value it. If applicable, discuss contributions made to
the field by historically underrepresented groups and explain
why these efforts are significant. This can validate students by
helping them see themselves represented by the authors of the
course (Appert et al., 2017).

Whenever possible, instructors should broaden readings by
including some from non-dominant perspectives. However,
you should also avoid including just a token marginalized
perspective here or there just to comply with a diversity best
practice instead of meaningfully including and considering
different perspectives. Inclusive course readings should place
multiple perspectives at the center and should be carefully and
thoughtfully contextualized and integrated (Appert et al.,
2017).

3. Offer a variety of representative
instructional materials

Offering a variety of course materials is an inclusive best
practice and a general teaching best practice. Standard 4.5 of
the QM rubric states "a variety of instructional materials is
used in the course", and the Universal Design for Learning
                                   SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 21

model also stresses the importance of presenting information
in a variety of formats because not everyone learns or processes
information in the same way; this it increases the cognitive
accessibility of the materials, provides students flexibility in
how they learn, and increases student engagement (Brooks &
Grady, 2022).

This means that you should use a variety of teaching methods.
Your course shouldn't be entirely text-based because not every
student learns best by reading. Instead, supplement your
readings with recorded lecture videos, overview videos, other
pre-existing videos (that you didn't create), podcasts, images,
and other activities. When selecting visuals, try to choose
visuals that include diverse participants.

4. Use relevant and diverse examples

When choosing materials and examples (and test questions,
assignments, and case studies) to use in your course, be sure to
use examples that speak across genders and cultures and that
are relatable to people from various socio-cultural contexts in
a way that doesn't marginalize students. Provide representative
exemplars through the selection of texts, guest speakers, and
leaders that allow students to imagine their future successful
selves.

If you cannot, ground examples in specificity and discuss
limitations. Don't assume that all students will recognize the
22 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

cultural, literary, or historical references you use. Make sure
not to reward students for their similarity to you at the expense
of others. Instead, draw on resources, materials, humor, and
anecdotes that are relevant to the subject, and sensitive to the
social and cultural diversity of your students (Appert et al.,
2017). Make connections from the content to learners' lived
experiences when possible (e.g., provide examples of genetic
diseases familiar to learners when discussing the topic of
chromosomal abnormalities).

5. Ensure all materials work together to
promote diverse ways of knowing

Make sure the instructional materials, assessments, learning
activities, and tools you develop/select all support the learning
outcomes. This intentional curricular alignment should
integrate and encourage diverse ways of knowing.

As you begin to create content, always keep alignment and
the course's learning objectives in mind. Alignment is the idea
that all critical course components work together to ensure
that learners achieve the desired learning outcomes. This best
practice also aligns with QM standards 4.1 and 4.2, which state
that "instructional materials contribute to the achievement of
the stated learning objectives" and "the relationship between
the use of instructional materials and learning activities in the
course is explained", respectively.
                                   SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 23

You can ensure alignment with backward design by following
these three basic steps:

 1. Write measurable, action-oriented learning objectives
      that address the appropriate level of Bloom's Taxonomy.

 2. Choose assessment methods that indicate students'
      mastery of the objectives and materials.

 3. Choose instructional materials that help students work
      towards those objectives.

6. Make all content accessible to all students

Another question to always keep in mind as you are
developing and curating content, is "Are these materials/
activities accessible for all learners?" Are images and other
visuals described in text? Are headings properly formatted as
headings or are they just bigger, bolder fonts?
As you may recall, accessibility is also present in the QM
rubric; standards 8.3 and 8.4 state that the "course provides
accessible text and images in files, documents, LMS pages, and
web pages to meet the needs of diverse learners" and "the
course provides alternative means of access to multimedia
content in formats that meet the needs of diverse learners",
respectively.

Using diverse, inclusive, and equitable
content can help improve the learning
24 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

experience for all learners.

Keep in mind that not all of these will always be appropriate
for every class, but you should still be able to find yourself able
to incorporate at least a few of them.

1. Allow students to demonstrate learning in
multiple ways

One way to do this would be to include varying assignment
types (e.g., quizzes, discussions, assignments, H5P activities,
etc.) to balance the type of tasks students do in the course (e.g.,
individual vs group or written vs oral).

Another way to do this would be to allow students to choose
how they will demonstrate that they learned the aligned course
or module objective. For example, instead of assigning a
traditional written out synthesis paper, you could still ask
students to synthesize materials, but instead of requiring a
paper, you could allow them to choose the type of product
they produce (e.g., paper, presentation, video, website). This
type of agency lets students demonstrate their individual
strengths.

You could also encourage students to explore topics from their
unique identity perspectives. This could include inviting
students to critique the current literature in your field for
biases, or it could also include inviting students to respond to
course readings from their own personal experiences.
                                   SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 25

2. Make assessment criteria clear from the
beginning

You may also recognize this best practice from the QM rubric.
Standards 3.2 and 3.3 state that "the course grading policy is
stated clearly at the beginning of the course" and "specific and
descriptive criteria are provided for the evaluation of learners'
work, and their connection to the course grading policy is
clearly explained", respectively. Therefore, these best practices
are true from a general teaching perspective and from an
inclusive teaching perspective.

To make sure that all students can succeed on a given
assignment, communicate specific assessment criteria when
the assignment is given. You'll provide this information in the
rubric, but you could also include a description of successful
versions of the assignment, and other Transparent Assignment
Design strategies. Transparent assignment design is the
process of designing assignments so that the process of
learning is more explicit for students. In other words,
transparent assignments shed light on the assignment's
purpose, task, and criteria (Bose et al., 2020). UTA's
assignment template provides a template for getting started
with this by including headings for the prompt, guidelines,
and support.

3. Include a variety of different assessments

This is also present in the QM rubric; standards 3.4 and 3.5
26 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

states that "the assessments used are sequenced, varied, and
suited to the level of the course" and "the course provides
learners with multiple opportunities to track their learning
progress with timely feedback", respectively. When we say to
include various types of assessments, we mean that in any given
course, you should use more than one or two types of
assessments. For example, you could include weekly quizzes
and discussions, and then have one or two longer essays
throughout the course.

However, you should also include diversity in the types of
assessments, which have different functions. Diagnostic
assessments typically come at the beginning of a course; they
provide informal opportunities for you to learn what students
know going into your course so that you may adjust
instruction accordingly. Formative assessments promote
practice and create opportunities for you to give feedback to
students to guide their learning. Like diagnostic assessments,
formative assessments provide you with information that can
inform instruction. Summative assessments provide
opportunities for formal evaluation, typically for the purposes
of a grade (Marquis, 2021).

You should also incorporate a balance of low-stakes and high-
stakes assessments because all students can benefit from these.
Low-stakes assessments are typically more informal and
formative, and they may be graded (with a very low point
value) or ungraded. These are important because they give
                                   SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 27

students the opportunity to practice (without the risk of
negatively impacting their final grade) and receive feedback,
which enhances their learning (Marquis, 2021). Examples of
these could include comprehension/reading quizzes, H5P
activities, and reflective assignments. Conversely, high-stakes
assessments are more formal and summative and have grades
that represent a significant portion of their grades. Examples
of these may include final projects or papers, midterms or final
exams, etc.

4. Make sure you're assessing the learning
you're aiming for

This best practice also overlaps with the QM rubric; standard
3.1 states that "the assessments measure the achievement of the
stated learning objectives". There are two major things to keep
in mind here.

First, when creating an assessment, always make sure that it
relates to your materials and to your objectives.

Second, be sure that the assessment is focusing on the skills
or knowledge from the course and not from something else.
For example, if you're asking students to present something,
be sure the assessment is focused on things you discussed in
the course and not on the student's ability to actually present
(unless of course, that's something covered in the course). In
any case, be clear about the specific learning you are aiming to
28 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

see displayed will help you to better identify aspects of your
assessments that you may be able to adjust. For instance,
grading criteria for presentations might privilege the
conceptual learning you want to see displayed over public
speaking skills (Barkley & Major, 2016).

5. Provide descriptive, forward-looking
feedback

Feedback is an essential component of the learning process.
From a diversity and inclusivity perspective, giving students
good, quality feedback is important so that students know
how they're doing in your course and what they need to do to
improve. Usable, meaningful feedback doesn't need to be labor
intensive. Indeed, research shows that providing too much
feedback (for instance, on written work) can be overwhelming
and inhibit learning.

Even a few key observations that describe what is and is not
working in an assessment can help students better self-assess.
Concrete strategies for improvement also can help to ensure
all students have the information they need to be successful
(Watling & Ginsburg, 2018).

In your feedback, be sure to let students know what they're
doing well and what they could be doing better. Moreover, be
sure you also give students the opportunity to use the feedback
you provide (Brookhart, 2008). For example, will the feedback
                                   SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 29

apply to future assignments as well, or will they be able to use
it to revise the current assignment?

Activities (not graded or low stakes)

Activities, for the purpose of a course map, is anything the
student does in the course that isn't directly graded. For
example, you might have an ungraded video quiz or an H5P
activity that you want students to complete.

Activities can include activities that you mark as either
complete or incomplete.

Activities always include reading and watching the materials in
the "materials" column and should be noted.

Assessments (graded)

Assessments are anything that your students complete for a
grade (quizzes, exams, papers, projects, discussions, etc.). So,
you need to decide what kind of assessment will best test
whether your students learned what the objective said they
would learn. Once you have measurable verbs, it's also
important that you choose an assessment that aligns with the
verb.

For example:
30 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

Verb        Assessment
Define      Quiz
Identify
Recognize   Quiz/Assignment
Categorize  (short answer or essay
Classify    questions)
Describe
Explain     Discussion
Summarize
Interpret
Discuss
Defend
Interpret
Critique
Compare
Relate
Contrast
Verb         SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 31
Write
Evaluate      Assessment
Analyze       Written assignment/
Conclude      essay
Judge
Cite          Course project
Solve
Design        Group assignment
Develop
Plan
Create
Use
Illustrate
Collaborate
Complete

Is it a learning activity or an assessment?

Learning activities and assessments can be thought of the
same; they are anything that incorporate interaction and
engage the learner with the course content. For example:
32 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

   Class discussions
   Simulation exercises
   Practice quizzes
   Tests
   Case studies
   Role-playing
   Student presentations
   Labs

For example, you may have a discussion where in order to
participate in the discussion, students will first have to read
two articles. The reading of the two articles would be the
learning activity. The discussion post the student creates is
then the assessment.

Another example is when a learning objective requires a
student to apply a concept to a real-life case. The learning
activity could be the student applying that concept to a case
study and the assessment is how well the student did when
they applied that concept to the case study.

References

Ragupathi, K. (2016). Designing Effective Online
   Assessments: Resource Guide.

Brooks, R., & Grady, S. D. (2022). Course design
                                   SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 33

   considerations for inclusion and representation. Quality
   Matters White Paper. https://www.qualitymatters.org/qa-
   resources/resource-center/articles-resources/course-design-
   inclusion-representation-white-paper

Crawford, Stephen (2012). Aligning Assessments with
   Learning Objectives. http://teachonline.asu.edu/2012/10/
   aligning-assessments-with-learning-objectives/.

Appert, L., Simonian Bean, C., Irvin, A., Jungels, A. M., Klaf,
   S., & Phillipson, M. (2017). Guide for Inclusive Teaching
   at Columbia. Columbia Center for Teaching and Learning.
   https://ctl.columbia.edu/resources-and-technology/
   resources/inclusive-teaching-guide/download/

Ambrose, S. A., Bridges, M. W., DiPietro, M., Lovett, M. C.,
   & Norman, M. K. (2010). How Learning Works: Seven
   Research-Based Principles for Smart Teaching. John Wiley
   & Sons.

Davis, B. G. (2009). Tools for Teaching. Second Edition. John
   Wiley & Sons.

Malamed, C. (n.d.). Why You Need To Use Storytelling For
   Learning. http://theelearningcoach.com/elearning2-0/
   why-you-need-to-use-storytelling-for-learning/.

Mills, E. (2017). Don't Overlook the Value of Storytelling in
   Instructional Design. https://www.caveolearning.com/
34 | SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS

   blog/dont-overlook-the-value-of-storytelling-in-
   instructional-design.

Pappas, C. (2014). 7 Tips To Integrate Storytelling Into Your
   Next eLearning Course. https://elearningindustry.com/
   7-tips-integrate-storytelling-next-elearning-course.

Ko, S., & Rossen, S. (2017). Teaching Online: A Practical
   Guide. Taylor & Francis.

Zhadko, O., & Ko, S. (2019). Best Practices in Designing
   Courses with Open Educational Resources. Taylor &
   Francis.

Bridges, M. W., DiPietro, M., Lovett, M. C., Norman, M.
   K., & Ambrose, S. A. (2023). How Learning Works: Eight
   Research-Based Principles for Smart Teaching. Wiley.

Bose, D., Dalrymple, & Shadle, S. (2020). A renewed case for
   student success: Using transparency in assignment design
   when teaching remotely. Faculty Focus.
   https://www.facultyfocus.com/articles/course-design-
   ideas/a-renewed-case-for-student-success-using-
   transparency-in-assignment-design-when-teaching-remotel
   y

Reinert Center for Transformative Teaching & Learning.
   (2017). Resource Guides for Assessment and Assignment
                                   SELECTING ALIGNED ASSESSMENTS | 35

   Design. Saint Louis University. https://www.slu.edu/cttl/
   resources/inclusive-teaching.php

Marquis, T. L. (2021). Formative assessment and scaffolding
   online learning. New Directions for Adult & Continuing
   Education, 169, 51-60. https://doi.org/10.1002/ace.20413

Watling, C. J., & Ginsburg, S. (2018). Assessment, feedback,
   and the alchemy of learning. Medical Education, 53(1).
   https://doi.org/10.1111/medu.13645

Barkley, E. F., & Major, C. H. (2016). Learning assessment
   techniques: A handbook for college faculty . Jossey-Bass.

Brookhart, S. M. (2008). How to give effective feedback to your
   students . Association for Supervision and Curriculum
   Development.

Nestor, M. & Nestor, C. (2013, November 25). Alignment
   and Backward Design. http://www.youtube.com/
   watch?v=ZTv2HR2ckto.
36 | ASSIGNMENTS

3.

ASSIGNMENTS

   Jessica Kahlow

Written assignments are a staple of educational assessment,
providing a means for students to demonstrate their
understanding, critical thinking, and communication skills.
This chapter delves into various types of written assignments
and offers guidance on how to design them effectively to
enhance student learning and engagement.

The Importance of Written
Assignments

Written assignments serve multiple educational purposes:

   Demonstrating Understanding: They allow students
      to articulate their comprehension of the material.

   Developing Critical Thinking: Written tasks
      encourage students to analyze, synthesize, and evaluate
      information.

   Enhancing Communication Skills: Writing
                                                                  ASSIGNMENTS | 37

      assignments improve students' ability to express ideas
      clearly and coherently.

Types of Written Assignments

1. Essays

Essays are a common type of written assignment that require
students to explore a topic in depth, develop an argument, and
support it with evidence.

   Types of Essays

          Expository Essays: Explain or describe a concept
            or idea.

          Persuasive Essays: Argue a specific point of view.
          Analytical Essays: Analyze a text, event, or idea.
          Narrative Essays: Tell a story or recount an event.

   Components of a Good Essay

          Clear Thesis Statement: The central argument or
            point of the essay.

          Structured Organization: Introduction, body
            paragraphs, and conclusion.

          Evidence and Examples: Support the thesis with
            relevant information and analysis.
38 | ASSIGNMENTS

          Coherent Flow: Logical progression of ideas and
            smooth transitions.

2. Research Papers

Research papers require students to investigate a topic, gather
information from various sources, and present their findings
in a structured format.

   Components of a Good Research Paper
          Clear Research Question or Hypothesis:
            Defines the focus of the paper.
          Literature Review: Summarizes existing research
            on the topic.
          Methodology: Describes the research methods
            used to gather data.
          Analysis and Results: Presents the findings of the
            research.
          Discussion and Conclusion: Interprets the results
            and suggests implications or future research
            directions.

3. Reflective Journals

Reflective journals encourage students to reflect on their
learning experiences, integrating personal insights with course
content.
                                                                  ASSIGNMENTS | 39

   Components of a Good Reflective Journal
          Personal Reflection: Discusses personal
            experiences and insights.
          Connection to Course Material: Links
            reflections to concepts and theories from the
            course.
          Critical Analysis: Examines experiences critically,
            considering different perspectives.
          Future Implications: Reflects on how the
            experience will influence future learning or actions.

4. Case Studies

Case studies involve detailed analysis of a real-world situation,
requiring students to apply theoretical knowledge to practical
scenarios.

   Components of a Good Case Study
          Clear Description of the Case: Provides
            background information and context.
          Identification of Key Issues: Highlights the main
            problems or challenges.
          Application of Theories and Concepts: Uses
            course material to analyze the case.
          Recommendations: Suggests practical solutions
            or actions based on the analysis.
40 | ASSIGNMENTS

5. Annotated Bibliographies

Annotated bibliographies require students to summarize and
evaluate sources related to a specific topic.

   Components of a Good Annotated Bibliography
          Accurate Citations: Provides complete and
            correct bibliographic information.
          Summaries: Briefly describes the content of each
            source.
          Evaluations: Critically assesses the relevance,
            quality, and credibility of each source.
          Reflection: Discusses how each source contributes
            to the understanding of the topic.

Steps to Crafting Effective
Written Assignments

Step 1: Define the Purpose and
Objectives

Clearly articulate what you want students to achieve through
the assignment. Consider the following:

   Learning Objectives: What skills or knowledge should
      students demonstrate?

   Purpose: Is the assignment intended to assess
                                                                   ASSIGNMENTS | 41

      understanding, promote critical thinking, or encourage
      reflection?

Step 2: Choose the Appropriate Type
of Assignment

Select a type of written assignment that aligns with your
objectives and is suitable for the course content and student
level.

Step 3: Develop Clear Instructions

Provide detailed instructions that outline:

   Assignment Goals: What students are expected to
      achieve.

   Format and Structure: Guidelines on length,
      formatting, and organization.

   Assessment Criteria: Rubrics or criteria that will be
      used to evaluate the assignment.

Step 4: Provide Resources and
Support

Offer resources and support to help students succeed:

   Guidelines and Examples: Provide examples of good
42 | ASSIGNMENTS

      assignments and tips for effective writing.
   Research Resources: Recommend databases, journals,

      and other resources.
   Writing Support: Offer access to writing centers or

      online tools.

Step 5: Encourage Drafts and
Revisions

Encourage students to submit drafts and provide feedback to
help them improve their work before the final submission.

Step 6: Assess and Provide Feedback

Evaluate the assignments based on the established criteria and
provide constructive feedback to guide further learning.

Best Practices for Written
Assignments

You were up all night thinking about the perfect assignment.
You started your morning off by typing up your thoughts and
posting it to students as an assignment. And then... the emails
come... "How long does it have to be?", "Can I use a
PowerPoint or do I have to do a video?", "Why do I have to
                                                                  ASSIGNMENTS | 43

use this citation style?", and "What do you mean by...". Yikes!
This was supposed to be the perfect assignment!

   Clarity and Precision: Ensure instructions and
      expectations are clear and precise.

   Alignment with Objectives: Make sure the assignment
      aligns with the learning objectives of the course.

   Engagement and Relevance: Design assignments that
      are engaging and relevant to students' interests and
      experiences.

   Feedback and Support: Provide timely and
      constructive feedback, and offer support throughout the
      process.

Writing Assignment Directions

Maybe it's still the perfect assignment, but your prompt didn't
give students enough information. Try to predict the
questions students will ask and make sure your prompt
addresses those by including these five components:

1. Introduction

This situates the assignment within the context of the course,
reminding students of what they have been working on in
anticipation of the assignment and how that work has
prepared them to succeed at it.
44 | ASSIGNMENTS

2. Justification, Purpose, and Summary

In a few sentences explain the overall assignment mission and
type of assignment.

Explain why the particular type of assignment you've chosen
(e.g., lab report, policy memo, problem set, or personal
reflection) is the best way for you and your students to measure
how well they've met the learning objectives associated with
this segment of the course.

3. Detailed Tasks/Key Components

Outline what students are supposed to do at a granular level. Is
there a step-by-step process they need to follow? What are the
key components they need to make sure to include?

4. Logistics/Submission Format

Explain how and when students will submit. Include items
like:

   Due date
   Requirements for length, formatting/styling, document

      type, and citation style
   Location and type of submission

5. Evaluation Criteria
                                                                  ASSIGNMENTS | 45

Outline the criteria you will use to evaluate students work.
This could be in a detailed list or rubric.

It is helpful to explain what criteria look like at certain
performance levels. For example, what does "A" work look like,
"B" work look like? Or what comprises "Meets expectations"
vs. "Does not meet expectations"?

Writing Student Presentation
Directions

Group or individual presentations can be an essential part of
student participation because it "fosters interaction among
students", especially when they're also asked to share
comments and questions about others' presentations (Ko &
Rossen, 2017, p. 329). Moreover, online presentations are a
great way for students to share their work with their
classmates. Online presentations afford students more tools to
convey their ideas.

Having students give presentations is easy enough in a face-
to-face class - everyone is present and there aren't many
technology considerations that have to be made. But in an
online format, a once-simple assignment gets more complex.

   How can students record presentations that include
      sharing a screen, video of themselves, and audio?
46 | ASSIGNMENTS

   How can students submit their videos so that just the
      professor can watch them?

   How can they submit videos so that their peers can view
      and comment?

We're going to walk through all the options so you can choose
what is right for your course, and then we'll also provide
resources for you to pass along to your students for whichever
method you choose.

Presentation Options

There are two main choices you have to make.

 1. Assignment type: Will it be an individual or a group
      presentation?

 2. Audience: Will students submit it just to the professor
      or will their classmates also be able to see it?

If the audience is only the instructor, you may want your
students to do a presentation or video recording that does
not need to be viewed by the entire class. For this, you'll use
a Canvas online submission assignment, and students will
embed their video into their submission.

If the audience is the classmates and the instructor, create a
discussion in Canvas. Students can embed their videos into
discussion posts. You can set up groups in those discussions so
                                                                  ASSIGNMENTS | 47

that only those in the groups can see the presentations, or you
can leave them open to the whole class.

Tools and Technologies for
Supporting Written Assignments

Learning Management Systems (LMS)

Platforms like Moodle, Canvas, and Blackboard facilitate the
submission, grading, and feedback processes for written
assignments.

Writing Tools

Tools like Grammarly, Turnitin, and the Purdue OWL offer
writing assistance and plagiarism checking.

Collaboration Tools

Google Docs, Microsoft Teams, and other collaboration tools
enable peer review and collaborative writing projects.

Crafting effective written assignments requires thoughtful
planning, clear communication, and ongoing support. By
understanding the various types of written assignments and
following best practices for their design and implementation,
educators can create meaningful assessments that enhance
48 | ASSIGNMENTS

student learning and engagement. Written assignments not
only evaluate students' understanding and skills but also foster
critical thinking, creativity, and effective communication.

Preventing Plagiarized
Assignments and Promoting
Academic Integrity

Plagiarism remains a significant challenge in academic settings,
undermining the integrity of educational institutions and
devaluing the hard work of honest students. As educators, it
is our responsibility to create an environment that promotes
academic integrity and deters dishonest practices. This chapter
explores effective strategies for preventing plagiarism,
including the use of TurnItIn and designing plagiarism-proof
assignments.

Promoting Academic Integrity

Academic integrity is the cornerstone of a credible educational
system. It ensures that students are evaluated based on their
own work and merit. Promoting this integrity involves not
only setting clear expectations but also creating a culture where
honesty is valued and celebrated. Here are key steps to
fostering an environment of academic integrity:
                                                                  ASSIGNMENTS | 49

 1. Clearly Communicate Expectations: Educate
      students about what constitutes plagiarism and the
      consequences of engaging in it. Provide clear guidelines
      on citation practices and the importance of original
      work.

 2. Foster a Culture of Trust and Respect: Encourage
      open communication and build trust with your
      students. When students feel respected and supported,
      they are less likely to resort to dishonest practices.

 3. Provide Resources and Support: Offer resources such
      as writing centers, citation guides, and workshops on
      academic integrity. Support students in developing their
      research and writing skills.

Use of TurnItIn

TurnItIn is a widely used tool that helps detect and prevent
plagiarism by comparing student submissions against a vast
database of academic work, websites, and other sources. Here's
how TurnItIn can be effectively utilized:

 1. Submission and Originality Reports: Require
      students to submit their assignments through TurnItIn.
      Review the originality reports generated to identify
      potential instances of plagiarism.

 2. Educate Students on TurnItIn: Explain to students
      how TurnItIn works and how it can benefit them by
50 | ASSIGNMENTS

      highlighting areas that need proper citation. This
      transparency can encourage students to engage more
      deeply with their own work.
 3. Use TurnItIn as a Learning Tool: Rather than solely a
      policing mechanism, use TurnItIn to educate students
      about proper citation and the importance of academic
      integrity. Provide feedback on how they can improve
      their writing and avoid unintentional plagiarism.

Designing Plagiarism-Proof
Assignments

Designing assignments that are challenging to plagiarize is a
proactive way to prevent academic dishonesty. Plagiarism-
proofing assignments involves making them more specific,
personal, and process-oriented. Below are strategies for
creating such assignments:

 1. Use Unique and Specific Prompts: Tailor prompts to
      the course material and student interests. This specificity
      makes it difficult for students to find pre-written answers
      online.

 2. Personalize Projects: Encourage students to connect
      assignments to their personal experiences or future
      career goals. Personal reflections are inherently unique
      and harder to plagiarize.

 3. Incorporate Current Events: Use recent developments
                                                                   ASSIGNMENTS | 51

      in the field to keep topics fresh and less likely to be
      found in existing sources.
 4. Focus on the Creation Process: Require multiple
      drafts and check-ins for larger papers and projects. This
      ongoing engagement makes it harder for students to
      submit plagiarized work.
 5. Include Reflective Essays: Ask students to explain
      their work and decision-making process. Reflective
      essays help verify the authenticity of their submissions.
 6. Test Your Prompts: Search the assignment directions
      online or use an AI tool like ChatGPT to generate
      responses. This can help you gauge how easily your
      prompts can be plagiarized and adjust accordingly.

Example: Plagiarism-Proof
Assignments

Not Plagiarism-Proof

       Essay Prompt: The Evolution of Modern
       Architecture
       Instructions: Write a 1,000-1,200 word essay
       discussing the evolution of modern architecture.
52 | ASSIGNMENTS

       Consider the following points: Key characteristics
       of modern architecture, influential architects,
       technological advancements, and changes in
       urban landscapes.
       Why It's Not Plagiarism-Proof: This prompt is
       generic and easily searchable, with many pre-
       written essays available online.

Plagiarism-Proof Version

       Personal Exploration of Modern
       Architecture's Evolution
       Instructions: Write a 1,000-1,200 word essay
       exploring the evolution of modern architecture
       through a personalized lens. Incorporate the
       following elements:
       Local Case Study: Select a modern building or
       project in your city. Describe its key
       characteristics and how it exemplifies modern
       architectural principles.
                                                                  ASSIGNMENTS | 53

       Architect Interview: Conduct a brief interview
       with a local architect or architecture professor to
       gain insights. Include quotes and reflections from
       the interview.
       Personal Experience: Reflect on a modern
       architectural space you have visited. Discuss how
       the design impacted your experience and
       understanding of modern architecture.
       Technological Influence: Analyze how
       technological advancements influenced the
       building in your local case study.
       Additional Requirements:
       Original Photos or Sketches: Include photographs
       or sketches of the building.
       Process Documentation: Document your
       research process, including selecting your case
       study, conducting your interview, and gathering
       reflections.

Why It's Plagiarism-Proof: This prompt requires original
research, personal reflection, and locally-sourced material,
making it difficult to plagiarize.

Preventing plagiarism and promoting academic integrity are
54 | ASSIGNMENTS

critical aspects of fostering a trustworthy and effective
educational environment. By utilizing tools like TurnItIn and
designing plagiarism-proof assignments, educators can create a
learning atmosphere where honesty is paramount and students
are encouraged to produce original, thoughtful work.
Embracing these strategies ensures that academic
achievements genuinely reflect students' knowledge and
efforts, ultimately enriching the educational experience for all.

References

Wick, A. (2020). 4 Tips for writing good online assignment
   directions. Cengage. https://todayslearner.cengage.com/
   writing-good-online-assignment-instructions/

BOK Center, Harvard University (n.d.). How to Write an
   Effective Assignment. https://bokcenter.harvard.edu/how-
   to-write-assignment-prompt

Southwestern University (n.d.). Six Parts of an Effective
   Prompt. https://www.southwestern.edu/offices/writing/
   faculty-resources-for-writing-instruction/effective-writing-
   assignments/six-parts-of-an-effective-prompt/.
                   DISCUSSIONS | 55

4.

DISCUSSIONS

   Jessica Kahlow

Asynchronous discussions are a fundamental part of online
education. They are one of the main ways that online courses
facilitate learner-learner interaction and can also enhance
learner-instructor interaction when used properly. The mere
presence of a course discussion does not guarantee meaningful
engagement, participation, or interaction. Many instructors
struggle to make discussion board forums a vibrant, engaging
space for students to genuinely interact with one another.

   Do you hate discussions? Maybe you're just doing them
                               wrong.

           (and I mean this in the nicest way possible)

This sentiment underscores the common challenges
instructors face when trying to have good online course
discussions. Because well, in our experience as instructional
designers, instructors who say they hate online discussions
simply aren't using them correctly. And, as instructional
designers and as faculty, we recognize that in light of all the
56 | DISCUSSIONS

best practices surrounding the design of effective online
discussions, it is hard to create good, quality discussions that
students actually engage with. Often, discussions are marred
by one-correct-answer prompts, overly prescriptive
instructions, and lackluster participation, resulting in
stagnant, uninspiring exchanges that fail to fully engage
students. However, there is hope. By exploring innovative
strategies and leveraging emerging technologies, instructors
can revolutionize the online discussion experience, turning it
into a dynamic and enriching platform for learning and
collaboration.

This chapter discusses artificial intelligence (AI), specifically
ChatGPT, as a tool to enhance online discussions,
revolutionizing the way educators facilitate and engage with
their students in online learning environments. This chapter
is to offers a comprehensive synthesis of existing literature,
highlighting the value of online course discussions and
demonstrating how instructors are integrating AI alongside
research-backed best practices for online discussions and the
use of AI.

The Value of Discussions in
Online Courses

One function of online discussions is to facilitate and
encourage social interaction among students. Since at least the
                                                                    DISCUSSIONS | 57

year 2000, online course discussions have been shown to
establish a strong sense of community among learners when
used appropriately (Poole, 2000). Poole's (2000) case study
examined students' participation in online course discussions
in a graduate-level course taken by K-12 teachers. This seminal
article, published 25 years prior to the writing of this chapter,
highlights the continued importance of fostering social
presence in online learning environments. In the context of
online classrooms, social presence "refers to a student's sense
of being in and belonging in a course and the ability to interact
with other students and an instructor" (Picciano, 2002, p. 22).
The theory of social presence explains the effect media can
have on communication (Short et al., 1976). Over time, the
theory has evolved to include the examinations of how new
media affects online learning and has demonstrated how the
use of select media affects social presence in online learning
environments (Lowenthal, 2009).

Current research continues to highlight the significance of
social presence in promoting engagement, collaboration, and
a supportive learning atmosphere, emphasizing its crucial role
in enhancing the overall learning experience for students. For
instance, Cho and Tobias (2016) used the community of
inquiry theory to examine the impact of online discussions
on student learning experiences. Over three consecutive
semesters, the same instructor taught the same online course
under three conditions: no discussion, discussion without
instructor participation, and discussion with active instructor
58 | DISCUSSIONS

participation. Their results showed no significant differences
in cognitive or instructor presence across conditions.
However, there was a significant difference in social presence.
Interestingly, no significant differences were observed in time
spent on the platform, course satisfaction, or student
achievement among the conditions (Cho & Tobias, 2016).
Likewise, Swan and Shih (2019) also found that the perceived
presence of the instructor could be more influential for
student satisfaction than the perceived presence of peers.

Truhlar et al. (2018) explored the impact of chat roles and
reflections on student interactions in an online sustainability
course. Assigned roles increased critical student-student
interactions, while self-reflections had no effect. Groups
completing group reflections showed more critical
interactions.

These findings are important for a few reasons. First, they
suggest that the presence of an instructor in discussions might
enhance social interaction among students, but it may not
significantly impact cognitive or instructor presence. This
implies that the role of the instructor in online discussions
may be more crucial for fostering social connections among
students rather than directly influencing the depth of cognitive
engagement or the instructor's teaching presence.
Additionally, the study indicates that the mere presence of
online discussions, regardless of instructor involvement, does
not significantly affect factors such as the time students spend
                                                                    DISCUSSIONS | 59

on the platform, their overall satisfaction with the course, or
their academic achievement. Therefore, educators should
carefully consider the purpose and desired outcomes of
incorporating online discussions into their courses,
recognizing that instructor participation may primarily
influence social dynamics rather than academic performance.

Students are choosing to take online classes at an increasingly
high rate (Tirado-Morueta et al. 2017); therefore, it is
increasingly important to provide students with learning
environments that afford them high levels of engagement.
Many communication technologies including videos and
online chats have made their way into the online classroom
to help provide a more engaging environment. While these
technologies help increase the instructor's presence and
student engagement, many online students still feel like they
lack a relationship with their instructor (Cherney et al., 2018;
Dyer et al., 2018). Prior research has shown that students'
perceptions of their instructor's social presence contributes to
students' perceived learning (Richardson & Swan, 2003) and
that instructors can create personal connections with students
when they are more responsive (Young et al., 2011). Despite
having known this information for decades, the idea of using
online discussions in online courses is a point of contention for
many instructors and students alike. The next section reviews
some of the well-established best practices for online
discussions.
60 | DISCUSSIONS

Best practices for online
Discussions

In online courses, there are only so many ways to achieve
learner-learner interaction, and one of those is through
asynchronous discussions. This chapter discusses strategies for
making good online discussions that students interact and
engage with. The most common mistake instructors make is
setting their discussions up like an assignment and simply
expecting students to know how to engage with them. Some
signs that your discussion prompt is really an assignment
prompt in disguise include discussion prompts that. . .

   have only one correct answer
   lead to predictable or generic responses, hindering

      meaningful dialogue
   too broad or vague, making it challenging for students to

      provide focused and insightful responses
   overly prescriptive, leaving little room for interpretation

      or diverse viewpoints
   lack of clarity on what students are expected to do or

      how to structure their responses

There are a lot of ways to make discussions more engaging. For
example, you could:

   allow flexibility for varied interpretations, encouraging a
                                                                    DISCUSSIONS | 61

      more dynamic and open discussion
   craft prompts that invite critical thinking, prompting

      students to analyze, synthesize, or apply knowledge
   provide clear instructions on the desired format of

      responses or actions students should take
   illustrate how the discussion relates to real-world

      situations, experiences, or examples (Woods & Bliss,
      2016)
   include enough context to guide students and facilitate a
      meaningful discussion
   ask students to come to a consensus and get buy-in from
      the whole discussion group (Truhlar et al., 2018)

Of course, not every discussion will be able to do all of these
things, and some are topic-dependent. But, you can always be
creative, participate in the discussion, give response directions,
and make sure there is more than one way to respond. Woods
and Bliss (2016) compiled a list of best practices based on
existing research, which are summarized below.

1. Ensure Response Variety

The first best practice seems pretty obvious, but it's just to
make sure there are various ways to respond to the prompt.
You should choose something that has many different correct
answers and that can be looked at from more than one
perspective. For example, in Figure 1, students are asked to
62 | DISCUSSIONS

choose an article from a series. So, already, we'll have students
choosing to write about different articles. The initial post
further asks students how the article can applied to their lives
and what they took away from it, which will also be different
for each student (note: this sample comes from a graduate
course in social work).

Figure 1. Sample discussion with various ways to reply

       Initial Post
       Explore NPR's Special Series - Bill of The Month:
       Bill of The Month Series.Links to an external site.
       Choose one story from the website and provide
       a summary of the story. Your summary should
       encompass the billed cost of care, reasons
       behind the bill, details of the services provided,
       and what was covered and not covered.
       Discuss what insights you gained from the
       selected story and how this learning can be
       applied to future practice when working with
       patients and their families. Share your reflections
       in your own words.
       Replies
                                                                    DISCUSSIONS | 63

       Engage with your peers by responding to their
       summaries and reflections. Explore similarities or
       differences in the challenges presented in each
       story and discuss potential strategies for
       addressing such healthcare cost issues in
       practice.
       This discussion aims to foster a collective
       understanding of real-world healthcare cost
       challenges and encourages collaborative
       reflections on practical applications in future
       healthcare practice.

2. Ask Students To Do Something

Second, make sure you're actually asking students to do
something, preferably from a higher level of Bloom's
taxonomy, like create, evaluate, or analyze. I've seen a lot of
discussions out there that don't clearly ask students to do
anything, which makes it hard to respond to and practically
impossible to discuss. For example, the discussion prompt in
Figure 2 asks students to create some kind of multimedia based
on the readings and then discuss them with their classmates
(note: this sample comes from a graduate course on
multimedia design tools).
64 | DISCUSSIONS

Figure 2. Sample discussion asking students to do something.

       Overview
       After reading the module materials, select
       something from the assigned readings to
       convert into a simple multimedia element of your
       choice to share and discuss. Remember to keep
       the principles discussed in the module in mind
       when creating the multimedia for the discussion.
       Part 1: Initial Post

            1. Select something from the assigned
                readings to convert into a simple
                multimedia element.

           2. Create the multimedia element (this can
                be anything you want and can use any
                technology you want: a short video, an
                infographic, an image, a presentation slide,
                etc.).

           3. Post your multimedia element to this
                discussion by the Wednesday before the
                discussion's due date.

       Part 2: Replies
       Look at the multimedia that your classmates
                                                                   DISCUSSIONS | 65

       have created, and reply to at least two of them
       with the following:

            1. Identify something you like about their
                multimedia. Be specific.

           2. Evaluate how they used the multimedia
                tool and whether it's appropriate (i.e.,
                would future students find it valuable
                when learning this content?).

           3. A question you have for them (e.g., how
                they made something) OR something they
                could do to make the multimedia even
                better.

3. Relate The Topic To Personal
Experiences

Third, having students relate the topic to a personal experience
is a great way for students to get to know one another while
building community in the course (de Abreu, 2023). It also
gets students to think about concepts in various relatable
contexts. This is a good thing to do especially if you're working
with adult learners who have work experience in the area. Also,
66 | DISCUSSIONS

people generally like talking about themselves, so this type of
discussion usually goes over well with students. For example, in
Figure 3, students are specifically asked to relate the materials
to their own experiences and perspectives (note: this sample
comes from a graduate course on multimedia design tools).

Figure 3. Sample discussion asking students to incorporate their
experiences

       Part 1: Initial Post
       For this discussion, please respond to the
       following questions based on your experience
       and understanding of health insurance and the
       US healthcare system.

            1. Share your positive views on the US
                healthcare system, considering your
                political perspective and personal
                experiences within the national or
                international healthcare context. Discuss
                any encounters with health insurance,
                whether personal or assisting someone
                close to you (anonymously if needed),
                highlighting the positive aspects.

           2. Reflect on the drawbacks and challenges
                                                          DISCUSSIONS | 67

        you see within the US healthcare system.
        Discuss issues such as accessibility,
        affordability, or any personal encounters
        with complications in health insurance
        processes, keeping confidentiality in mind.
   3. On a scale of 1 to 10, how would you rate
        your knowledge of health insurance and
        how it works? Please explain. (10 being
        very knowledgeable about health
        insurance companies, insurance terms,
        payments, claims, etc.).
   4. Why do you think social workers or other
        disciplines (nursing, educators,
        psychologists) should have an
        understanding of health insurance?

Part 2: Replies
After posting your initial response, engage with
your peers by replying to at least two
classmates' posts. In your responses:

    1. Acknowledge your peers' perspectives,
        validating their experiences and opinions
        regarding the US healthcare system and
        health insurance.
68 | DISCUSSIONS

           2. Share any insights or experiences you
                have that align with or differ from your
                peers' perspectives. Respectfully
                contribute to the conversation, promoting
                diverse viewpoints.

           3. Encourage further discussion by posing
                thoughtful questions related to your
                peers' posts. These questions can delve
                deeper into their experiences or opinions,
                fostering a meaningful dialogue.

           4. Remember to maintain a respectful and
                inclusive tone throughout your responses,
                promoting an atmosphere of open-
                mindedness and understanding.

4. Use Current Events

Next, use current events. When students read about
something in a textbook, they often dissociate it from things
happening around them or in the news, so this is a great way
to bridge that gap. For example, in Figure 4, students are asked
to find a current article related to a social policy; later, in their
replies, they are asked to read articles that other post and say
what policy it's related to and the social problem that's
                                                                   DISCUSSIONS | 69

addressed (note: this example comes from a graduate course in
political science).

Figure 4. Sample discussion with current events or articles

       Part 1
       The course materials this week discussed social
       insurance and how social policy has evolved over
       time. In your initial post (due the Wednesday
       before the discussion due date), find and post a
       recent article (from 2020 to the present) that
       describes or discusses a recent policy change.
       You just need to post the link to the article in
       your initial post.
       Part 2
       Then, for your replies, choose two other articles
       to respond to and say what kind of policy it is,
       describe the policy itself (cite if needed), and the
       social problem it addressed.

5. Include Directions For Initial Posts
And For Replies

Fifth, sometimes you'll have a great prompt, and then be
70 | DISCUSSIONS

disappointed when students have lackluster discussion replies.
One way to deal with this is to also have directions telling
students what they should be doing in their responses. Ideally,
they should be building on another student's response in some
way. To do this, think about what students have said in in-
person courses when asked a similar question, or try to
anticipate how they might respond to the prompt and how
they could use that to reply to others. A great way to do this
is to have directions for an initial post, and then additional
directions for reply posts. Figures 1, 2, 3, and 4 are all examples
of how you might do this with different kinds of discussions.

6. Participate In The Discussion

Sixth, and this is another general best practice, is to
consistently participate in the discussion. First, you should
really be checking in as a moderator and to make sure the
discussion is going the way you thought it would so you can
redirect the conversation if needed. It also lets students know
that you're there and a real person. You do not have to reply to
every post, but you should choose at least several to reply to.
In your replies, you could model good replies by asking follow-
up questions, providing additional examples, or relating the
discussion back to the course materials.
                 DISCUSSIONS | 71

7. Be Creative!

Finally, be creative, and be yourself! Add in videos and images
to give more context. Think outside the box! Here are some
suggestions.

Case study scenarios are a common way discussions are used.
Instructors often provide a case study and questions for
students to respond to and they discuss various outcomes for
a case. This would be an incredibly relevant choice in criminal
justice specifically.

Watch and respond to or discuss a relevant video. This is a great
way to include videos in your course, and it helps make sure
students are watching them.

Research related sources and share with the class - this could
be good if you're having students write a research paper and
need to also find sources for that. It could also be good in
courses where you want to emphasize the relevancy of certain
topics. For example, if relevancy to current events is important
in your course, you could have students find current events
related to the topic and discuss them in relation to course
concepts.

Teach a topic - there's a lot of research out there about this
one and how having to teach something helps you learn it
better. One good time to do this is in a module with a lot of
72 | DISCUSSIONS

complex topics. You could do this individually or in groups
depending on the class size and number of topics.

Project/paper presentations - this is a fun one, I think. I
always think it's weird when students record videos and then
the instructor is the only person who can see them. This also
gives students an idea of what their classmates were working on

Multi-step - along with the presentations, this one is a little
more logistically challenging in that students would need to
make an initial post earlier in the week. So to go back to the
example I gave with James earlier, he could have students find
current events related to materials, have them post those
articles, and then to make it a multi-step, he could ask students
to reply to another student's article post by saying which
course concepts are present in the article.

Brainstorming ideas for projects or papers. Here you could
have students introduce their topics and ask others for
feedback, you could also include things like finding relevant
resources and outlining in these types of discussions.

The future of presence

If you're thinking that all of that is too much to do, you're
not on your own. You can use AI to help you make your
discussions good. For instance, Chat GPT is a great tool to
                                                                    DISCUSSIONS | 73

help you achieve these discussion best practices. For example,
you may ask Chat GPT to . . .

   Can you suggest a follow-up prompt for this discussion
      so students know how to reply?

   Can you suggest follow-up questions to extend the
      discussion based on this prompt?

   How can I add depth and complexity to this discussion
      prompt?

   What modifications can I make to encourage critical
      thinking in responses to this prompt?

   What can I add to this prompt to encourage reflective
      responses?

   What can I do to prompt consideration of alternative
      viewpoints in response to this question?

   What multimedia elements can I add to enhance this
      discussion prompt?

   How can I connect this discussion prompt to real-world
      applications?

Examples

Okay so let's take a look at some examples.
74 | DISCUSSIONS

Example 1

Read this prompt and think about how you or your students
might reply to it.
Original

       If a particular neighborhood won an award for
       the state's best neighborhood watch program of
       the year, what would you expect that
       neighborhood would be doing to earn such
       recognition?

Okay, now think about how we could revise it to make it
better.
Revised

       Your neighbors are complaining that their garden
       gnomes are being stolen so you're creating a
       new neighborhood watch program in your
                                                                    DISCUSSIONS | 75

       neighborhood. In your initial post, describe what
       you might want your neighborhood watch to do
       to reduce theft.
       How would you get others to participate?
       Then, read a classmate's post and describe what
       might work well and what might not work so
       well in their neighborhood watch plan. Be sure
       to use concepts from class to support your
       answer.

The revised prompt introduces a practical scenario (garden
gnome theft) for relatability, enhancing engagement. It
incorporates a second part that encourages interaction, critical
thinking, and the application of class concepts when analyzing
a classmate's post, thereby deepening the discussion and
promoting a comprehensive understanding.

Example 2

Okay, now let's take a look at another example.
76 | DISCUSSIONS

Original

       Read
       Virtual team development (Kahlow, 2024)
       Post
       Answer at least three of the questions from the
       end of the chapter using the readings from this
       module and the information provided in the case
       study.

Revised

       Read Virtual team development (Kahlow,
       2024)
       This case study follows Jackie as she begins
       working on a remote team for her new job. In
       addition to highlighting some of the challenges
       and benefits of finding and performing remote
       work, this case study provides further insight
                                                          DISCUSSIONS | 77

into the stages of group development in an
online team. The case study background
information about related concepts are present
within the case; these include the hiring process,
socialization, phases of group development, and
some general challenges and benefits associated
with working remotely. The case concludes by
asking students to consider ways that primarily
virtual teams could best use the time they have
together in person.

Initial Post

In your initial post, answer at least three of the
questions from the end of the chapter using the
readings from this module and the information
provided in the case study.

Replies

      Discuss your answers to the questions
        with your classmates. In doing so you
        might. . .

      Reflect on the challenges and benefits
        Jackie faces in her remote work journey.

      Unpack the stages of group development
        in online teams. Have you witnessed
78 | DISCUSSIONS

                similar stages in your virtual teams?
             Dive into the hiring process and

                socialization in a remote setting. What
                creative onboarding strategies can you
                suggest for virtual teams?
             Imagine the possibilities! How can
                primarily virtual teams make the most of
                their in-person time together?

The revised prompt gives background on the reading,
improves structure and expectations for replies, and prompts
students to share personal experiences, adding a practical and
relatable aspect to the discussion.

Example 3

Original

       What rights do you have when you stand
       accused?
                                                                    DISCUSSIONS | 79

       The Sixth Amendment governs the rights of an
       accused once the trial process has commenced.
       You need to have read Chapter 10 of the Courts
       and Criminal Justice System in America text to
       answer the discussion questions below.
       Answer and discuss the following questions
       Of the enumerated rights guaranteed to a
       criminal defendant, which, in your opinion, is the
       most vital to his ability to put on an effective
       defense?
       Which of the rights guaranteed to a criminal
       defendant is the least important or the least vital
       to his ability to put on an effective defense?

This original prompt is fine, but how could it be even better?

Revised

       We're diving into the realm of the Sixth
       Amendment, a cornerstone in the rights of an
80 | DISCUSSIONS

accused during the trial process. Before we

embark on this journey, make sure you've delved

 into Chapter 10 of the Courts and Criminal Justice
System in America text.

Initial Post

Most Vital Right: Of the enumerated rights
guaranteed to a criminal defendant, which, in
your opinion, is the most vital to their ability to
put on an effective defense? Share your insights
asynchronously, providing examples or scenarios
that highlight the importance of your chosen
right.

Least Important or Vital: On the flip side, which
of the rights guaranteed to a criminal defendant
do you consider the least important or the least
vital to their ability to put on an effective
defense? Explain your reasoning, drawing
connections to real-life cases or legal principles.

Replies

When replying to your classmates, consider
adopting the role of a legal commentator. Offer
constructive feedback on their choices, and if you
have a different perspective, present it
                                                                    DISCUSSIONS | 81

       respectfully. This is our virtual courtroom, and
       diverse opinions contribute to a richer discussion!
       Challenge your peers respectfully by asking them
       to cite specific cases or legal precedents that
       support their viewpoints. Let's build a library of
       legal references!

The revised prompt is more engaging, has clearer instructions,
and gives suggestions for interacting with students.

Conclusion

Online discussions serve as a pivotal avenue for learner-learner
interaction in online courses. This chapter has delved into
strategies to transcend conventional discussions, transforming
them into dynamic, engaging, and creative prompts that evoke
thoughtful responses. The identification of common pitfalls,
such as disguised assignment prompts, has been highlighted,
emphasizing the need for a shift toward more interactive
approaches. Several best practices have been elucidated, urging
instructors to allow flexibility in interpretations, pose higher-
order thinking questions, and facilitate personal connections
with topics. Emphasizing real-world relevance, providing clear
82 | DISCUSSIONS

instructions, and fostering contextual understanding have
been underscored as essential elements.

The incorporation of creativity, coupled with personal
engagement, stands out as a recurring theme. The
encouragement of instructors to actively participate in
discussions ensures a guiding presence and humanizes the
online learning environment. Practical suggestions, such as the
addition of videos, case study scenarios, and research source
sharing, further enrich the discussion landscape.

References

Ahlf, M., & McNeil, S. G. (2023). An exploratory review of
   literature on moderation in asynchronous discussions.
   Distance Education, 44(1), 137-161.

Aloni, M., & Harrington, C. (2018). Research-based practices
   for improving the effectiveness of asynchronous online
   discussion boards. Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in
   Psychology, 4(4).

Cherney, M. R., Fetherston, M., & Johnsen, L. J. (2018).
   Online course student collaboration literature: A review
   and critique. Small Group Research, 49, 98-128.
   https://doi.org/10.1177/1046496417721627

Cho, M.-H., & Tobias, S. (2016). Should Instructors Require
                                                                    DISCUSSIONS | 83

   Discussion in Online Courses? Effects of Online Discussion
   on Community of Inquiry, Learner Time, Satisfaction, and
   Achievement--ProQuest. International Review of Research
   in Open and Distributed Learning, 17(2).

Dyer, T., Aroz, J., & Larson, E. (2018). Proximity in the online
   classroom: Engagement, relationships, and personalization.
   Journal of Instructional Research, 7, 11.

Goshtasbpour, F., Swinnerton, B. J., & Pickering, J. D. (2022).
   Twelve tips for engaging learners in online discussions.
   Medical Teacher, 44(3), 244-248.

Grant, S. (2022). Not Your Mother's Discussion Board:
   Creating Engaging Discussion Boards in the Introductory
   Business Law Course. Journal of Legal Studies Education,
   39(2), 127-165.

Lin, T.-C. (2023). Can online discussions benefit students'
   learning in online courses? Evidence From teaching
   introduction to microeconomics. E-Learning and Digital
   Media.

Lowenthal, P. R. (2009). The evolution and influence of social
   presence theory in online learning. Social Computing,
   Concepts, Methodologies, Tools and Applications,
   113-128.

Picciano, A. (2002). Beyond student perceptions: Issues of
84 | DISCUSSIONS

   interaction, presence, and performance in an online course.
   Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 6, 21-40.

Poole, D. M. (2000). Student participation in a discussion-
   oriented online course: A case study. Journal of Research on
   Computing in Education, 33(2), 162.

Richardson, J. C., & Swan, K. (2003). Examining social
   presence in online courses in relation to students' perceived
   learning and satisfaction, JALN, 7, 66-88.

Short, J. (1976). The social psychology of
   telecommunications. London; New York: Wiley.

Stock, E. (2019). Want students to remember what they learn?
   Have them teach it. EdSurge.

Swan, K., & Shih, L. F. (2005). On the nature and
   development of social presence in online course discussions.
   Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 9(3), 22.

Swan, K., & Shih, L. F. (2019). On the nature and
   development of social presence in online course discussions.
   Online Learning, 9(3). https://doi.org/10.24059/
   olj.v9i3.1788

Tirado-Morueta, R., Maraver-Lpez, P., & Hernando-Gmez,
   . (2017). Patterns of participation and social connections
   in online discussion forums. Small Group Research, 48,
   639-664. https://doi.org/10.1177/1046496417710726
                                                                    DISCUSSIONS | 85

Truhlar, A. M., Williams, K. M., & Walter, M. T. (2019).
   Student engagement with course content and peers in
   synchronous online courses discussions. Online Learning,
   22(4). https://doi.org/10.24059/olj.v22i4.1389

Woods, K., & Bliss, K. (2016). Facilitating successful online
   discussions. The Journal of Effective Teaching, 16(2), 76-92.

Young, S., Kelsey, D., & Lancaster, A. (2011). Predicted
   outcome value of e-mail communication: Factors that foster
   professional relational development between students and
   teachers. Communication Education, 60, 371-388.
   https://doi.org/10.1080/03634523.2011.563388
86 | QUIZZES

5.

QUIZZES

   Jessica Kahlow

The digital transformation in education has revolutionized the
way assessments are conducted. Online quizzes and exams have
become integral components of both traditional and virtual
learning environments, offering flexibility, immediacy, and a
range of interactive possibilities. This chapter explores the
essential elements and best practices for creating effective
online assessments that accurately measure student learning
and foster engagement. Online assessments serve multiple
purposes:

   Evaluating Learning: They help measure students'
      understanding and retention of course material.

   Providing Feedback: Instant feedback mechanisms in
      online quizzes can guide students in their learning
      journey.

   Encouraging Engagement: Interactive and diverse
      question types can make learning more engaging.
                                                   QUIZZES | 87

To Quiz or not
to Quiz

Exams may not be the best

fit for all courses. Exams are

stressful,  inequitable,

logistically difficult, not

empathetic, and frankly, no

one likes them (Saucier et      Crawford, Stephen (2012).
al., 2022). Quizzes may not     Aligning Assessments with
be the best assessment fit for  Learning Objectives.
a course, but they could be a   http://teachonline.asu.edu/
great activity for a course.    2012/10/
There are a lot of fun          aligning-assessments-with-le
                                arning-objectives/.

technologies out there (e.g., Google Forms, Kahoot, H5P,

Genially, Canva, and Quizlet) that provide additional

functionalities for creating engaging and interactive quizzes

that you could use as an interactive activity. However, be sure

to be prepared to make accommodations for students facing

technical issues or requiring additional support.

To start, are you sure a quiz is your best option? Recall
Bloom's taxonomy wheel from the page on selecting an
assessment type. According to that wheel, how many levels of
Bloom's learning verbs can be assessed with a multiple-choice
quiz? Right, only two learning objectives are tested with
multiple-choice questions. Those types of questions are most
88 | QUIZZES

beneficial when assessing if students can remember factual
information. And yet they are the go-to assessment strategy
a majority of the time. If you only use multiple choice quizzes
in your course, how are you going to find out if students can
apply and analyze the knowledge you have given them? As
you study the wheel, you will see that to bring students up to
using higher-order thinking skills, you will need to vary your
assessment techniques. However, there are some strategies you
can use that I'll discuss here to get your quiz questions up to
higher levels of Bloom's taxonomy.

Sometimes you will have to use multiple choice tests because
of time or grading constraints or the content covered in the
course (e.g., it would probably be fine to forgo quiz
assessments in an introduction to communication course, but
it might be less fine to forgo quizzes in a course where you're
literally teaching future doctors how to be a doctor. In this
case, you can still write your multiple choice questions to test
students on levels above the knowledge level. Here is an
example.
                    QUIZZES | 89

Original Question

Place the steps in order, from start to finish, for
designing a course with backward alignment.

   A. Write measurable, action-oriented
        learning objectives that address the
        appropriate level of Bloom's Taxonomy.

   B. Choose assessment methods that indicate
        students' mastery of the objectives and
        materials.

   C. Choose instructional materials that help
        students work towards those objectives

Rewritten Question

Tyler is using the backward design method to
develop his course. He has written his learning
90 | QUIZZES

       objectives for the lesson. What will he choose in
       his next step?

           A. Assessment methods
           B. Instructional activities
           C. LMS tools
           D. Technology resources

The question has been taken from the knowledge level to the
application level. Students have to know the order of steps
(knowledge level) and then apply it to a situation (application
level). We are testing both with one question.

Aligning Quiz Questions

Effective quizzes and exams must align with the course's
learning outcomes. Each question should directly relate to
a specific objective, ensuring that the assessment accurately
measures the intended outcomes. Incorporating a mix of
question types can assess different levels of cognitive skills,
from basic recall to higher-order thinking:

   Multiple-Choice Questions: Good for assessing factual
                                                                           QUIZZES | 91

      knowledge and comprehension.
   True/False Questions: Useful for quick checks of

      understanding.
   Short Answer and Essay Questions: Evaluate deeper

      understanding and the ability to articulate complex
      ideas.
   Matching and Ordering Questions: Test recognition
      and understanding of relationships between concepts.
   Scenario-Based Questions: Present real-life scenarios
      to assess application and analysis skills.

Online assessments support a variety of question types; refer
to the list below for question types, descriptions, Bloom level,
advantages, and disadvantages of each.
92 | QUIZZES

Question Type    Description                Advantages         Disadvantages
Multiple Choice
                 Multiple choice            MCQs are the       When
Multiple         questions present a        most versatile of  compared to
Response         question and ask           the                true/false and
                 students to choose         closed-ended       matching,
                 from a list of possible    question types.    multiple-choice
                 options/answers. Most      This versatility   items can be
                 MCQs feature one           stems from the     more
                 correct answer, and two    fact that the      challenging to
                 to four "distractor"       questions can      write. They also
                 choices that are           contain more       require the
                 incorrect. Questions       elaborate          creation of
                 can take the form of       scenarios that     plausible
                 incomplete sentences,      require careful    "distractors" or
                 statements, or complex     consideration      incorrect
                 scenarios. MCQs are        on the part of     answer options.
                 most appropriate for       the student.       As with other
                 factual, conceptual,       The probability    closed-ended
                 or procedural              of student         questions,
                 information. Some          guessing is also   multiple-choice
                 simple rules of thumb      relatively low.    assesses
                 that can make for more                        recognition over
                 effective questions:       MCQs are most      recall.
                                            appropriate for
                 MRQs are very similar      factual,           Scoring can be
                 to the MCQs except         conceptual, or     complicated if
                 that it has more than      procedural         students don't
                 one correct answer.        information        select all of the
                 MRQs present a                                correct answers,
                 question and ask                              which can make
                 students to choose                            these questions
                 multiple options from a                       seem more
                 list of possible options/                     difficult than
                 answers and usually has                       they really are.
                 more than one correct
                 answer.
                                              QUIZZES | 93

Question Type Description                     Advantages Disadvantages

Fill-in-the-blanks  Fill-in-the-blank         Fill-in-the-blank   FIB questions
                    questions are             questions assess    are only suitable
                    "constructed-response,"   unassisted recall   for questions
                    that require students to  of information,     that can be
                    create an answer and      rather than         answered with
                    typically one word        recognition.        short responses.
                    answers. Completion       They are            Additionally,
                    questions are also        relatively easy to  because
                    similar to fill-in-the    write.              students are free
                    blank question types.                         to answer any
                    Fill-in-the-blank                             way they
                    questions are most                            choose, FIB
                    appropriate for                               questions can
                    questions that                                lead to
                    require student recall                        difficulties in
                    over recognition.                             scoring if the
                    Examples include                              question is not
                    assessing the correct                         worded
                    spelling of items or in                       carefully.
                    cases when it is
                    desirable to ensure that
                    the students have
                    committed the
                    information to
                    memory.
94 | QUIZZES

Question Type  Description              Advantages         Disadvantages
True/False
               True/false questions     True/false         True/false
               present a statement,     questions are      questions are
               and prompt the           among the          limited in what
               student to choose        easiest to write.  kinds of student
               whether the statement                       mastery they
               is true. Students                           can assess. They
               typically have a great                      have a relatively
               deal of experience with                     high probability
               this type of question.                      of student
               T/F questions are most                      guessing the
               appropriate for factual                     correct answer
               information and                             (50%). True/
               naturally                                   false also
               dichotomous                                 assesses
               information                                 recognition of
               (information with only                      information, as
               two plausible                               opposed to
               possibilities).                             recall.
               Dichotomous
               information is "either/
               or" in nature.
                                         QUIZZES | 95

Question Type  Description               Advantages Disadvantages
Matching
               Matching questions        Matching items    Matching
               involve matching paired   can assess a      assesses
               lists that require        large amount of   recognition
               students to correctly     information       rather than
               identify, or "match"      relative to       recall of
               depending on the          multiple-choice   information.
               relationship between      questions. If
               the items. These are      developed
               most appropriate for      carefully, the
               assessing student         probability of
               understanding of          guessing is low.
               related information.
               Examples of related
               items include states and
               capitals, terms and
               definitions, tools and
               uses, and events and
               dates.
96 | QUIZZES

Question Type  Description                Advantages Disadvantages

Essay/Short    Essays and short-answer    Essay questions     There are two
Answer         types are                  are the only        main
               constructed-response       question type       disadvantages to
               questions. However,        that can            essay questions
               essay answers are          effectively assess  -- time
               typically much longer      all six levels of   requirements
               than those of              Bloom's             and grading
               short-answer, ranging      Taxonomy.           consistency.
               from a few paragraphs      They allow          Essays are
               to several pages. Most     students to         time-consuming
               appropriate for            express their       for students to
               assessments that cannot    thoughts and        complete.
               be accomplished with       opinions in         Scoring can be
               other question types.      writing,            difficult because
               Because essays are the     granting a          of the variety of
               only question types        clearer picture     answers, as well
               that can effectively       of the level of     as the "halo
               assess the highest levels  student             effect" (students
               of student mastery,        understanding.      rewarded for
               they are the only option   Finally, as         strong writing
               if the goal of testing is  open-ended          skills as opposed
               the assessment of          questions, they     to
               synthesis and              assess recall over  demonstrated
               evaluation levels.         recognition.        mastery of the
                                                              content).

Writing Good Quiz Questions

In contemporary education, multiple-choice examinations are
inescapable. Yet, studies over decades confirm that many of the
questions used in these tests are of dubious validity because of
shoddy construction. This activity provides a stepwise guide
to construct good multiple-choice questions (MCQs). Before
                                                                           QUIZZES | 97

you get started writing a question, be certain that you are
testing an important concept--a "take-home" message that
you really want the learners to understand and remember.
Questions about minutiae are easier to write, so avoid the
temptation.

What are the parts of a question?

   The stem is the part that asks the question.
   The distractors are the incorrect answer options.
   The key is the correct answer choice.

Writing The Stem

Probably, the most important single concept in writing a
strong MCQ is to have a well-focused stem. That means that
the main idea of the question must be found in the stem.
A good way to test the quality of your stem is to cover the
options and see if you can answer the question.

Examples of good, well-focused
stems

   "On computed tomography (CT), what is the typical
      contrast enhancement pattern of a hepatic cavernous
      hemangioma?"
98 | QUIZZES

   "What pancreatic tumor most often shows
      radiographically evident calcification?"

Examples of poor, unfocused stems

   "Which of the following is true regarding dual-energy
      CT?" "Concerning ovarian carcinoma, it is correct
      that:"

   Such unfocused stems turn an MCQ into a group of
      loosely related true-false questions.

In creating your stem, use simple wording and avoid any
extraneous information not needed to answer the question.

Example of a stem with extraneous
information

   "Numbness of the right side of the lower lip of a 60-year-
      old woman with facial injury due to a motorcycle
      accident is most likely caused by a fractured mandible
      with displacement of the ________."

Unnecessary information removed

   "With mandibular fracture, displacement of what
      structure is the most likely cause of lower lip
      numbness?"
                                                                           QUIZZES | 99

Test takers benefit from clarity and conciseness. Be sure to
avoid "negative" constructions:

   "...each of the following EXCEPT,"
   "Which of the following is NOT associated with..."

You want the test takers to stay in "find the right answer"
mode.

Writing the Answer Choices

The correct answer (or key)

The most important attribute is that the choice identified as
correct must be 100% incontrovertible. Ideally, you should
have a manuscript citation or reference available for
corroboration. In writing the correct answer, avoid nebulous
terms such as "frequently," "often," "rarely," or "sometimes"
because they can give clues as to what the correct answer is.

The distractors

From the psychometric standpoint, having two distractors is
fine, although three is more typical. These can be the most
challenging part of constructing a good question because
plausible distractors are difficult to write. Your distractors
should be plausible and not be obvious "throw-away" options.
100 | QUIZZES

Using plausible distractors helps ensure the learner really
knows the correct answer and isn't just deducing the right
answer. For similar reasons, "all of the above" and "none of the
above" are frowned upon. Each question should test a single
concept.

Avoiding clues in the answer options

Examples of constructions that draw attention to one of the
choices:

          One option is significantly longer or shorter than
            the others (longer answers are usually correct).

   Definite modifiers such as "always" or "never" (clues
      that an answer is false)

   A choice "highlighted" by capitalization, quotation
      marks, or parentheses

   A choice whose grammar doesn't agree with the stem
   And don't include two options that form a mutually

      exclusive pair, such as "Worse when the patient inhales"
      and "Worse when the patient exhales" because
      frequently, one of the pair is the correct answer,
      improving the guessing odds for the test taker.
                                                                          QUIZZES | 101

Purpose of Bloom's Taxonomy

Bloom's Taxonomy provides a framework for creating well-
structured quiz questions that assess different levels of
cognitive skills. When writing Multiple Choice Questions
(MCQs) or Multiple Response Questions (MRQs) (where
students can select more than one correct answer), it's
important to align each question with the appropriate
cognitive level.

While MCQs and MRQs are typically associated with lower-
level thinking, such as recall and comprehension, but with
thoughtful question crafting, they can reach the Evaluate and
Create levels of Bloom's Taxonomy.

Questions by Bloom's Level

Remember

The remembering level forms the base of Bloom's Taxonomy
pyramid. Because it is the lowest complexity, many of the verbs
in this section are in the form of questions. You can use this
level of questioning to ensure students can recall specific
information from the lesson.
102 | QUIZZES

Best Practices

   Keep the questions straightforward.
   Use simple, clear language.
   Ensure distractors (incorrect answers) are plausible to

      avoid guesswork.

Examples

   Define mercantilism.
   Name the inventor of the telephone.
   List the 13 original colonies .
   Label the capitals on this map of the United States.
   Locate the glossary in your textbook.
   Match the following inventors with their inventions.
   Select the correct author of "War and Peace" from the

      following list.

Understand

At the understanding level, you want students to show that
they can go beyond basic recall by understanding what the
facts mean. The questions at this level should allow you to
see if your students understand the main idea and are able to
interpret or summarize the ideas in their own words.
                QUIZZES | 103

Best Practices

   Focus on questions that ask students to explain or
      classify concepts.

   Use distractors that test common misconceptions.
   Ensure correct answers involve interpretation, not mere

      recall.

Examples

 Explain the law of inertia using an example from an
   amusement park.

 Outline the main arguments for and against year-round
   education.

 Discuss what it means to use context to determine the
   meaning of a word.

 Translate this passage into English.
 Describe what is happening in this Civil War picture.
 Identify the correct method for disposing of recyclable

   trash.
 Which statements support implementing school

   uniforms?

Apply

At the applying level, students must show that they can apply
the information they have learned. Students can demonstrate
104 | QUIZZES

their grasp of the material at this level by solving problems and
creating projects.

Best Practices

   Use real-world scenarios to assess how students can
      apply their learning.

   Ensure distractors represent common mistakes or
      incorrect applications of knowledge.

   Provide sufficient context to make the scenario clear.

Examples

   Using the information you have learned about mixed
      numbers, solve the following questions.

   Use Newton's Laws of Motion to explain how a model
      rocket works.

   Using the information you have learned about
      aerodynamics, construct a paper airplane that minimizes
      drag.

   Create and perform a skit that dramatizes an event from
      the civil rights era.

   Demonstrate how changing the location of the fulcrum
      affects a tabletop lever.

   Classify each observed mineral based on the criteria
      learned in class.

   Apply the rule of 70 to determine how quickly $1,000
                                                                         QUIZZES | 105

      would double if earning 5 percent interest.

Analyze

Analyze questions need to assess the ability to break
information into components and understand their
relationships. These questions often require students to
examine data, compare different ideas, or determine
relationships.

Best Practices

   Ask students to identify relationships, causes, or
      underlying principles.

   Provide scenarios that require critical thinking and
      comparison.

   Use distractors that represent incomplete or incorrect
      analysis.

Examples

   Which of the following best explains the relationship
      between supply and demand in a competitive market?

   Which of the following factors likely contributed to the
      economic recession of 2008?
106 | QUIZZES

Evaluate

Evaluate questions ask students to assess the ability to make
judgments based on criteria and standards. These questions
often involve decision-making, prioritizing options, or
determining the best course of action.

Best Practices

   Focus on real-life dilemmas or problems that require
      students to make informed judgments.

   Ensure distractors represent common but flawed
      evaluations.

   Make the criteria for evaluation clear, even if implicit.

Examples

   Which of the following actions would be the most
      ethical response in a case of workplace discrimination?

   Which of the following policies would be most effective
      in reducing unemployment?

Create

Create questions typically are not best suited for a quiz, but
it could be done through essay questions. Asking students to
"create" something in a quiz can be challenging, especially
                                                                          QUIZZES | 107

when quizzes are often designed for objective assessments.
While it's possible to integrate creation-focused tasks into a
quiz by using innovative question types that encourage
students to apply higher-order thinking, these types of
assessments are typically better suited as assignments.

Best Practices

   Clarity and Guidelines: Since creation tasks are more
      subjective, ensure that questions are clear and provide
      specific expectations for what students should create.

   Rubrics: Use detailed rubrics that outline criteria like
      originality, depth of thought, relevance, and adherence
      to course content. Rubrics will help in grading creative
      assignments more objectively.

   Scaffolded Support: Consider scaffolding the creation
      process. For example, if the final product is complex, you
      can ask students to submit drafts or preliminary ideas in
      earlier quizzes.

Examples

   Ask students to create a thesis statement based on
      provided data or readings.

   Provide a real-world problem and ask students to design
      a solution or response
108 | QUIZZES

Overall Tips for Writing Good
Quiz/Exam Questions

To write effective multiple-choice and multiple-response
questions, follow these guidelines to ensure clarity, fairness,
and alignment with learning outcomes.

   Questions should be clear, concise, and free of
      ambiguity to prevent misinterpretation.

   Distractors (incorrect answer options) should be
      plausible so that students can't easily eliminate them,
      and terms like "always" or "never" should be avoided to
      prevent obvious answers.

   Options like "all of the above" and "none of the above"
      should be used sparingly.

   Ensure that questions are culturally neutral, accessible to
      all students (including those with disabilities), and free
      of bias.

   Each question should be directly related to a learning
      outcome and cover a single concept, with simple and
      precise language. Incorporating a variety of question
      difficulties will help differentiate levels of student
      understanding.

When designing a quiz or exam,

 1. Determine its purpose: formative (to provide ongoing
                                                                         QUIZZES | 109

      feedback) or summative (for final evaluation).
 2. Choose question types that align with your learning

      objectives and cover a range of cognitive levels.
 3. Provide timely feedback so that students can learn from

      their mistakes.
 4. Before releasing the assessment, test it yourself or with a

      colleague to ensure clarity, technical functionality, and
      appropriate timing.
 5. After the assessment, analyze the results to spot trends or
      issues that can highlight areas where students struggled,
      potentially indicating gaps in instruction.

To ensure your questions are focused, make sure the main idea
is clearly stated in the question stem and use simple wording.
All answer options should be plausible, avoiding complex or
tricky language. Remember, bad questions are easier to write
than good ones. While writing effective questions can be
challenging, these straightforward principles will help create
assessments that are clear, fair, and valid, providing better
learning opportunities for your students.

Security and Academic Integrity

There are also several things you can do to maintain the
integrity of online assessments:

   Randomize Questions: Use question pools and
110 | QUIZZES

      randomization to create unique quizzes for each student.
   Timed Assessments: Limit the time available to

      complete the quiz to reduce the likelihood of cheating.
   Proctoring Tools: Use online proctoring services if

      necessary to monitor exams. Respondus Monitor helps
      maintain academic integrity in high-stakes online exams
      by providing secure proctoring environments.

Conclusion

Creating effective online quizzes and exams requires careful
planning, a deep understanding of assessment principles, and
the strategic use of technology. By aligning assessments with
learning objectives, diversifying question types, ensuring
clarity and fairness, and leveraging digital tools, educators can
design assessments that not only measure student learning
accurately but also enhance the overall learning experience.

References

Brame, C. J. (2013). Writing good multiple-choice test
   questions. https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-pages/
   writing-good-multiple-choice-test-questions/

Moniquemuro. (2019). How to create a quiz in your online
                                                                      QUIZZES | 111

course (that doesn't suck). ProofMango.
https://proofmango.com/create-a-quiz-in-online-course/

Saucier, D. A., Renken, N. D., & Schiffer, A. A. (2022). Five
   reasons to stop giving exams in class. Faculty Focus.
   https://www.facultyfocus.com/articles/educational-
   assessment/five-reasons-to-stop-giving-exams-in-class/

Vanderbilt University Center for Teaching. (n.d.). Giving

exams  online:  Strategies                and  tools.

https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/online-exams/

Ye, H. (2019). Best practices for online quizzes. FOCUS
   Center for Teaching and Learning, Cedarville University.
   https://ctl.cedarville.edu/wp/best-practices-for-online-
   quizzes/
112 | CHOOSING THE RIGHT TOOL

6.

CHOOSING THE RIGHT
TOOL

   Jessica Kahlow; Tamika M. Porter; and
   Malikah R. Nu-Man

How Technology Helps Measure
Student Learning

Technology is a powerful ally for teachers, especially in
measuring student learning. With the use of digital formative
assessments, teachers can expedite their ability to provide
student feedback in real-time. Also, students are interacting
with their assignments, receiving teacher input, and invested
and motivated in their learning (Timmis et al., 2016).

Timmis, Broadfoot, Sutherland, and Oldfield (2016)
encourage teachers to reflect on the "four C's" when using
technology to enhance a lesson. Ask yourself, does the use
of technology allow for increased collaboration or critical
thinking opportunities? Are students able to communicate
their ideas uniquely and are students able to demonstrate
                                              CHOOSING THE RIGHT TOOL | 113

creative thinking? Following this format provides for lessons
that foster student engagement, with technology as an
enhancement tool. Digital formative assessments provide
teachers the opportunity to give individual feedback quicker
and in real-time than traditional non-digital paper and pen
formative assessments. Thus, when students are engaging,
receiving timely feedback from their teachers, and intrinsically
motivated by the feedback they are receiving from their
teacher, learning is taking place (Timmis et al., 2016).

Types of Assessments and Tools

There are a plethora of ways in which assessment can occur.
Assessment is a broad term that encompasses all actions that
teachers and students engage in to retrieve information that
can be used to evaluate and change teaching and learning at
the end of a given time period (Timmis et al., 2016). Teachers
are able to experience drastic improvements in their skills when
making regular use of assessment methods.

As previously mentioned, assessment falls into two broad
categories: formative and summative approaches. Formative
assessment is a means for determining how the learning is
taking place, on the way toward meeting some end goal.
Alternatively, the final outcome of a learning intervention is
measured through summative assessment. Both of these types
114 | CHOOSING THE RIGHT TOOL

of assessment are crucial in supporting current and future
students in their learning.

Formative Assessment Technology
Tools

Gone are the days of simple clickers and bells. Educators now
have access to a variety of tools that allow for instant feedback.
Retrieval Practice is an assessment tool that takes place during
the learning process to help build knowledge networks in
students' minds and help reinforce their learning. It allows the
educator to continuously gauge student learning while making
it effortful and challenging (Agarwal, 2017).

Retrieval Practice Applications

Retrieval practice focuses on helping students retrieve
information out of their heads, instead of focusing on pouring
knowledge into their heads (Agarwal, 2017). It allows the
educator to ensure that accurate questions and assessment
tools are being utilized to effectively analyze student learning.
Instant feedback may be gathered on an individual basis or as a
group, depending on the dynamics of the classroom.

Socrative, Kahoot, Quizziz, and Quizlet are all examples of
examples of educational technologies that allow teachers and
students to attain instant results on the learning taking place.
The students may access the system using a variety of different
                                              CHOOSING THE RIGHT TOOL | 115

technological tools. They might use the tool from within a
learning management system (LMS), or on a mobile device.
Teachers can have students work through retrieval practice
together (such as when using a polling tool like PollEverywhere
or a game-like tool like Kahoot).

There are also educational technology tools that are more self-
paced and provide opportunities for learners to work at their
own pace. Many of these services are starting to allow for either
approach to be used. Quizlet flashcards and some of their
games such as Scatter, Match, and Gravity can be used in a
self-directed way by students. Quizlet also has a game called
Quizlet Live that can be used with a group of students at one
time for retrieval practice.

Summative Assessment Technology
Tools

Learning outcomes must also be observed from a broader
scope, allowing for benchmarks of achievement to be
evaluated. Summative assessment tools allow educators to
analyze the overall achievement of students. Two broad
methods for using technology for summative assessment are
discussed in this section: The Learning Management System
(LMS) and electronic portfolios (e-Portfolios).
116 | CHOOSING THE RIGHT TOOL

Learning Management Systems

A learning management system (LMS) is often considered the
centerpiece of a teacher's summative assessment toolbox.
Accessibility is a vital part to utilizing both formative and
summative assessment tools virtually. Teachers must have
differentiated technology tools that are aligned with student
learning outcomes and that allow the effective gauging of
student learning (Steele, 2015). Most Learning Management
Systems have embedded tools that allow for the ease-of-access
by most teachers, regardless of their technology familiarity.

The LMS allows for transparency amongst all stakeholders in
the learning process. Students can access resources and
assignments while communicating with their peers and
teacher. Parents may monitor student progress while also
communicating with the teacher. Often times what is
communicated in class does not make it home to the parents.
The LMS removes this hindrance in communication.

Finally, for the teacher, the LMS is the ultimate assessment
tool. The most beneficial part of the LMS is that both
formative and summative assessments may be given through
it. If your school or district has already adopted an LMS, it is
best to use it since students, parents, and other stakeholders
will already be familiar with it.

If your school or district has not adopted an LMS, there are
                                              CHOOSING THE RIGHT TOOL | 117

still options available. You may choose to operate your course
by using a LMS like Schoology, Jupiter Ed, Engrade, Canvas,
or Google Classroom. Many school districts have implemented
gradebooks that mimic the LMS gradebook, but lack the
accessibility in linking and hyperlinking to the array of
assessment tools that they use regularly. The systems
previously mentioned allow you to run your course, virtually
as minimally or involved as you would like, and are tailored to
accommodate all levels of technology users. The experienced
or novice teacher may manipulate the LMS in a way that suits
the needs of their students and their course design.

ePortfolios

One method of helping students demonstrate their global
learning is through the use of an eportfolio. An E-Portfolio
is an electronic account of student work/progress used at all
educational levels from early education through higher
education. Eportfolios can support deep learning and support
reflective practices across various learning contexts as they
facilitate overall learning. The blend of learning products that
exist within the eportfolio makes learning visible to all
stakeholders, but especially the student. The eportfolio allows
for students to reflect on and integrate their work to view
overall learning progress. The reason that eportfolios have
become a successful assessment tool is because they require
significant and purposeful work from the student. During the
118 | CHOOSING THE RIGHT TOOL

development process students may experience student-faculty
interaction, which allows students to evaluate and discuss their
own learning over time (Harring & Luo, 2016).

Through websites like Google an educator may receive step-
by-step guidance on how to create an eportfolio with their
students. This tool would of course be most effective if linked
to the LMS already utilized by the institution. If the school-
site is not accessing a LMS, an eportfolio is still an option, as
the student may compile the artifacts via an alternative fashion.
Eportfolios make learning visible to all stakeholders. Most
importantly to the students, it can help heighten self-efficacy.
This powerful pedagogical tool can support deep and
integrative learning. Deep learning may occur as students are
able to make their learning relative to their own experiences.
Developing an eportfolio allows the students to make
connections to their everyday life, while showcasing their areas
of strength. Eportfolios allow students to show their
experiences, along with reflecting on their own learning and
the progress made therein (Harring & Luo, 2016).

The artifacts, rubrics, and criteria for the eportfolio will vary
based on the course layout and educational level of the
students. Ultimately, the eportfolio would involve signature
assignments representative of student learning over a longer
period. The period may span a semester, a school year, or even
a school career. Digital assignments through the LMS may
allow for summative assessments to be less stressful. Students
                                             CHOOSING THE RIGHT TOOL | 119

have different approaches to learning and to foster and
enhance their education we need to understand their learning
style. This includes how assessments have a direct impact in
learning, and how they perceive themselves (Al Kadri et al.,
2009). The students verbalized the negative impact felt from
the limited learning opportunities that summative assessments
offer and expressed preference for formative assessment, which
may foster a deeper approach to learning. Student achievement
is elevated when they are able to participate in both formative
and summative assessment to guide learning. During the
summative assessment process students may be allowed to
upload videos, files, and documents they originate for
benchmark assignments developed by their teacher to show
their overall learning.

Tool Selection

The accessibility of the technology tools and apps can be
overwhelming for any teacher to choose. Picking the right app
or tool that your students can easily navigate while driving
home your lesson objectives. When you are selecting a tool take
into consideration the following items:

Start small

Trying to get a handle on too many technologies causes
unnecessary stress. Learning a digital instrument takes time
120 | CHOOSING THE RIGHT TOOL

and applying it as part of the lesson can range from an hour
to a couple of days. Knowing if it will work smoothly during
the class session. You also must provide secure and specific
directions that you go over, demonstrate and have availability
all semester. Having clear instructions that you review, model
and have available all semester is helpful.

Focus on your goals

It can be tempting to get caught up in the list of features a
technology tool provides and miss determining whether or not
the educational goal will be met through its use. Choose a
few tools at a time and try them out. Give them a test run to
see which are the easiest to learn and use. Read the reviews
to gauge whether they met the basics needs other customers
and how likely will the product align your lesson goals. This
method leads to the actual picking of the best tools that will
serve your needs. The more you try out the tools, the easier
it gets because you will know what you want. Move on to
another if the app no longer meets your demands.

Assess what you have

Take stock of the technology available in your class and on
your campus. Knowing the technology capabilities determines
in what capacity the app is useful. Also, you should find out
what websites and apps your students used in the past. Be
                                              CHOOSING THE RIGHT TOOL | 121

mindful of district firewalls, therefore check ahead if the
technology is capable.

Consider whether to pay for tools

As a teacher, the excitement of a new tool and the possibilities
of enhancing your lessons is overpowering. Getting clear on
how you intend to pay for them is crucial. Questions to ask
yourself include are you willing to pay or go the free route? If
you are ready to pay, who will be paying for the tool? What are
the included features in the tech and how much of a difference
does paying make? How does the company make their money
and stay sustainable, when they give their tool away for free? Is
there a potential for our students' data to be the produce that
is being bought and sold?

Revise and reflect

Go back to your goals and reflect on how well has the tool
fulfilled your needs. How long and often is the app used? Do
any problems arise while using the new tech? Remember, if it
is not working well enough, you can pick another. Determine
how it will be paid for - this reflection can reinforce the digital
divide if we do not think carefully about who will bear the
cost.
122 | CHOOSING THE RIGHT TOOL

                         Conclusion

Some                   The selection of tools may
technology-            seem like a difficult process at
based                  first glance. However, when
assessment             you take into consideration
tools and              the hype of the tool, privacy,
resources              and the legal ramifications
                       you may have using a tool,
              Retri    take a deep breathe and start
                eval   small and determine whether
                Pract  the tool you are selecting will
                ice    achieve the goals you have for
                Tool   using it in your classroom.
                       By utilizing the steps of
              Socra    selecting tools discussed in
                tive   this chapter, you will be
                       trying the best tools for your
              Kaho     classroom that are available.
                ot     Also, you will more likely
                       implement and keep the
              Quizi    tools you select. Therefore,
                zz     take your time, go through
                       the steps discussed in this
              Quizl    chapter, and you will have
                et     plenty of powerful tools to
                       utilize in your classroom.
              Poll
                Ever
                ywh
                            CHOOSING THE RIGHT TOOL | 123

References

Nu-Man, M.R., and Porter,                    ere
   T.M., (2018). Igniting                  Scho
   Your Teaching with
   Educational Technology                    olog
   A Resources for New                       y
   Teachers. Editors: Matt                 Jupit
   Rhoads & Bonni                            er Ed
   Stachowiak. Retrieved                   Goog
   from                                      le
                                             Class
                                             room
                                           H5P

https://edd7032017f2.pressbooks.com/

Antoine, F. M, Porter, T.M., and Reye-Aceytuno, E., (2018).

Igniting Your Teaching with Educational Technology A

Resources for New Teachers. Editors: Matt Rhoads &

Bonni  Stachowiak.               Retrieved          from

https://edd7032017f2.pressbooks.com/chapter/5/

A complete reference list of the original ebook Igniting Your

Teaching with Educational Technology A Resources for

New    Teachers,            can       be        viewed
124 | CHOOSING THE RIGHT TOOL

   at: https://edd7032017f2.pressbooks.com/back-matter/
   references/
                              SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION | 125

7.

SUBJECT EXPERTISE
AND EVALUATION

   Jessica Kahlow

Instructional designers (IDs) play a pivotal role in the design
and evaluation of educational experiences. Their expertise in
pedagogy, learning theory, and educational technology equips
them to design courses that foster meaningful learning.
However, a common question arises: How can IDs design and
evaluate courses when they don't know the content? This chapter
explains why instructional designers do not need to be SMEs
to be effective, the value they bring to the educational process,
and how they collaborate with SMEs to create impactful
learning experiences.

The Role of the SME in Evaluation

But first, let's talk about the role of the SME in evaluating
courses. In the process of designing and evaluating educational
courses, instructional designers (IDs) and subject matter
experts (SMEs) play distinct yet complementary roles. While
126 | SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION

IDs focus on course structure, pedagogy, and user experience,
SMEs bring specialized knowledge that ensures the course
content is both accurate and relevant. This chapter delves into
the crucial role SMEs play in course evaluation, highlighting
their responsibilities and how they collaborate with
instructional designers to create high-quality learning
experiences.

1. Ensuring Content Accuracy and
Relevance

One of the primary roles of an SME during course evaluation
is to verify the accuracy of the content. SMEs meticulously
review the material to confirm that all facts, data, and
information are correct and align with current academic
research or industry standards. This step is vital for
maintaining the credibility of the course and ensuring learners
are provided with reliable information.

SMEs also assess the content's relevance to the stated learning
objectives. They ensure that all topics covered contribute
meaningfully to the learning outcomes and that the material
reflects the real-world applications necessary for the learner's
success in the field.
                              SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION | 127

2. Reviewing Depth and Breadth of
Content

SMEs evaluate whether the course content offers an
appropriate level of complexity for the target
audience--whether it is introductory, intermediate, or
advanced. They consider whether the material is presented at
a depth that matches the learners' needs, ensuring it neither
overwhelms novices nor underserves advanced learners.

In addition, SMEs ensure that the course covers all necessary
topics thoroughly. They check for balanced coverage, making
sure that no critical details are left out and that excessive or
unrelated content is avoided. This helps create a
comprehensive learning experience that is neither too
superficial nor overly detailed.

3. Reviewing Instructional Material
Quality

SMEs contribute to the clarity and comprehensibility of
instructional materials. They review explanations, examples,
and supplementary resources to ensure that complex concepts
are conveyed in a way that learners can understand. This
feedback can help refine content so that learners at various
levels can grasp the information effectively. SMEs may also
suggest additional readings, articles, or multimedia resources
128 | SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION

that enhance the learner's understanding of the topic. Their
expertise allows for recommendations that add depth and
variety to the learning experience.

The Role of Instructional
Designers in Evaluation

Instructional designers are experts in the art and science of
learning. Their competencies include understanding how
learners absorb, retain, and apply information, as well as how
to design content that supports these processes. These skills
enable IDs to:

   Apply Learning Theories: IDs use theories such as
      constructivism, behaviorism, and cognitivism to shape
      learning environments that encourage active
      participation and knowledge retention.

   Utilize Design Frameworks: Models like ADDIE
      (Analysis, Design, Development, Implementation,
      Evaluation) and Bloom's Taxonomy are central to how
      IDs approach course creation and feedback, ensuring
      that each stage is purposeful and effective.

   Incorporate Universal Design Principles: IDs
      integrate strategies that make learning accessible and
      inclusive, considering varied learning styles, abilities, and
      needs.
                     SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION | 129

Why Instructional Designers Don't
Need to Be SMEs

The ID's strength lies in their specialized
knowledge of instructional design principles,
which are transferable across disciplines. Here's
why they don't need to be subject matter
experts:

1. Focus on Pedagogy Over Content

Instructional designers are experts in how
content should be taught, not necessarily what
content is being taught. Their role centers on
facilitating learning through effective course
structure, intuitive navigation, engaging
multimedia, and assessment alignment. By
focusing on the design aspect, IDs ensure that
learners can interact with content in a way that
maximizes comprehension and retention.

2. Collaboration with Subject Matter
Experts

The most successful course development
130 | SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION

       projects are collaborative. SMEs contribute the
       content knowledge that is essential for accuracy
       and comprehensiveness, while IDs contribute
       their design and pedagogical expertise. This
       partnership allows each professional to work to
       their strengths.

       As an instructional designer, I am not an expert
       in every course I design. I've designed courses in
       everything from microbiology to astrophysics to
       social work (and more). Am I an expert in any of
       those things? No. Are they still good courses?
       Yes.

      3. Objectivity and a Fresh Perspective

       An ID's distance from the content can be an
       asset. Without being immersed in the subject,
       IDs can evaluate courses from a learner's
       perspective, identifying areas where instructions
       may be unclear, learning objectives may be
       misaligned, or engagement may be lacking. This
       objectivity enables them to focus on the user
       experience and learning flow, ensuring that
       courses meet the needs of diverse learners.
                              SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION | 131

Evaluation is a key part of the instructional design process.
When IDs assess a course, their focus is on elements such as:

   Alignment of Learning Outcomes and Assessments:
      IDs ensure that the learning goals stated at the beginning
      of a module are effectively assessed by the end.

   Content Organization and Navigation: They review
      whether the course structure allows for logical
      progression, easy navigation, and minimal cognitive
      load.

   Engagement and Interactivity: IDs evaluate whether
      the course incorporates elements that engage learners,
      such as multimedia, discussion forums, or practical
      exercises.

   Accessibility and Inclusivity: IDs check that the
      course adheres to standards for accessibility, making
      content available to learners with different needs and
      abilities.

These factors are essential regardless of the specific subject
matter. By concentrating on these components, instructional
designers ensure that a course meets quality standards and
fosters a positive learning experience.
132 | SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION

     Common Myths: Instructional
     Designers and Subject Expertise

       It is a common misconception that instructional
       designers need to be SMEs to provide valuable
       feedback or create meaningful courses. Let's
       debunk some of these myths:

             Myth 1: Only SMEs Can Ensure
                Content Accuracy
                While SMEs are essential for content
                accuracy, IDs are crucial for making that
                content teachable and learnable. IDs ask
                questions and guide SMEs on how to
                present information so that it is digestible
                to the learner.

             Myth 2: IDs Without Subject Expertise
                Cannot Create Deeply Engaging
                Content
                Engagement comes from how content is
                presented, not just what it is. IDs know
                how to weave engagement strategies into
                any content by leveraging design
                principles and interactive tools.
                              SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION | 133

             Myth 3: IDs Can't Effectively Evaluate
                Courses Outside Their Subject Area
                IDs bring an understanding of evaluation
                frameworks and learner-centric design
                that allows them to assess a course's
                quality, regardless of the topic. Their
                evaluations focus on whether the course
                structure supports learning, not on the
                depth of content knowledge.

Wearing Both the ID and SME
Hats

In some cases, professionals may find themselves taking on
both the role of an instructional designer and a subject matter
expert. This dual role can be both advantageous and
challenging. When one person embodies expertise in both
course design and the subject content, there are unique
considerations to keep in mind to maintain objectivity, quality,
and balance throughout the course development and
evaluation processes.
134 | SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION

Advantages of Being Both ID and SME

 1. Streamlined Communication: One of the most
      significant advantages of wearing both the ID and SME
      hats is the elimination of back-and-forth
      communication between separate roles. Decisions can be
      made more swiftly, as the person in the dual role already
      possesses the relevant knowledge and design expertise.

 2. Deep Integration of Content and Pedagogy: With
      expertise in both areas, the dual-role professional can
      seamlessly align course content with instructional
      strategies. This integration ensures that the learning
      materials and assessments are pedagogically sound and
      content-rich.

 3. Unified Vision: The course can reflect a cohesive vision
      because one individual oversees both content accuracy
      and instructional strategy. This unity can help create a
      course that is both engaging and informative without
      disconnects between the content and its presentation.

Challenges of Being Both ID and SME

 1. Potential Bias: One of the main challenges is
      maintaining objectivity. As an SME, there is a natural
      tendency to focus heavily on content depth and
      complexity. However, when acting as an ID, the goal is
      to simplify complex topics for the target learner.
                              SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION | 135

      Balancing this dual focus can be difficult; there may be a
      risk of overloading learners with information or,
      conversely, oversimplifying key concepts.
 2. Balancing Detail with Pedagogy: SMEs often have
      extensive knowledge and may assume that certain
      advanced details are necessary for learners. As an ID, it is
      important to step back and determine which details are
      truly essential and which might overwhelm or distract
      from the learning objectives.
 3. Managing Time and Resources: Combining the roles
      of ID and SME can be time-intensive. The individual
      must allocate sufficient time to both aspects of course
      development, which requires disciplined time
      management and clear prioritization.

Wearing both the ID and SME hats can be a rewarding
challenge that combines deep content knowledge with
effective course design strategies. While this dual role offers
significant advantages, such as streamlined decision-making
and a unified course vision, it also demands careful balance,
objectivity, and time management. By approaching each phase
of the course creation process with a clear focus and involving
external reviewers for additional perspectives, professionals can
create courses that are engaging, learner-centric, and content-
strong.
136 | SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION

Conclusion

Instructional designers are the bridge between content experts
and learners. They don't need to be subject matter experts
because their role is to shape how content is delivered in a way
that enhances learning. By partnering with SMEs, maintaining
an objective viewpoint, and applying universal instructional
design principles, IDs create courses that are effective,
engaging, and accessible. The distinct yet complementary
expertise of both IDs and SMEs ensures that learners receive
high-quality education that is both accurate and pedagogically
sound.

Discussion Questions

 1. Do you think instructional designers (IDs) need to be
      subject matter experts (SMEs) in the content they are
      designing courses for? What role does this distinction
      play in the design process?

 2. In your opinion, what are the most significant benefits
      of having instructional designers and subject matter
      experts collaborate on course design and evaluation?
      How does this partnership enhance the quality of the
      learning experience?

 3. The chapter mentions that an instructional designer's
      distance from the content allows them to evaluate
      courses from a learner's perspective. How does this
                           SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION | 137

    "outsider" view contribute to better course design?
4. Consider the myths about instructional designers (e.g.,

    they need to be SMEs to ensure content accuracy or
    create engaging content). How do these myths impact
    the understanding of the role of instructional designers
    in the educational process?
5. What are some strategies that instructional designers can
    use when evaluating a course without being an expert in
    its content? How can they ensure that the course meets
    educational goals even without deep subject knowledge?
6. Discuss the pros and cons of wearing both the
    instructional designer and subject matter expert hats.
    How can someone balancing both roles ensure that they
    remain objective and effective in both areas?
7. Why is it important for an instructional designer to
    focus on pedagogy and learner experience, rather than
    content expertise? How does this focus align with
    modern educational goals?
138 | SUBJECT EXPERTISE AND EVALUATION
                                  GENERATIVE AI AND ASSESSMENTS | 139

PART II

GENERATIVE AI
AND
ASSESSMENTS
140 | GENERATIVE AI AND ASSESSMENTS
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 141

8.

INSTRUCTORS' USE OF
AI IN TEACHING

   Jessica Kahlow

With the onset of AI and its increased availability, it has
become a hot topic in higher education. In their 2023
literature review, Pradana et al. synthesized 93 articles about
the use of ChatGPT in education, highlighting its increasingly
profound popularity, since ChatGPT did not become
available until 2021. While most of this conversation is
centered around students' use of AI in the classroom, less has
been said about how faculty might benefit from AI in their
teaching. One thing the research does seem to agree on is that
AI and Chat GPT are good at reorganizing existing
information and are less good at making up new information.
For instance, Kiryakova and Angelova (2023) explored
Bulgarian university professors' perspectives on the potential
and challenges of integrating ChatGPT into teaching
activities. Their survey results indicated overall positive
attitudes toward using ChatGPT to support teaching tasks,
engage learners, and promote critical thinking (Kiryakova &
142 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

Angelova, 2023). Therefore, this chapter focuses on how
instructors use AI in higher education teaching. Instructors
primarily use AI to help them develop content in two ways: to
create content and to deliver content.

On using AI to develop content

Instructors can use AI tools to generate or curate educational
content, such as quizzes, assignments, rubrics, lecture
materials, presentation slides, and reading lists. They may also
use it to create brief summaries of assigned course materials,
module or course overviews and recaps, and even to reply to
student messages and give feedback (Crompton & Burke,
2023; Joyce, 2023; LaPierre, 2023; Mondal et al., 2023).
Meron and Araci (2023) looked at ChatGPT's potential to
help instructors design higher education courses. In their
article, they used ChatGPT to develop materials and then
reflected on what that process looked like by evaluating the
strengths and weaknesses they encountered. They noted that
ChatGPT was great for saving time, structuring text, and
aiding brainstorming, its weaknesses included generating
generic content requiring substantial human intervention and
refinement (Meron & Araci, 2023).
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 143

On using AI to deliver content

AI can also be used to help instructors deliver content to
students, and this is particularly the case in online courses.
Instructors might use text-to-speech to create a voiceover with
an AI-generated voice, they might use an avatar instead of their
real image, or they might use an AI rendering to create video
and/or audio.

In terms of using AI to create audio content, research so far
has focused on the quality of the audio and how humanlike
it sounds. For instance, Kim et al. (2022) found that AI
instructors with humanlike voices are seen as more credible
than those with machinelike voices. Additionally, the
perceived social presence mediates this relationship, and
credibility influences students' intentions to enroll in future
AI-led courses. This highlights the significance of creating AI
instructors that students perceive as credible.

In terms of using AI to create video content, research so far has
focused on whether instructors include themselves in the video
versus an avatar of some kind. For instance, Yuan et al. (2021)
explored how changes in instructors' image and voice in online
video courses impact learner outcomes. Two experiments were
conducted with college students, altering instructor images
and voices. Results showed that videos without instructor
images led to better academic performance and less boredom.
Real instructor images enhanced satisfaction with interaction
144 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

and teaching. Real images were preferred over virtual ones, and
beautified images over original ones. Real voices were preferred
over synthesized ones. Positive evaluations of instructor image
and voice correlated with social presence, satisfaction,
enjoyment, and negatively with boredom. Instructor image
positively predicted transfer learning achievement. The study
suggests integrating instructor presence with course design
and utilizing technology for image and voice processing in
online course development.

Finally, in terms of using AI to create audio and video content,

For instance, Pi et al. (2022) explored the effectiveness of using
AI-generated virtual instructors in video lectures as a cost-
effective alternative to real human instructors. Their results
indicated that the AI likable instructor significantly improved
students' learning performance and motivation without
diminishing their attention to the learning materials. This
suggests that instructional designers can leverage AI voices and
images of likable humans to enhance student motivation and
learning outcomes in instructional videos.

Best Practices for Ethically Using
AI to Create or Develop Content

Almost every study also considers, to varying extents, the
ethics of using AI to develop and deliver content. However,
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 145

almost all of these considerations are rather vague statements
indicating that more research is necessary. In this section, we
summarize these vague statements into a couple of best
practices that we use and hope that others can use as they
develop content with AI. Based on this, there seem to be two
main best practices for integrating AI:

 1. always review AI-generated content for accuracy and
      quality

 2. always cite any AI tools used to help make content

The first best practice is to cite the AI tools or resources
employed, similar to how you would cite any other source
or technology used in your research or educational materials.
There are several ways you could do this, depending on the AI
and how it is used. You could:

In-Text Citations: One option would be to include the name
of the AI tool or technology and the year of its publication
or development in parentheses within the text where it is first
mentioned. For example: "This content was drafted using
OpenAI's ChatGPT-3 model (OpenAI, 2024)." You could
put these in-text citations in everything in the course that you
use AI for, including paragraphs of text, videos, slides, etc. This
might be a good option if you regularly used AI throughout
the course to develop content.

Reference List: Another option would be to include a full
146 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

citation in the reference list at the end of your course materials.
The citation should include the author (if applicable), the
name of the AI tool or technology, the year it was developed
or published, and any other relevant information. For example:
"OpenAI. (2024). ChatGPT-3." You could even link to the
exact chat you used for full transparency.

Course Design Acknowledgements: Finally, you may also
include a more general statement in your course that specifies
the technologies you used in the course and how you used
them. For example, you might say something such as "Some
of the content in this course was drafted or refined using AI
(Open AI, ChatGPT version 3.5). All content has been
reviewed and meets the university, instructor, and
instructional design team's standards for quality." This might
be a good option if you primarily used AI to refine your
existing content.

Related to these best practices, you may also consider
including a notice about your expectations and preferences
for students using in AI in your course by clarifying whether
students are permitted to use AI for the assignments in the
course. For example, you might include a statement like

      In this course, you are encouraged to use AI tools to
      support your work. To maintain academic integrity, if you
      use AI tools, you must disclose that you used the AI tool
      and properly attribute it using in-text citations and
      quotations and listing it on the reference page. This should
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 147

      include the name(s) of the tool(s) used and a note about
      how the tool was used for the assignment.

Whatever you choose, by citing AI tools and resources
properly, you give credit to the developers and provide
transparency to your audience about the sources and
technologies used in your course materials. Further, citing the
AI materials used in your course, you demonstrate to students
the importance of academic integrity and proper attribution in
academic work. This modeling encourages students to follow
ethical practices in their own research and writing, fostering
a culture of honesty and respect for intellectual property. It
also helps students understand the significance of giving credit
to the creators of the AI tools and resources they rely on,
promoting responsible scholarship and integrity in their
academic endeavors.

Second, always verify the accuracy and quality of AI-generated
content before incorporating it into the course. Review the
material for factual errors, clarity, and coherence to maintain
credibility and promote effective learning. There are also
several best practices for doing this, including:

Read, listen, and watch any content that you used AI to make.
Verify the accuracy of information presented in the content.
AI may sometimes generate inaccurate or outdated
information, so it is essential to fact-check and ensure that
the content aligns with current knowledge and standards in
148 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

the field. You never know when it might decide to throw
something completely random, off-base, or inappropriate out
there.

Verify that the content is original and not plagiarized from
other sources. AI-generated content should be unique and add
value to the course rather than simply replicating existing
materials.

Verify the answers to multiple-choice questions generated with
AI. Even if you gave it the exact text to create the questions, be
sure that there is only one correct answer and that it is actually
the correct answer.

By following these best practices, educators can harness the
power of AI to create high-quality, engaging, and effective
content for online higher education courses while supporting
student learning and success.

Teaching Contexts for AI Use

Quizzes

Using ChatGPT to create effective online quizzes and quiz
questions involves a few key steps. Here's a guide to help you
get started:

 1. Identify what is being Assessed
                           INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 149

  Determine the key concepts, skills, or knowledge areas
    your quiz will cover.

  Align questions with these objectives to ensure the quiz
    effectively measures the desired outcomes.

2. Decide on Question Types

  Multiple Choice: Good for assessing recognition and
    recall.

  True/False: Useful for checking basic understanding.
  Short Answer: Tests recall and comprehension.
  Fill-in-the-Blanks: Measures understanding of key terms

    or concepts.
  Matching: Helps assess the ability to connect related

    concepts.

3. Prompt ChatGPT to Create Questions

  Provide context and specify the type of questions you
    need.

  Example prompts:
        "Generate a multiple-choice question about the causes
          of World War II."
        "Create a true/false question on the fundamentals of
          photosynthesis."
        "Provide a short answer question about the water
          cycle."
150 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

 4. Ensure Quality and Accuracy

   Review the questions for clarity and correctness.
   Make sure there's only one correct answer for multiple-

      choice questions and that the options are not
      misleading.

 5. Create Explanations

   Generate feedback or explanations for each question to
      enhance learning.

   Example prompt: "Provide an explanation for why the
      answer to the following multiple-choice question is correct."

 6. Test

   Test your quiz with a small group to identify any issues.
   Use feedback to refine questions and improve clarity.

Example Interaction with ChatGPT

Prompt: "I need a multiple-choice question on the basics of
machine learning, including four answer options with one
correct answer."

ChatGPT Response:
Question: What is the primary purpose of supervised learning
in machine learning?
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 151

  a. To find hidden patterns in data
 b. To make predictions based on labeled data
  c. To group similar items without prior labels
 d. To evaluate the performance of a model

Answer: b) To make predictions based on labeled data

Feedback: Supervised learning involves training a model on a
labeled dataset, which means the data includes input-output
pairs. The goal is to make predictions or decisions based on this
labeled data.

Using these steps and examples should help you effectively
create and refine online quizzes with the assistance of
ChatGPT.

OpenAI. (2024). How to use ChatGPT to make quizzes.
ChatGPT 3.5.

Assignments

Instructors can use ChatGPT to create clear, engaging, and
well-structured assignment prompts by leveraging its ability to
generate ideas, improve wording, and ensure alignment with
learning objectives.
152 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

ChatGPT for Brainstorming Assignment
Ideas

One of my favorite ways to use ChatGPT is for brainstorming
assignment ideas. Instructors can use ChatGPT to brainstorm
different types of assignments (essays, presentations, case
studies, etc.) related to course content. ChatGPT can suggest
creative approaches to assessing student understanding.

   Example: "I need assignment ideas for my
      environmental science class."

   ChatGPT Output: "1) Write a research paper on the
      impact of plastic pollution on marine life. 2) Create a
      public awareness campaign on climate change for your
      community. 3) Design a sustainable city plan that
      addresses water conservation, energy use, and waste
      management."

By using ChatGPT as a brainstorming partner, instructors
can develop more engaging, clear, and effective prompts that
align with learning objectives and enhance student
performance.

ChatGPT for Instructions

ChatGPT can help instructors create prompts that target
different cognitive levels, from basic recall to higher-order
thinking skills like evaluation and creation.
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 153

   Example: "Can you write assignment prompts that
      target different Bloom's Taxonomy levels for a business
      ethics course?"

   Output: "1) Remember: Define corporate social
      responsibility. 2) Understand: Explain how corporate
      social responsibility affects consumer behavior. 3)
      Apply: Analyze a case study of a company facing an
      ethical dilemma and suggest a course of action. 4)
      Evaluate: Critically assess the effectiveness of corporate
      social responsibility initiatives at a global corporation. 5)
      Create: Develop your own ethical framework for
      businesses operating in developing countries."

Instructors can provide a brief description of the course or
unit objectives, and ChatGPT can suggest assignment
prompts that align with the intended learning outcomes. It
can also help refine the scope and focus of the assignment.

   Example: An instructor teaching critical thinking could
      ask, "Can you help me craft a prompt that encourages
      students to analyze a historical event from multiple
      perspectives?"

   Output: "Analyze the causes and consequences of the
      American Civil War from both the Union and
      Confederate viewpoints. Discuss how differing
      ideologies on state rights and slavery influenced the
      outcome."
154 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

ChatGPT can help instructors refine the language of their
assignment prompts to make them clearer and more accessible
to students. It can suggest edits to avoid ambiguity, clarify
expectations, and ensure instructions are easy to follow.

   Example: "Can you make this assignment prompt
      clearer? `Write a report on climate change and its global
      impact.'"

   Output: "Write a 5-page report that explains the causes
      of climate change, its effects on different regions of the
      world, and possible solutions to mitigate its impact.
      Include specific examples and cite at least three sources."

ChatGPT can suggest ways to differentiate assignments for
diverse learners, including students with different learning
needs, preferences, or proficiency levels. It can also suggest
alternative formats (like presentations instead of essays) to
accommodate different skills.

   Example: "How can I adapt this assignment for
      students with different learning styles?"

   Output: "For students who prefer visual learning, offer
      the option to create an infographic instead of writing a
      report. For those who prefer hands-on activities, allow
      them to design a field study or an experiment related to
      the topic."
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 155

Discussions

If you're thinking that all of that is too much to do, you're
not on your own. You can use AI to help you make your
discussions good. For instance, Chat GPT is a great tool to
help you achieve these discussion best practices. For example,
you may ask Chat GPT to . . .

   Can you suggest a follow-up prompt for this discussion
      so students know how to reply?

   Can you suggest follow-up questions to extend the
      discussion based on this prompt?

   How can I add depth and complexity to this discussion
      prompt?

   What modifications can I make to encourage critical
      thinking in responses to this prompt?

   What can I add to this prompt to encourage reflective
      responses?

   What can I do to prompt consideration of alternative
      viewpoints in response to this question?

   What multimedia elements can I add to enhance this
      discussion prompt?

   How can I connect this discussion prompt to real-world
      applications?

Examples

Okay so let's take a look at some examples.
156 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

Example 1
Read this prompt and think about how you or your students
might reply to it.
Original

       If a particular neighborhood won an award for
       the state's best neighborhood watch program of
       the year, what would you expect that
       neighborhood would be doing to earn such
       recognition?

Okay, now think about how we could revise it to make it
better.
Revised

       Your neighbors are complaining that their garden
       gnomes are being stolen so you're creating a
       new neighborhood watch program in your
       neighborhood. In your initial post, describe what
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 157

       you might want your neighborhood watch to do
       to reduce theft.
       How would you get others to participate?
       Then, read a classmate's post and describe what
       might work well and what might not work so
       well in their neighborhood watch plan. Be sure
       to use concepts from class to support your
       answer.

The revised prompt introduces a practical scenario (garden
gnome theft) for relatability, enhancing engagement. It
incorporates a second part that encourages interaction, critical
thinking, and the application of class concepts when analyzing
a classmate's post, thereby deepening the discussion and
promoting a comprehensive understanding.

Example 2

Okay, now let's take a look at another example.
158 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

Original

       Read
       Virtual team development (Kahlow, 2024)
       Post
       Answer at least three of the questions from the
       end of the chapter using the readings from this
       module and the information provided in the case
       study.

Revised

       Read Virtual team development (Kahlow,
       2024)
       This case study follows Jackie as she begins
       working on a remote team for her new job. In
       addition to highlighting some of the challenges
       and benefits of finding and performing remote
       work, this case study provides further insight
       into the stages of group development in an
                     INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 159

online team. The case study background
information about related concepts are present
within the case; these include the hiring process,
socialization, phases of group development, and
some general challenges and benefits associated
with working remotely. The case concludes by
asking students to consider ways that primarily
virtual teams could best use the time they have
together in person.

Initial Post

In your initial post, answer at least three of the
questions from the end of the chapter using the
readings from this module and the information
provided in the case study.

Replies

      Discuss your answers to the questions
        with your classmates. In doing so you
        might. . .

      Reflect on the challenges and benefits
        Jackie faces in her remote work journey.

      Unpack the stages of group development
        in online teams. Have you witnessed
        similar stages in your virtual teams?
160 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

             Dive into the hiring process and
                socialization in a remote setting. What
                creative onboarding strategies can you
                suggest for virtual teams?

             Imagine the possibilities! How can
                primarily virtual teams make the most of
                their in-person time together?

The revised prompt gives background on the reading,
improves structure and expectations for replies, and prompts
students to share personal experiences, adding a practical and
relatable aspect to the discussion.

Rubrics

Making good rubrics with specific and detailed criteria for each
rating can be difficult and time-consuming. Enter--Chat
GPT. Chat GPT can transform existing assignments and
discussion prompts into detailed and specific rubrics. Chat
GPT is great at restructuring information (Estrada & Fabin,
2024), so it's a great way to make a rubric if you already have
the assignment directions made. Such an approach expedites
the rubric-making process and ensures that the rubric aligns
well with the existing assessment. Chat GPT can be very
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 161

helpful in developing assessment rubrics (Estrada & Fabin,
2024). Estrada and Fabin (2024) found that the AI-generated
rubric in their study provided a clear and transparent
framework for evaluating student work. So, Chat GPT allows
instructors to efficiently generate rubrics, so long as the goal
is to use the generated rubric, or parts of it, that align with
the goals and outcomes of the assessment (Estrada & Fabin,
2024). While instruments are not fully replicable due to Chat
GPT's unique responses in each interaction, their responses
can serve as a great starting point for developing rubrics.
Estrada and Fabin (2024) recommend developing a clear and
specific prompt in the message sent to Chat GPT. The
directions should include instructions for what you want Chat
GPT to do, the format you want the output to be in, and any
other restrictions you have for the rubric (Estrada & Fabin,
2024). As with anything generated with AI, they noted the
importance of reviewing the generated content for accuracy.

How To Make A Rubric With Chat GPT

Step 1: Locate the assessment you want to
make a rubric for.

Before you can use Chat GPT to make a rubric, you need to
have your assignment or rubric.

For the purposes of this example, we're using the example in
Box 1. The assignment directions outlined in Box 1 are from a
162 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

graduate course in assessment and evaluation. The assignment
is for students to write a 1-2 page reading reaction where they
engage with the materials assigned in that module.

Box 1: Reading Reaction Assignment

Directions

After reading the assigned materials for the module, you will
write a two-page (or one-page single-spaced) paper to react
to the assigned readings in this module. Do not simply
summarize the reading. Instead, engage the content by
agreeing, disagreeing, applying, questioning, and/or extending
the course materials. In doing so, you may write about
anything that stood out to you as valuable in the materials.
I've included questions below to get you thinking about the
material more, but you can reply to some or none of these.

   How do diverse assessment methods like simulations
      and e-portfolios enhance learning engagement and
      authenticity?

   What are the benefits and challenges of integrating peer
      assessment and multimedia in educational settings?

   Reflect on how technology can be effectively utilized to
      improve assessment practices in your own teaching or
      learning context.

   What are the key factors influencing the high-stakes
      nature of assessment in higher education?
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 163

   How can educators balance the pressures of quality
      assurance, employability needs, and diversity
      considerations in assessment practices?

   Discuss strategies or reforms that could potentially
      alleviate challenges such as grade inflation and student
      dissatisfaction.

   Compare and contrast formative and summative
      assessment approaches. How can each type contribute to
      enhancing student learning outcomes?

   Reflect on how assessment data can be effectively used to
      inform instructional decisions and program
      improvements.

   Discuss the importance of aligning assessment strategies
      with educational goals and student needs.

   Why is it important for assignments to resonate
      culturally and hold significance for students? How can
      instructors achieve this in diverse educational settings?

   Reflect on your own experiences with culturally
      affirming assignments. How did they impact your
      learning and engagement?

   Discuss practical strategies for communicating course
      design and assignment expectations effectively through
      the syllabus.

   How are you doing? Is there anything you'd like me to
      know or share?

Guidelines
164 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

   Refer to the rubric for additional grading criteria.
   Do not simply summarize the reading. Instead, engage

      the content by agreeing, disagreeing, applying,
      questioning, and/or extending the course materials.
   Cite any additional materials used in APA format.

Step 2: Decide if you have any specific
criteria and ratings in mind.

Criteria

You don't need to know exactly what your criteria will be,
but it does help to have a general idea of what they should
be. Ideally, the criteria for the rubric should align with the
assessment and the learning outcomes associated with that
assessment (Chen & Ho, 2019). Generally speaking, you
should aim to have about three to nine criteria for any given
assessment. Unless you tell it to give you fewer, Chat GPT
will often give you a lot of criteria, so even if you don't have
something specific in mind you still might want to specify the
number of criteria you're looking for.

Ratings

As Chan and Ho (2019) describe, writing the descriptions for
each rating is the most challenging part of creating rubrics (p.
542). This is where Chat GPT really shines when you're using
it to help you make rubrics. Again, if you want all your rubrics
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 165

to use a consistent rating scale, it would be good to tell Chat
GPT which one you want to use, or, again, at the very least, the
number of ratings you want to have. Some common ratings
include:

   Met and not met or marks and no marks
   Meets expectations, approaching expectations, does not

      meet expectations (this is my favorite)
   Excellent, Average, Poor
   A, B, C, D, F or 5, 4, 3, 2, 1

In any case, you will want to include an explanation of the
expectations for each rating, including a description of the
characteristics of that level of work. This is where Chat GPT
comes in.

Step 3: Write and enter your Chat GPT
prompt

Now that you have your prompt and any criteria or ratings
identified, you can enter your prompt into Chat GPT using
the following template:

"Can you make a rubric in table format with the following
ratings [insert ratings you selected in step 3] and with these
criteria [insert criteria you identified, if any, in step 2] for
this assignment: [copy and paste assignment directions]?"
166 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

For this example, I used this prompt: Can you make a rubric
in table format that uses the following ratings: meets
expectations, approaching expectations, and does not meet
expectations; and the following criteria: content, examples,
and writing quality; for this assignment: [here I copy and
pasted the entire assignment directions from Box 1]?

The complete response from Chat GPT is provided in Box 2.

Box 2: Chat GPT's Rubric

Absolutely! Here's a rubric for the Reading Reaction
Assignment using the ratings "Meets Expectations,"
"Approaching Expectations," and "Does Not Meet
Expectations":

Reading Reaction Assignment Rubric
          INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 167

Criteria  Meets            Approaching      Does Not
Content   Expectations     Expectations     Meet
                                            Expectations
          Thoroughly       Engages with
          engages with     the reading      Minimally
          the reading      material,        engages with
          material.        showing some     the reading
          Demonstrates a   understanding.   material.
          deep             Response         Lacks depth,
          understanding    includes some    analysis, or a
          by agreeing,     agreement,       direct focus
          disagreeing,     disagreement,    on relevant
          applying,        application,     themes or
          questioning,     questioning,     questions.
          and/or           and/or           Response may
          extending the    extension, but   be mostly
          course           may lack depth   summary or
          materials.       or direct focus  off-topic.
          Directly         on relevant
          addresses        themes or
          relevant themes  questions.
          or questions.
168 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

Criteria     Meets             Approaching       Does Not
             Expectations      Expectations      Meet
                                                 Expectations
Examples     Effectively uses  Uses examples
and          specific          from the          Lacks specific
Reflections  examples from     readings, but     examples
             the readings to   may lack          from the
             support           specificity or    readings.
             analysis.         relevance.        Reflections
             Includes          Reflections       are superficial
             thoughtful        show some         or unrelated
             reflections that  connection to     to personal
             connect           personal          insights or
             personal          insights or       experiences.
             insights or       experiences but   Lacks
             experiences to    are not fully     originality or
             the readings.     developed.        depth in
             Demonstrates      Demonstrates      reflections.
             originality and   some originality
             depth in          in reflections.
             reflections.
          INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 169

Criteria  Meets              Approaching       Does Not
          Expectations       Expectations      Meet
Writing                                        Expectations
Quality   Writing is clear,  Writing is
          coherent, and      mostly clear but  Writing is
          well-organized.    may have minor    unclear,
          Free of            organizational    poorly
          significant        issues or some    organized, or
          grammatical or     grammatical       difficult to
          spelling errors.   and spelling      follow.
          Follows            errors. Mostly    Contains
          assignment         follows           significant
          guidelines,        assignment        grammatical
          including          guidelines, with  or spelling
          length, format,    minor             errors. Does
          and citation       deviations in     not follow
          requirements.      length, format,   assignment
                             or citation.      guidelines,
                                               with major
                                               deviations in
                                               length,
                                               format, or
                                               citation.

This streamlined rubric should provide clear guidance on the
key aspects you want to assess in the Reading Reaction
Assignment.

Note: The information in this box was generated completely
by Chat GPT 3.5 using the previously disclosed prompt.

Step 4: Regenerate, revise, and make your
final rubric

Then, I used the parts of Chat GPT's rubric that I liked to
170 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

finalize the rubric for the assignment, which is provided in the
table below. Be sure to also assign point values that match the
point values in your assignment and syllabus, since sometimes
Chat GPT likes to put random values in there for you. Keep
in mind that the point value you assign to each criteria helps
highlight the priority or importance of each (Chen & Ho,
2019).

For the rubric in Box 3, most of it looks pretty similar to the
rubric Chat GPT gave me in Box 2. I really only summarized
or combined pieces of information to make it a little bit more
workable to the assignment and my preferences.

Box 3: Final Edited Rubric
            INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 171

Criteria    Meets               Approaching     Does Not
            Expectations        Expectations    Meet
                                                Expectations
Content     10 to > 7 pts       7 to > 5 pts
                                                5 to > 0 pts
            Thoroughly          Engages with
            engages with the    the reading     Minimally
            reading material    material,       engages with
            by agreeing,        showing some    the reading
            disagreeing,        understanding   material;
            applying,           but may lack    response is
            questioning,        depth or focus  primarily a
            and/or              on relevant     summary of
            extending the       themes or       the readings.
            course materials    questions.
            to address                          5 to > 0 pts
            relevant themes     7 to > 5 pts
            or questions.                       Lacks analysis
                                                and
            10 to > 7 pts                       reflection.
                                                Does not
Examples    Provides            Offers some     address
and         insightful          analysis and    provided
Reflection  analysis and        reflection but  questions or
            reflection on key   may lack depth  raise
            points. Clearly     or clarity.     independent
            addresses at least  Partially       points. Does
            one of the          addresses at    not use
            provided            least one       examples or
            questions or        provided        the examples
            independently       question or     provided are
            raises valuable     raises some     irrelevant or
            points.             points. Uses    insufficient.
            Effectively uses    examples, but
            specific examples   they may be
            from the reading    vague or not
            and/or personal     fully support
            experience to       the points
            support points.     made.
172 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

Criteria  Meets              Approaching       Does Not
          Expectations       Expectations      Meet
Writing                                        Expectations
Quality
          5 to > 4 pts       4 to > 2 pts      2 to > 0 pts

          Writing is clear,  Writing is        Writing is
          coherent, and      mostly clear but  unclear,
          well-organized.    may have minor    poorly
          Free of            organizational    organized, or
          significant        issues or some    difficult to
          grammatical or     grammatical       follow.
          spelling errors.   and spelling      Contains
          Follows            errors, but they  significant
          assignment         do not hinder     grammatical
          guidelines,        understanding.    or spelling
          including length,  Mostly follows    errors. Does
          format, and        assignment        not follow
          citation           guidelines, with  assignment
          requirements.      minor             guidelines,
                             deviations in     with major
                             length, format,   deviations in
                             or citation.      length,
                                               format, or
                                               citation.

Note: The information in this box is based on the content
generated by Chat GPT 3.5 in Box 2.

Once you have everything just the way you want it, you can
copy and paste the rubric into Canvas or whatever LMS you're
using. Refer to the links below for help adding a rubric to your
assignments and discussions in Canvas.

   How to add a rubric to an assignment in Canvas
   How to add a rubric to a discussion in Canvas
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 173

Then, as always, be sure to test out the rubric. If you can,
you can use a previous student's assignment to make sure the
rubric works the way you want it to before actually using it in a
course. After you use it in a course, consider how well students
met the criteria and whether it was easy to use it to grade the
assignment; you want to make sure that the rubric aligns well
with the assignment, outcomes, and the quality of work you
get from students. As you use the rubric for grading, be sure to
note anything you didn't like or would want to change for next
time.

   If the rubric is resulting in unexpected grades, you may
      need to rebalance the number of points for the criteria to
      better align with your expectations.

   If you consistently scored students lower on specific
      criteria, consider whether you can make the wording
      clearer or more objective.

   If you had to frequently adjust how you interpreted the
      rubric, you may need to revise your criteria to better
      match the outcomes associated with the assignment.

   If a criteria was consistently difficult to grade, you might
      need to add more criteria or split one criteria into
      multiple so you can describe them with a bit more detail.

Remember that regularly reflecting on and revising your
rubrics helps make sure it is doing what it's supposed to be
doing and is helpful for both instructors and students.
174 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

Feedback

Using ChatGPT to provide students with feedback can be a
great way to offer personalized and constructive comments.
Here's how you can effectively utilize ChatGPT for this
purpose:

1. Identify what feedback is needed

   Determine whether you need feedback on specific
      assignments, quizzes, essays, or general performance.

   Consider the level of detail and the tone appropriate for
      your students.

2. Generate feedback by providing context and specifics

   Input the student's response or work into ChatGPT
      along with any relevant criteria or guidelines.

   Example prompts:
          "Here is a student's essay on climate change. Provide
            feedback focusing on clarity, structure, and
            argumentation."
          "This is a student's answer to a math problem. Give
            feedback on accuracy and problem-solving
            approach."

Example Interaction:
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 175

Student Submission: "The causes of climate change are
natural and man-made. Natural causes include volcanic
eruptions and variations in solar radiation. Human activities
such as burning fossil fuels contribute to climate change."

Prompt for ChatGPT: "Provide feedback on the following
student answer about climate change, focusing on completeness
and accuracy."

ChatGPT Response: Feedback: "Your answer provides a
good overview of climate change causes. You correctly
mention both natural and human-induced factors. To
strengthen your response, consider elaborating on how human
activities contribute specifically to greenhouse gas emissions
and their impact on global temperatures. Additionally,
providing examples of recent studies or data could enhance the
depth of your analysis."

3. Personalize the Feedback

   Customize the feedback to address individual strengths
      and areas for improvement.

   Use student names and refer to specific aspects of their
      work to make feedback more personal.

4. Encourage improvement by offering actionable
suggestions
176 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

   Include clear, actionable steps for improvement.
   Example prompt: "Provide suggestions for improving this

      student's essay on the impact of technology on education."

ChatGPT Response: Suggestions: "To improve your essay,
consider adding more examples of technological advancements
and their specific impacts on educational practices.
Additionally, addressing counterarguments and discussing
potential drawbacks of technology in education would
provide a more balanced perspective."

5. Provide encouragement by maintaining a positive and
supportive tone

   Acknowledge the effort and progress the student has
      made.

   Example prompt: "Generate a positive and encouraging
      comment for a student who has shown improvement in
      their writing skills."

ChatGPT Response: Encouragement: "Great job on your
recent writing assignment! I noticed significant improvement
in your use of descriptive language and organization. Keep up
the good work, and continue to focus on developing your ideas
further. You're making excellent progress!"

6. Integrate Feedback into Learning
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 177

   Suggest resources or activities that can help the student
      improve in specific areas.

   Example prompt: "Suggest resources or exercises for a
      student who needs help with essay structure."

ChatGPT Response: Resources: "For improving essay
structure, you might find these resources helpful: `How to
Write an Effective Essay' by [Author], available at [Link], and
practice exercises on essay organization at [Website].
Additionally, reviewing sample essays and analyzing their
structure can provide valuable insights."

By following these steps, you can use ChatGPT to provide
detailed, personalized, and constructive feedback that helps
students understand their strengths and areas for
improvement.

OpenAI. (2024). How to use ChatGPT to provide feedback.
ChatGPT 3.5.

References

Andrade, H. G. (2005). Teaching With Rubrics: The Good,
   the Bad, and the Ugly. College Teaching, 53(1), 27-31.
   https://doi.org/10.3200/CTCH.53.1.27-31
178 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

Brookhart, S. M., & Chen, F. (2015). The quality and

effectiveness of descriptive rubrics. Educational Review,

67(3),  343-368.            https://doi.org/10.1080/

00131911.2014.929565

Chan, Z., & Ho, S. (2019). Good and bad practices in rubrics:
   The perspectives of students and educators. Assessment &
   Evaluation in Higher Education, 44(4), 533-545.
   https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2018.1522528

Crompton, H., & Burke, D. (2023). Artificial intelligence in
   higher education: The state of the field. International
   Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education,
   20(1), 22. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-023-00392-8

Estrada, B. O., & Fabin, A. D. H. (2024). Generacin de

rbricas con herramientas de inteligencia artificial para la

evaluacin de aprendizajes en educacin superior. DIDAC,

84,     Article  84.        https://doi.org/10.48102/

didac.2024..84_JUL-DIC.211

Gezie, A., Khaja, K., Chang, V. N., Adamek, M. E., & Johnsen,
   M. B. (2012). Rubrics as a Tool for Learning and
   Assessment: What Do Baccalaureate Students Think?
   Journal of Teaching in Social Work, 32(4), 421-437.
   https://doi.org/10.1080/08841233.2012.705240

Jonsson, A. (2014). Rubrics as a way of providing
   transparency in assessment. Assessment & Evaluation in
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 179

   Higher Education, 39(7), 840-852. https://doi.org/
   10.1080/02602938.2013.875117

Joyce, A. (2023). Embracing AI: Using Cat-GPT to Encourage
   Classroom Discussion. College Teaching, 0(0), 1-3.

Kiryakova, G., & Angelova, N. (2023). ChatGPT: A
   Challenging Tool for the University Professors in Their
   Teaching Practice. Education Sciences, 13(10), NA-NA.
   https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci13101056

LaPierre, S. S. (2023). Educators Find Value in ChatGPT.
   Computers in Libraries, 43(7), 31-35.

Lowenthal, P. R. (2009). The evolution and influence of social
   presence theory in online learning. Social Computing,
   Concepts, Methodologies, Tools and Applications,
   113-128.

Meron, Y., & Araci, Y. T. (2023). Artificial intelligence in
   design education: Evaluating ChatGPT as a virtual
   colleague for post-graduate course development. Design
   Science, 9, e30. https://doi.org/10.1017/dsj.2023.28

Mondal, H., Marndi, G., Behera, J., & Mondal, S. (2023).
   ChatGPT for teachers: Practical examples for utilizing
   artificial intelligence for educational purposes. Indian
   Journal of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, 10(3),
   200-200.
180 | INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING

Pi, Z., Deng, L., Wang, X., Guo, P., Xu, T., & Zhou, Y. (2022).
   The influences of a virtual instructor's voice and appearance
   on learning from video lectures. Journal of Computer
   Assisted Learning, 38(6), 1703-1713. https://doi.org/
   10.1111/jcal.12704

Picciano, A. (2002). Beyond student perceptions: Issues of
   interaction, presence, and performance in an online course.
   Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 6, 21-40.

Pradana, M., Elisa, H. P., & Syarifuddin, S. (2023). Discussing
   ChatGPT in education: A literature review and
   bibliometric analysis. Cogent Education, 10(2), 2243134.
   https://doi.org/10.1080/2331186X.2023.2243134

Richardson, J. C., & Swan, K. (2003). Examining social
   presence in online courses in relation to students' perceived
   learning and satisfaction, JALN, 7, 66-88.

Reddy, Y. M., & Andrade, H. (2010). A review of rubric use
   in higher education. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher
   Education, 35(4), 435-448. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   02602930902862859

Taylor, B., Kisby, F., & Reedy, A. (2024). Rubrics in higher
   education: An exploration of undergraduate students'
   understanding and perspectives. Assessment & Evaluation
   in Higher Education, 49(6), 799-809. https://doi.org/
   10.1080/02602938.2023.2299330
                              INSTRUCTORS' USE OF AI IN TEACHING | 181

Yuan, M., Zeng, J., Wang, A., & Shang, J. (2021). Would It
   Be Better if Instructors Technically Adjust Their Image or
   Voice in Online Courses? Impact of the Way of Instructor
   Presence on Online Learning. Frontiers in Psychology, 12.
   https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.746857
182 | AI RUBRICS

9.

AI RUBRICS

   Jessica Kahlow

This chapter applies to various contexts and has been used
to create rubrics in various disciplines, including accounting,
biology, communication, criminal justice, education, nursing,
physics, political science, and social work. This has also been
used in undergraduate and graduate courses and for various
assignment types, including everything from short answer quiz
questions to discussion boards to research papers.

After spending hours perfecting your assignment directions,
you might be glad to just be done with that step; but an
important--yet often overlooked--component of assignment
design is rubric creation. This chapter discusses the benefits
of rubrics for both instructors and students. Then, it outlines
directions and an example of how to use OpenAI's ChatGPT
version 3.5 or Microsoft Copilot to make rubrics for your
existing assignments.
                 AI RUBRICS | 183

Why Use Rubrics

Rubrics are assessment tools that outline important criteria
and expectations for specific graded assignments or discussions
(Andrade, 2005; Taylor et al., 2024). Rubrics are a way for
instructors to communicate to students what counts as quality
work by outlining different criteria specific to the assessment
and provide multiple ratings for each of those criteria
(Brookhart & Chen, 2015). In other words, rubrics describe
both the desirable qualities expected within student work and
pitfalls in student work, which help students think through
the assignment more and produce higher quality work
(Andrade, 2005). Good rubrics help ensure consistent grading
and lead to more objective evaluations of student work (Chan
& Ho, 2019). In short, we know rubrics are helpful for both
instructors and students.

How Rubrics Help Instructors

Instructors have long-held predispositions toward not liking
rubrics (Reddy & Andrade, 2010). Still, in Reddy and
Andrade's (2010) literature review, they noted that when
instructors do use rubrics, they appreciated that the rubrics
helped them grade more consistently and efficiently.

   Rubrics help instructors give more informative feedback
      without spending as much time doing so (Andrade,
184 | AI RUBRICS

      2005; Gezie et al., 2012).
   Rubrics help instructors provide more consistent

      evaluations of student work (Taylor et al., 2024),
      particularly when multiple instructors are grading the
      same assessment (Chan & Ho, 2019).
   Artificial Intelligence (AI) accelerates the rubric creation
      process by efficiently generating rubrics based on input
      information (Estrada & Fabin, 2024).

How Rubrics Help Students

The benefit of rubrics on student learning has also been well-
documented in the literature.

   Rubrics help students understand the goal of the
      assignment and focus their efforts accordingly (Andrade,
      2005; Reddy & Andrade, 2010; Gezie et al., 2012),
      which also helps boost their confidence and lessen their
      anxiety about the assessment (Taylor et al., 2024).

   Students perceive assessments with rubrics as more
      transparent (Chan & Ho, 2019; Gezie et al., 2012;
      Jonsson, 2014; Reddy & Andrade, 2010).

   Students perform better on assessments and have deeper
      learning when there are rubrics available (Reddy &
      Andrade, 2010).

   Feedback received from descriptive rubrics improves
      students' learning (Andrade, 2005).
                                                                      AI RUBRICS | 185

How to use AI for Rubrics

Making good rubrics with specific and detailed criteria for each
rating can be difficult and time-consuming. Enter--ChatGPT.
ChatGPT can transform existing assignments, and discussion
prompts into detailed and specific rubrics. ChatGPT is great
at restructuring information (Estrada & Fabin, 2024), so it is
a great way to make a rubric if you already have the assignment
directions made. Such an approach expedites the rubric-
making process and ensures that the rubric aligns well with
the existing assessment. ChatGPT can be very helpful in
developing assessment rubrics (Estrada & Fabin, 2024).
Estrada and Fabin (2024) found that the AI-generated rubric
in their study provided a clear and transparent framework for
evaluating student work. So, ChatGPT allows instructors to
efficiently generate rubrics, so long as the goal is to use the
generated rubric, or parts of it, that align with the goals and
outcomes of the assessment (Estrada & Fabin, 2024). While
instruments are not fully replicable due to ChatGPT's unique
responses in each interaction, their responses can serve as a
great starting point for developing rubrics. Estrada and Fabin
(2024) recommend developing a clear and specific prompt in
the message sent to ChatGPT. The directions should include
instructions for what you want ChatGPT to do, the format
you want the output to be in, and any other restrictions you
have for the rubric (Estrada & Fabin, 2024). As with anything
186 | AI RUBRICS

generated with AI, they noted the importance of reviewing the
generated content for accuracy.

Step 1: Select the assignment you
want to make a rubric for.

Before you can use ChatGPT to make a rubric, you need to
have your assignment directions and grading criteria finalized.

The assignment directions outlined in Box 1 are from a
graduate course in assessment and evaluation. The assignment
is for students to write a 1-2 page reading reaction where they
engage with the materials assigned in that module.

Box 1: Reading Reaction Assignment

       Assignment Directions
       After reading the assigned materials for the
       module, you will write a two-page double-
       spaced (or one-page single-spaced) paper to
       react to the assigned readings in this
       module. Do not simply summarize the reading.
       Instead, engage the content by agreeing,
       disagreeing, applying, questioning, and/or
                                                             AI RUBRICS | 187

extending the course materials. In doing so, you
may write about anything that stood out to you
as valuable in the materials. I have included
questions below to get you thinking about the
material more, but you can reply to some or
none of these.

      How do diverse assessment methods like
        simulations and e-portfolios enhance
        learning engagement and authenticity?

      What are the benefits and challenges of
        integrating peer assessment and
        multimedia in educational settings?

      Reflect on how technology can be
        effectively utilized to improve assessment
        practices in your own teaching or learning
        context.

      What are the key factors influencing the
        high-stakes nature of assessment in
        higher education?

      How can educators balance the pressures
        of quality assurance, employability needs,
        and diversity considerations in assessment
        practices?

      Discuss strategies or reforms that could
188 | AI RUBRICS

                potentially alleviate challenges such as
                grade inflation and student dissatisfaction.
             Compare and contrast formative and
                summative assessment approaches. How
                can each type contribute to enhancing
                student learning outcomes?
             Reflect on how assessment data can be
                effectively used to inform instructional
                decisions and program improvements.
             Discuss the importance of aligning
                assessment strategies with educational
                goals and student needs.
             Why is it important for assignments to
                resonate culturally and hold significance
                for students? How can instructors achieve
                this in diverse educational settings?
             Reflect on your own experiences with
                culturally affirming assignments. How did
                they impact your learning and
                engagement?
             Discuss practical strategies for
                communicating course design and
                assignment expectations effectively
                through the syllabus.
                                                                      AI RUBRICS | 189

             How are you doing? Is there anything you
                would like me to know or share?

       Guidelines

             Refer to the rubric for additional grading
                criteria.

             Do not simply summarize the reading.
                Instead, engage the content by agreeing,
                disagreeing, applying, questioning, and/or
                extending the course materials.

             Cite any additional materials used in APA
                format.

Step 2: Decide if you have any specific
criteria and ratings in mind.

Criteria

You do not need to know exactly what your criteria will be,
but it does help to have a general idea of what they should
be. Ideally, the criteria for the rubric should align with the
assessment and the learning outcomes associated with that
assessment (Chen & Ho, 2019). Generally, you should aim to
have about three to nine criteria for any assessment. Unless you
190 | AI RUBRICS

tell it to give you fewer, ChatGPT will often give you a lot of
criteria, so even if you do not have something specific in mind
you still might want to specify the number of criteria you are
looking for.

Ratings

As Chan and Ho (2019) describe, writing the descriptions for
each rating is the most challenging part of creating rubrics
(p. 542). This is where ChatGPT really shines when you are
using it to help you make rubrics. Again, if you want all your
rubrics to use a consistent rating scale, it would be good to tell
ChatGPT which one you want to use, or, again, at the very
least, the number of ratings you want to have. Some common
ratings include:

   Meets expectations, approaching expectations, does not
      meet expectations (this is my favorite)

   Excellent, Average, Poor
   A, B, C, D, F or 5, 4, 3, 2, 1

In any case, you will want to include an explanation of the
expectations for each rating, including a description of the
characteristics of that level of work. This is where ChatGPT
comes in.
                                                                      AI RUBRICS | 191

Step 3: Write and enter your ChatGPT
prompt

For this example, I used this prompt: Can you make a rubric
in table format that uses the following ratings: meets
expectations, approaching expectations, and does not meet
expectations; and the following criteria: content, examples,
and writing quality; for this assignment: [here I copy and
pasted the entire assignment directions from Box 1]?

Now that you have your prompt and any criteria or ratings
identified, you can enter your prompt into ChatGPT using the
following template:

Box 2: Sample Template

       "Can you make a rubric in table format with the
       following ratings [insert ratings you selected
       in step 2] and with these criteria [insert
       criteria you identified, if any, in step 2] for
       this assignment: [copy and paste assignment
       directions from Box 1]?"

The complete response from ChatGPT is provided in Box 3.
192 | AI RUBRICS

Box 3: ChatGPT's Rubric

       Absolutely! Here is a rubric for the Reading
       Reaction Assignment using the ratings "Meets
       Expectations," "Approaching Expectations," and
       "Does Not Meet Expectations":
       Reading Reaction Assignment Rubric
                                          AI RUBRICS | 193

Criteria  Meets          Approaching      Does Not
Content   Expectations   Expectations     Meet
                                          Expectations
          Thoroughly     Engages with
          engages with   the reading      Minimally
          the reading    material,        engages with
          material.      showing some     the reading
          Demonstrates   understanding.   material.
          a deep         Response         Lacks depth,
          understanding  includes some    analysis, or a
          by agreeing,   agreement,       direct focus
          disagreeing,   disagreement,    on relevant
          applying,      application,     themes or
          questioning,   questioning,     questions.
          and/or         and/or           Response
          extending the  extension, but   may be
          course         may lack depth   mostly
          materials.     or direct focus  summary or
          Directly       on relevant      off-topic.
          addresses      themes or
          relevant       questions.
          themes or
          questions.
194 | AI RUBRICS

Criteria          Meets             Approaching     Does Not
                                                    Meet
                  Expectations Expectations         Expectations

Examples          Effectively uses  Uses examples   Lacks specific
and               specific          from the        examples
Reflections       examples from     readings, but   from the
                  the readings to   may lack        readings.
                  support           specificity or  Reflections
                  analysis.         relevance.      are superficial
                  Includes          Reflections     or unrelated
                  thoughtful        show some       to personal
                  reflections that  connection to   insights or
                  connect           personal        experiences.
                  personal          insights or     Lacks
                  insights or       experiences     originality or
                  experiences to    but are not     depth in
                  the readings.     fully           reflections.
                  Demonstrates      developed.
                  originality and   Demonstrates
                  depth in          some
                  reflections.      originality in
                                    reflections.
                                            AI RUBRICS | 195

Criteria  Meets            Approaching      Does Not
          Expectations     Expectations     Meet
Writing                                     Expectations
Quality
          Writing is       Writing is       Writing is
          clear,           mostly clear     unclear,
          coherent, and    but may have     poorly
          well-organized.  minor            organized, or
          Free of          organizational   difficult to
          significant      issues or some   follow.
          grammatical      grammatical      Contains
          or spelling      and spelling     significant
          errors. Follows  errors. Mostly   grammatical
          assignment       follows          or spelling
          guidelines,      assignment       errors. Does
          including        guidelines,      not follow
          length, format,  with minor       assignment
          and citation     deviations in    guidelines,
          requirements.    length, format,  with major
                           or citation.     deviations in
                                            length,
                                            format, or
                                            citation.

This streamlined rubric should provide clear
guidance on the key aspects you want to assess
in the Reading Reaction Assignment.

Note: The information in this box was generated
completely by ChatGPT 3.5 using the previously
disclosed prompt.

Step 4: Regenerate, revise, and make
196 | AI RUBRICS

your final rubric

Then, I used the parts of ChatGPT's rubric that I liked to
finalize the rubric for the assignment, which is provided in the
table below. Be sure to also assign point values that match the
point values in your assignment and syllabus, since sometimes
ChatGPT likes to put random values in there for you. Keep
in mind that the point value you assign to each criteria helps
highlight the priority or importance of each (Chen & Ho,
2019).

For the rubric in Box 3, most of it looks pretty like the rubric
ChatGPT gave me in Box 2. I only summarized or combined
pieces of information to make it more workable for the
assignment and my preferences.

Box 4: Final Edited Rubric
                                         AI RUBRICS | 197

Criteria  Meets          Approaching     Does Not
Content   Expectations   Expectations    Meet
                                         Expectations
          10 to > 7 pts

          Thoroughly     7 to > 5 pts    5 to > 0 pts
          engages with
          the reading    Engages with    Minimally
          material by    the reading     engages with
          agreeing,      material,       the reading
          disagreeing,   showing some    material;
          applying,      understanding   response is
          questioning,   but may lack    primarily a
          and/or         depth or focus  summary of
          extending the  on relevant     the readings.
          course         themes or
          materials to   questions.
          address
          relevant
          themes or
          questions.
198 | AI RUBRICS

Criteria          Meets            Approaching     Does Not
                  Expectations     Expectations    Meet
                                                   Expectations
                  10 to > 7 pts

Examples          Provides         7 to > 5 pts    5 to > 0 pts
and               insightful
Reflection        analysis and     Offers some     Lacks analysis
                  reflection on    analysis and    and
                  key points.      reflection but  reflection.
                  Clearly          may lack depth  Does not
                  addresses at     or clarity.     address
                  least one of     Partially       provided
                  the provided     addresses at    questions or
                  questions or     least one       raise
                  independently    provided        independent
                  raises valuable  question or     points. Does
                  points.          raises some     not use
                  Effectively      points. Uses    examples or
                  uses specific    examples, but   the examples
                  examples         they may be     provided are
                  from the         vague or not    irrelevant or
                  reading and/     fully support   insufficient.
                  or personal      the points
                  experience to    made.
                  support
                  points.
                                          AI RUBRICS | 199

Criteria  Meets          Approaching      Does Not
          Expectations   Expectations     Meet
Writing                                   Expectations
Quality   5 to > 4 pts   4 to > 2 pts
                                          2 to > 0 pts
          Writing is     Writing is
          clear,         mostly clear     Writing is
          coherent, and  but may have     unclear,
          well-          minor            poorly
          organized.     organizational   organized, or
          Free of        issues or some   difficult to
          significant    grammatical      follow.
          grammatical    and spelling     Contains
          or spelling    errors, but      significant
          errors.        they do not      grammatical
          Follows        hinder           or spelling
          assignment     understanding.   errors. Does
          guidelines,    Mostly follows   not follow
          including      assignment       assignment
          length,        guidelines,      guidelines,
          format, and    with minor       with major
          citation       deviations in    deviations in
          requirements.  length, format,  length,
                         or citation.     format, or
                                          citation.

Note: The information in this box is based on the
content generated by Chat GPT 3.5 in Box 2.

Once you have everything just the way you want it, you can
copy and paste the rubric into Canvas or whatever LMS you
are using. Refer to the links below for help adding a rubric to
your assignments and discussions in Canvas.
200 | AI RUBRICS

   How to add a rubric to an assignment in Canvas
   How to add a rubric to a discussion in Canvas

Then, as always, be sure to test out the rubric. If you can, you
can use a previous student's assignment to ensure the rubric
works the way you want it to before using it in a course. After
you use it in a course, consider how well students met the
criteria and whether it was easy to use it to grade the
assignment; you want to make sure that the rubric aligns well
with the assignment, outcomes, and the quality of work you
get from students. As you use the rubric for grading, be sure
to note anything you did not like or would want to change for
next time.

   If the rubric is resulting in unexpected grades, you may
      need to rebalance the number of points for the criteria to
      better align with your expectations.

   If you consistently scored students lower on specific
      criteria, consider whether you can make the wording
      clearer or more objective.

   If you had to frequently adjust how you interpreted the
      rubric, you may need to revise your criteria to better
      match the outcomes associated with the assignment.

   If a criterion was consistently difficult to grade, you
      might need to add more criteria or split one criterion
      into multiple so you can describe them with a bit more
      detail.
                                                                      AI RUBRICS | 201

Remember that regularly reflecting on and revising your
rubrics helps make sure it is doing what it is supposed to be
doing and is helpful for both instructors and students.

Disclosures

This chapter contains AI-generated content; the example
rubric was created using ChatGPT 3.5.

References

Andrade, H. G. (2005). Teaching With Rubrics: The Good,
the Bad, and the Ugly. College Teaching, 53(1), 27-31.
https://doi.org/10.3200/CTCH.53.1.27-31

Brookhart, S. M., & Chen, F. (2015). The quality and
effectiveness of descriptive rubrics. Educational Review, 67(3),
343-368. https://doi.org/10.1080/00131911.2014.929565

Chan, Z., & Ho, S. (2019). Good and bad practices in rubrics:
The perspectives of students and educators. Assessment &
Evaluation in Higher Education, 44(4), 533-545.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2018.1522528

Estrada, B. O., & Fabin, A. D. H. (2024). Generacin de
rbricas con herramientas de inteligencia artificial para la
evaluacin de aprendizajes en educacin superior. DIDAC, 84,
202 | AI RUBRICS

Article 84. https://doi.org/10.48102/didac.2024..84_JUL-
DIC.211

Gezie, A., Khaja, K., Chang, V. N., Adamek, M. E., & Johnsen,
M. B. (2012). Rubrics as a Tool for Learning and Assessment:
What Do Baccalaureate Students Think? Journal of Teaching
in Social Work, 32(4), 421-437. https://doi.org/10.1080/
08841233.2012.705240

Jonsson, A. (2014). Rubrics as a way of providing
transparency in assessment. Assessment & Evaluation in
Higher Education, 39(7), 840-852. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02602938.2013.875117

Reddy, Y. M., & Andrade, H. (2010). A review of rubric use
in higher education. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher
Education, 35(4), 435-448. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02602930902862859

Taylor, B., Kisby, F., & Reedy, A. (2024). Rubrics in higher
education: An exploration of undergraduate students'
understanding and perspectives. Assessment & Evaluation in
Higher Education, 49(6), 799-809. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02602938.2023.2299330
              BIBLIOGRAPHY | 203

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ahlf, M., & McNeil, S. G. (2023). An exploratory review of literature
      on moderation in asynchronous discussions. Distance
      Education, 44(1), 137-161.

Aloni, M., & Harrington, C. (2018). Research-based practices for
      improving the effectiveness of asynchronous online discussion
      boards. Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in Psychology,
      4(4).

Ambrose, S. A., Bridges, M. W., DiPietro, M., Lovett, M. C., &
      Norman, M. K. (2010). How Learning Works: Seven Research-
      Based Principles for Smart Teaching. John Wiley & Sons.

Andrade, H. G. (2005). Teaching With Rubrics: The Good, the Bad,
      and the Ugly. College Teaching, 53(1), 27-31. https://doi.org/
      10.3200/CTCH.53.1.27-31

Antoine, F. M, Porter, T.M., and Reye-Aceytuno, E., (2018). Igniting
      Your Teaching with Educational Technology A Resources for
      New Teachers. Editors: Matt Rhoads & Bonni Stachowiak.
      Retrieved from https://edd7032017f2.pressbooks.com/
      chapter/5/

Appert, L., Simonian Bean, C., Irvin, A., Jungels, A. M., Klaf, S.,
204 | BIBLIOGRAPHY

      & Phillipson, M. (2017). Guide for Inclusive Teaching at
      Columbia. Columbia Center for Teaching and Learning.
      https://ctl.columbia.edu/resources-and-technology/resources/
      inclusive-teaching-guide/download/

Barkley, E. F., & Major, C. H. (2016). Learning assessment techniques:
      A handbook for college faculty . Jossey-Bass.

BOK Center, Harvard University (n.d.). How to Write an Effective
      Assignment. https://bokcenter.harvard.edu/how-to-write-
      assignment-prompt

Bose, D., Dalrymple, & Shadle, S. (2020). A renewed case for student
      success: Using transparency in assignment design when teaching
      remotely. Faculty Focus. https://www.facultyfocus.com/
      articles/course-design-ideas/a-renewed-case-for-student-success-
      using-transparency-in-assignment-design-when-teaching-
      remotely

Brame, C. J. (2013). Writing good multiple-choice test questions.
      https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-pages/writing-good-
      multiple-choice-test-questions/

Bridges, M. W., DiPietro, M., Lovett, M. C., Norman, M. K., &
      Ambrose, S. A. (2023). How Learning Works: Eight Research-
      Based Principles for Smart Teaching. Wiley.

Brookhart, S. M. (2008). How to give effective feedback to your students
      . Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
                                                                BIBLIOGRAPHY | 205

Brookhart, S. M., & Chen, F. (2015). The quality and effectiveness
      of descriptive rubrics. Educational Review, 67(3), 343-368.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/00131911.2014.929565

Brooks, R., & Grady, S. D. (2022). Course design considerations for
      inclusion and representation. Quality Matters White Paper.
      https://www.qualitymatters.org/qa-resources/resource-center/
      articles-resources/course-design-inclusion-representation-
      white-paper

Chan, Z., & Ho, S. (2019). Good and bad practices in rubrics: The
      perspectives of students and educators. Assessment &
      Evaluation in Higher Education, 44(4), 533-545.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2018.1522528

Cherney, M. R., Fetherston, M., & Johnsen, L. J. (2018). Online
      course student collaboration literature: A review and critique.
      Small Group Research, 49, 98-128. https://doi.org/10.1177/
      1046496417721627

Cho, M.-H., & Tobias, S. (2016). Should Instructors Require
      Discussion in Online Courses? Effects of Online Discussion on
      Community of Inquiry, Learner Time, Satisfaction, and
      Achievement--ProQuest. International Review of Research in
      Open and Distributed Learning, 17(2).

Crawford, Stephen (2012). Aligning Assessments with Learning
      Objectives. http://teachonline.asu.edu/2012/10/aligning-
      assessments-with-learning-objectives/.
206 | BIBLIOGRAPHY

Crompton, H., & Burke, D. (2023). Artificial intelligence in higher
      education: The state of the field. International Journal of
      Educational Technology in Higher Education, 20(1), 22.
      https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-023-00392-8

Davis, B. G. (2009). Tools for Teaching. Second Edition. John Wiley
      & Sons.

Dyer, T., Aroz, J., & Larson, E. (2018). Proximity in the online
      classroom: Engagement, relationships, and personalization.
      Journal of Instructional Research, 7, 11.

Estrada, B. O., & Fabin, A. D. H. (2024). Generacin de rbricas
      con herramientas de inteligencia artificial para la evaluacin de
      aprendizajes en educacin superior. DIDAC, 84, Article 84.
      https://doi.org/10.48102/didac.2024..84_JUL-DIC.211

Gezie, A., Khaja, K., Chang, V. N., Adamek, M. E., & Johnsen, M.
      B. (2012). Rubrics as a Tool for Learning and Assessment: What
      Do Baccalaureate Students Think? Journal of Teaching in Social
      Work, 32(4), 421-437. https://doi.org/10.1080/
      08841233.2012.705240

Goshtasbpour, F., Swinnerton, B. J., & Pickering, J. D. (2022).
      Twelve tips for engaging learners in online discussions. Medical
      Teacher, 44(3), 244-248.

Grant, S. (2022). Not Your Mother's Discussion Board: Creating
      Engaging Discussion Boards in the Introductory Business Law
      Course. Journal of Legal Studies Education, 39(2), 127-165.
                                                                BIBLIOGRAPHY | 207

Inclusive Teaching Resources. (n.d.). UTA CRTLE.
      https://www.uta.edu/administration/crtle/teaching/pedagogy/
      inclusive-teaching-resources

Jonsson, A. (2014). Rubrics as a way of providing transparency in

assessment. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education,

39(7),  840-852.      https://doi.org/10.1080/

02602938.2013.875117

Joyce, A. (2023). Embracing AI: Using Cat-GPT to Encourage
      Classroom Discussion. College Teaching, 0(0), 1-3.

Kiryakova, G., & Angelova, N. (2023). ChatGPT: A Challenging
      Tool for the University Professors in Their Teaching Practice.
      Education Sciences, 13(10), NA-NA. https://doi.org/10.3390/
      educsci13101056

Ko, S., & Rossen, S. (2017). Teaching Online: A Practical Guide.
      Taylor & Francis.

LaPierre, S. S. (2023). Educators Find Value in ChatGPT. Computers
      in Libraries, 43(7), 31-35.

Lin, T.-C. (2023). Can online discussions benefit students' learning
      in online courses? Evidence From teaching introduction to
      microeconomics. E-Learning and Digital Media.

Lowenthal, P. R. (2009). The evolution and influence of social
      presence theory in online learning. Social Computing,
      Concepts, Methodologies, Tools and Applications, 113-128.
208 | BIBLIOGRAPHY

Malamed, C. (n.d.). Why You Need To Use Storytelling For Learning.
      http://theelearningcoach.com/elearning2-0/why-you-need-to-
      use-storytelling-for-learning/.

Marquis, T. L. (2021). Formative assessment and scaffolding online
      learning. New Directions for Adult & Continuing Education,
      169, 51-60. https://doi.org/10.1002/ace.20413

Meron, Y., & Araci, Y. T. (2023). Artificial intelligence in design
      education: Evaluating ChatGPT as a virtual colleague for post-
      graduate course development. Design Science, 9, e30.
      https://doi.org/10.1017/dsj.2023.28

Mills, E. (2017). Don't Overlook the Value of Storytelling in
      Instructional Design. https://www.caveolearning.com/blog/
      dont-overlook-the-value-of-storytelling-in-instructional-design.

Mondal, H., Marndi, G., Behera, J., & Mondal, S. (2023). ChatGPT
      for teachers: Practical examples for utilizing artificial intelligence
      for educational purposes. Indian Journal of Vascular and
      Endovascular Surgery, 10(3), 200-200.

Moniquemuro. (2019). How to create a quiz in your online course
      (that doesn't suck). ProofMango. https://proofmango.com/
      create-a-quiz-in-online-course/

Nestor, M. & Nestor, C. (2013, November 25). Alignment and

Backward  Design.     http://www.youtube.com/

watch?v=ZTv2HR2ckto.
                                                                BIBLIOGRAPHY | 209

Nu-Man, M.R., and Porter, T.M., (2018). Igniting Your Teaching
      with Educational Technology A Resources for New Teachers.
      Editors: Matt Rhoads & Bonni Stachowiak. Retrieved from
      https://edd7032017f2.pressbooks.com/

Pappas, C. (2014). 7 Tips To Integrate Storytelling Into Your Next
      eLearning Course. https://elearningindustry.com/7-tips-
      integrate-storytelling-next-elearning-course.

Pi, Z., Deng, L., Wang, X., Guo, P., Xu, T., & Zhou, Y. (2022).
      The influences of a virtual instructor's voice and appearance
      on learning from video lectures. Journal of Computer Assisted
      Learning, 38(6), 1703-1713. https://doi.org/10.1111/
      jcal.12704

Picciano, A. (2002). Beyond student perceptions: Issues of
      interaction, presence, and performance in an online course.
      Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 6, 21-40.

Poole, D. M. (2000). Student participation in a discussion-oriented
      online course: A case study. Journal of Research on Computing
      in Education, 33(2), 162.

Pradana, M., Elisa, H. P., & Syarifuddin, S. (2023). Discussing
      ChatGPT in education: A literature review and bibliometric
      analysis. Cogent Education, 10(2), 2243134. https://doi.org/
      10.1080/2331186X.2023.2243134

Ragupathi, K. (2016). Designing Effective Online Assessments:
      Resource Guide.
210 | BIBLIOGRAPHY

Reddy, Y. M., & Andrade, H. (2010). A review of rubric use in higher
      education. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 35(4),
      435-448. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602930902862859

Reinert Center for Transformative Teaching & Learning. (2017).
      Resource Guides for Assessment and Assignment Design. Saint
      Louis University. https://www.slu.edu/cttl/resources/inclusive-
      teaching.php

Richardson, J. C., & Swan, K. (2003). Examining social presence in
      online courses in relation to students' perceived learning and
      satisfaction, JALN, 7, 66-88.

Saucier, D. A., Renken, N. D., & Schiffer, A. A. (2022). Five reasons
      to stop giving exams in class. Faculty Focus.
      https://www.facultyfocus.com/articles/educational-
      assessment/five-reasons-to-stop-giving-exams-in-class/

Short, J. (1976). The social psychology of telecommunications.
      London; New York: Wiley.

Southwestern University (n.d.). Six Parts of an Effective Prompt.
      https://www.southwestern.edu/offices/writing/faculty-
      resources-for-writing-instruction/effective-writing-
      assignments/six-parts-of-an-effective-prompt/.

Stock, E. (2019). Want students to remember what they learn? Have
      them teach it. EdSurge.

Swan, K., & Shih, L. F. (2005). On the nature and development
                                                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY | 211

      of social presence in online course discussions. Journal of
      Asynchronous Learning Networks, 9(3), 22.

Taylor, B., Kisby, F., & Reedy, A. (2024). Rubrics in higher
      education: An exploration of undergraduate students'
      understanding and perspectives. Assessment & Evaluation in
      Higher Education, 49(6), 799-809. https://doi.org/10.1080/
      02602938.2023.2299330

Tirado-Morueta, R., Maraver-Lpez, P., & Hernando-Gmez, .
      (2017). Patterns of participation and social connections in
      online discussion forums. Small Group Research, 48, 639-664.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/1046496417710726

Truhlar, A. M., Williams, K. M., & Walter, M. T. (2019). Student
      engagement with course content and peers in synchronous
      online courses discussions. Online Learning, 22(4).
      https://doi.org/10.24059/olj.v22i4.1389

Vanderbilt University Center for Teaching. (n.d.). Giving exams
      online: Strategies and tools. https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/online-
      exams/

Watling, C. J., & Ginsburg, S. (2018). Assessment, feedback, and the
      alchemy of learning. Medical Education, 53(1). https://doi.org/
      10.1111/medu.13645

Wick, A. (2020). 4 Tips for writing good online assignment
      directions. Cengage. https://todayslearner.cengage.com/
      writing-good-online-assignment-instructions/
212 | BIBLIOGRAPHY

Woods, K., & Bliss, K. (2016). Facilitating successful online
      discussions. The Journal of Effective Teaching, 16(2), 76-92.

Ye, H. (2019). Best practices for online quizzes. FOCUS Center for
      Teaching and Learning, Cedarville University.
      https://ctl.cedarville.edu/wp/best-practices-for-online-quizzes/

Young, S., Kelsey, D., & Lancaster, A. (2011). Predicted outcome
      value of e-mail communication: Factors that foster professional
      relational development between students and teachers.
      Communication Education, 60, 371-388. https://doi.org/
      10.1080/03634523.2011.563388

Yuan, M., Zeng, J., Wang, A., & Shang, J. (2021). Would It Be Better
      if Instructors Technically Adjust Their Image or Voice in Online
      Courses? Impact of the Way of Instructor Presence on Online
      Learning. Frontiers in Psychology, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/
      fpsyg.2021.746857

Zhadko, O., & Ko, S. (2019). Best Practices in Designing Courses
      with Open Educational Resources. Taylor & Francis.
                                                           LINKS BY CHAPTER | 213

LINKS BY CHAPTER

Links by chapter are provided in the order that they appear in
the chapter.

Choosing the right tool

   Retrieval Practice Tool
      - https://www.retrievalpractice.org/

   Socrative - https://www.socrative.com/
   Kahoot - https://kahoot.com/welcomeback/
   Quizizz - https://quizizz.com/
   Quizlet - https://quizlet.com/
   Poll Everywhere - https://www.polleverywhere.com/
   Schoology - https://www.schoology.com/
   Jupiter Ed - https://login.jupitered.com/login/
   Google Classroom - https://classroom.google.com/u/

      0/h
   H5P - https://h5p.org/

AI Rubrics

   How to add a rubric to an assignment in Canvas -
214 | LINKS BY CHAPTER

      https://community.canvaslms.com/t5/Instructor-
      Guide/How-do-I-add-a-rubric-to-an-assignment/ta-p/
      1058
   How to add a rubric to a discussion in Canvas -
      https://community.canvaslms.com/t5/Instructor-
      Guide/How-do-I-add-a-rubric-to-a-graded-discussion/
      ta-p/1062
                                                                IMAGE CREDITS | 215

IMAGE CREDITS

This work contains copyrighted material the use of which has
not always been specifically authorized by the copyright
owners. The creators of this OER believe in good faith that
reuse of these materials constitutes a "fair use" as described
in Section 107 of the Copyright Act. Downstream users who
wish to use copyrighted material from this resource for
purposes beyond those authorized by the fair use doctrine
should obtain permission from the copyright owner(s) of the
original content.

Unless noted below, all figures used in the text are the
intellectual property of the content creators and are licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
license.

Selecting Aligned Assessments

Crawford, Stephen (2012). Aligning Assessments with
Learning Objectives. http://teachonline.asu.edu/2012/10/
aligning-assessments-with-learning-objectives/.
216 | IMAGE CREDITS

Quizzes

Crawford, Stephen (2012). Aligning Assessments with
Learning Objectives. http://teachonline.asu.edu/2012/10/
aligning-assessments-with-learning-objectives/.
                                   ERRATA AND VERSIONING HISTORY | 217

ERRATA AND
VERSIONING HISTORY

   Mavs Open Press

The peer review process for Mavs Open Press resources varies
by publication and author. We strive for transparency and
describe the creation process in the front matter of each text
so readers may evaluate the work on its own merit. Because we
offer web-based services, we can quickly and easily address any
errors that arise after publication. This page provides a record
of edits and changes made to the web version of this book since
its initial publication.

Changes logged here are reflected in the web text only until a
new version of the resource is released, at which point the file
downloads are also updated. Version updates are noted in the
Status field below.

If you have a correction to suggest, submit it to library-
open@listserv.uta.edu. We will contact the author then make
and log necessary changes here. Below is a list of Correction
Types we currently update:

 1. Typo
218 | ERRATA AND VERSIONING HISTORY

 2. Broken link
 3. Addition
 4. Other factual inaccuracy in content
 5. Incorrect calculation or solution
 6. General/pedagogical suggestion or question

 Date Submitted Format Correction Type Location Description Status
