   WAC PARTNERSHIPS
BETWEEN SECONDARY
AND POSTSECONDARY

            INSTITUTIONS

                                                         Edited by
                                              Jacob S. Blumner
                                     and Pamela B. Childers
          WAC PARTNERSHIPS
    BETWEEN SECONDARY AND
POSTSECONDARY INSTITUTIONS
PERSPECTIVES ON WRITING
Series Editors, Susan H. McLeod and Rich Rice

The Perspectives on Writing series addresses writing studies in a broad sense.
Consistent with the wide ranging approaches characteristic of teaching and
scholarship in writing across the curriculum, the series presents works that take
divergent perspectives on working as a writer, teaching writing, administering
writing programs, and studying writing in its various forms.

The WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press are collaborating so that these books
will be widely available through free digital distribution and low-cost print edi-
tions. The publishers and the Series editor are teachers and researchers of writing,
committed to the principle that knowledge should freely circulate. We see the
opportunities that new technologies have for further democratizing knowledge.
And we see that to share the power of writing is to share the means for all to
articulate their needs, interest, and learning into the great experiment of literacy.

Recent Books in the Series

Nathan Shepley, Placing the History of College Writing: Stories from the Incom-
    plete Archive (2015)

Asao B. Inoue, Antiracist Writing Assessment Ecologies: An Approach to Teaching
    and Assessing Writing for a Socially Just Future (2015)

Theresa Lillis, Kathy Harrington, Mary R. Lea, and Sally Mitchell (Eds.),
    Working with Academic Literacies: Case Studies Towards Transformative
    Practice (2015)

Beth L. Hewett and Kevin Eric DePew (Eds.), Foundational Practices of Online
    Writing Instruction (2015)

Christy I. Wenger, Yoga Minds, Writing Bodies: Contemplative Writing Pedagogy
    (2015)

Sarah Allen, Beyond Argument: Essaying as a Practice of (Ex)Change (2015)
Steven J. Corbett, Beyond Dichotomy: Synergizing Writing Center and Classroom

    Pedagogies (2015)
Tara Roeder and Roseanne Gatto (Eds.), Critical Expressivism: Theory and Prac-

    tice in the Composition Classroom (2014)
Terry Myers Zawacki and Michelle Cox (Eds), WAC and Second-Language Writ-

    ers: Research Towards Linguistically and Culturally Inclusive Programs and
    Practices, (2014)
         WAC PARTNERSHIPS
   BETWEEN SECONDARY AND
POSTSECONDARY INSTITUTIONS

              Edited by Jacob S. Blumner and Pamela B. Childers

                              The WAC Clearinghouse
                                  wac.colostate.edu

                               Fort Collins, Colorado
                                      Parlor Press

                                www.parlorpress.com
                             Anderson, South Carolina
The WAC Clearinghouse, Fort Collins, Colorado 80523

Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson, South Carolina 29621

© 2016 by Jacob S. Blumner and Pamela B. Childers. This work is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International.

ISBN 978-1-64215-073-5 (pdf ) | 978-1-64215-074-2 (epub) | 978-1-60235-807-2 (pbk.)

DOI 10.37514/PER-B.2015.0735

Produced in the United States of America

                          Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Blumner, Jacob S., 1968- editor. | Childers, Pamela B., 1943- editor.
Title: WAC partnerships between secondary and postsecondary institutions /

  edited by Jacob S. Blumner and Pamela B. Childers.
Description: Fort Collins, Colorado : WAC Clearinghouse ; Anderson, South Carolina : Parlor

   Press, [2016] | Series: Perspectives on writing | Includes bibliographical references.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016001106 (print) | LCCN 2016007275 (ebook) | ISBN 978-1-64215-073-

   5 (pdf ) | ISBN 978-1-64215-074-2 (epub) | ISBN 978-1-60235-807-2 (pbk. : alk. paper) |
   ISBN 978-1-60235-808-9 (hardcover : alk. paper) | ISBN 978-1-60235-811-9 ( iBook) | ISBN
   978-1-60235-812-6 (mobi)
Subjects: LCSH: English language--Composition and exercises--Study and teaching (Secondary) |
   Interdisciplinary approach in education. |College-school cooperation.
Classification: LCC LB1631 .W2 2016 (print) | LCC LB1631 (ebook) | DDC 808/.0420712--
   dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016001106

Copyeditor: Don Donahue
Designer: Mike Palmquist
Series Editors: Susan H. McLeod and Rich Rice

Cover Image: "Serenade in a Kansas Wind," Wax Pencil Drawing by Malcolm Graeme Childers.
Copyright © 1998 by Malcolm Childers. Used with permission.
Poem: "Serenade in a Kansas Wind," page 3, ©1998 Malcolm Graeme Childers.

The WAC Clearinghouse supports teachers of writing across the disciplines. Hosted by Colorado
State University, it brings together scholarly journals and book series as well as resources for teach-
ers who use writing in their courses. This book is available in digital format for free download at
wac.colostate.edu.

Parlor Press, LLC is an independent publisher of scholarly and trade titles in print and multi-
media formats. This book is available in print and digital formats from Parlor Press at www.par-
lorpress.com. For submission information or to find out about Parlor Press publications, write
to Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson, South Carolina 29621, or email editor@
parlorpress.com.
CONTENTS

Foreword.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . vii
       Art Young

Acknowledgments. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . xi

Serenade in a Kansas Wind .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3
       Malcolm Childers

Chapter 1. Introduction to WAC and Partnerships That Cross
Academic Levels and Disciplines.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5

       Jacob S. Blumner and Pamela B. Childers

Chapter 2. Talking about Writing Across the Secondary and
College Community.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 19

       Michelle Cox and Phyllis Gimbel

Chapter 3. Newton's Third Law Revisited: Action Reaction Pairs
in Collaboration.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 37

        Michael J. Lowry

Chapter 4. Shaping Disciplinary Discourses in High School:
A Two-Way Collaborative Writing Program .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 47

       Federico Navarro and Andrea Revel Chion

Chapter 5. Collaborating on Writing-to-Learn in Ninth-Grade
Science: What Is Collaboration--and How Can We Sustain It?.  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 63

       Danielle Myelle-Watson, Deb Spears, David Wellen, Michael
       McClellan, and Brad Peters

Chapter 6. In Our Own Backyard: What Makes a Community
College-Secondary School Connection Work? .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 87

       Mary McMullen-Light

Chapter 7. Negotiating Expectations: Overcoming Obstacles
Introducing WAC through Collaboration between a German
University Writing Center and German High Schools .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 113

       Luise Beaumont, Mandy Pydde, and Simone Tschirpke

Chapter 8. "So Much More Than Just an `A'": A Transformative
High School and University Writing Center Partnership.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 131

       Marie Hansen, Debra Hartley, Kirsten Jamsen, Katie Levin, and
       Kristen Nichols-Besel

                                                                                                    v
Chapter 9. "Oh, I Get By with a Little Help from My Friends":
Short-Term Writing Center/Community Collaborations.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 155

       Trixie G. Smith
Chapter 10. What We Have Learned about WAC Partnerships
and Their Futures.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 167

       Jacob S. Blumner and Pamela B. Childers
Contributors.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 175

vi
FOREWORD

      Art Young
      Clemson University

    Since the 1970s, Writing Across the Curriculum (WAC) has been an edu-
cational movement devoted to students of all ages learning disciplinary content
as they simultaneously develop their language abilities. Elementary schools, sec-
ondary schools, and colleges all experimented with a variety of approaches to
WAC, and since the 1980s, WAC has been a significant presence in American
education at all levels as teachers seek to make connections between students'
writing and their learning of subject matter--within the broader framework of
increasing students' critical-thinking, problem-solving, and creative abilities. A
motivated and engaged writer and learner is a successful student no matter the
disciplinary knowledge being learned.

    A major premise of WAC is that subject-matter teachers and writing teachers
should work together "across disciplines" to make WAC approaches to disci-
plinary writing and learning more effective and meaningful. Whether in physics
classes or in writing classes, when teachers work in isolation the result often is a
rote-learning approach rather than an active-learning approach. WAC, on the
other hand, demonstrates that partnering with other teachers will improve stu-
dent learning and communication abilities.

    WAC Partnerships between Secondary and Post-Secondary Institutions builds
on traditional approaches to WAC based on the collaboration of teachers from
different disciplines, collaborations often initiated by an interdisciplinary faculty
workshop--what one of the authors in this collection refers to as "the quintes-
sential WAC experience." But this book goes further and proposes that teachers
and institutions partner not only across disciplines in their schools and colleges,
but also across educational levels and with other community organizations--
locally, regionally, nationally, and even internationally. Two of the chapters are
by teacher-researchers in Argentina and in Germany. The editors and authors
in WAC Partnerships envision exciting possibilities for teachers, students, and
institutions that embrace WAC, an educational movement begun over 45 years
ago, but now in the twenty-first century more than ever full of opportunities
and possibilities.

    My involvement with WAC began in the 1970s and early 1980s, exciting
times for educational initiatives. My colleagues and I at Michigan Technological
University developed interdisciplinary workshops and cross-disciplinary proj-

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2015.0735.1.2                                      vii
Foreword

ects in which teachers at opposite ends of the campus came together to develop
strategies for improving students' writing abilities and subject-matter knowledge
through a variety of teacher-to-teacher projects and department-to-department
projects. We conducted workshops in local elementary and secondary schools,
and we partnered on workshops with institutions in other states. We started a
writing center with tutors who replaced decontextualized self-paced, fill-in-the-
blanks, learning modules. My colleague Toby Fulwiler founded and co-directed
the Upper Peninsula Writing Project (UPWP), an affiliate of the National Writ-
ing Project (NWP). UPWP soon had an emphasis on WAC, inviting teachers
from disciplines other than English to enroll, as well as maintaining NWP's
principles of emphasizing writing process theory and pedagogy and a teach-
ers-as-writers approach to building and expressing knowledge. But, as you will
read in this book, these activities are just the beginning of opportunities that
now await engaged teachers and institutions that form partnerships across disci-
plines and across educational levels.

    Jacob S. Blumner and Pamela B. Childers, nationally-known and respect-
ed teacher-researchers on WAC and writing centers at both the secondary and
post-secondary levels, have collected and edited an engaging and important an-
thology that will be of special interest to teachers and administrators already
participating in or seeking to participate in WAC and writing center programs
and possibilities. WAC Partnerships provides models for collaborations between
secondary and higher education institutions and between individual teachers
in different educational settings. Readers learn of a successful collaboration be-
tween a private high school and a public community college that provides an
example of best practices when planning to build a partnership. Readers also
learn of a partnership between a high school and a university that was not suc-
cessful, offering a case study in mistakes that may lead to failure. Readers learn
of collaboration between a high school writing center and a university writing
center that creates substantial and unexpected benefits for the student tutors in
both locations.

    These partnerships and others in this volume are presented in the context of
new opportunities for WAC and writing centers brought about by recent chang-
es in local, national, and global educational cultures, from new technologies
that support collaboration across distances, and educational policies designed to
equip students to contribute and even thrive in the information-driven world
of the twenty-first century. Such opportunities emerge from new educational
policies, such as the Common Core State Standards for writing and literacy,
to prepare students for writing in college, a key area for partnerships between
secondary schools and colleges, and from STEM, a curricular innovation in
science, technology, engineering, and math, which focuses on writing in the

viii
                                                                                                      Foreword

science and engineering disciplines in high school and college. One essay by a
high school science teacher reports on a collaboration between NASA senior sci-
entists and secondary science teachers who are dedicated to "supporting the next
generation of STEM professionals." Key components of this collaboration are
the use of WAC strategies, such as problem-based learning, frequent informal
writing-to-learn activities, and formal writing-to-communicate assignments and
projects for both teachers and students.

    Other fresh opportunities for WAC and writing centers are being created
every day by the rapid development of digital communication technologies,
technologies that allow students, teachers, and institutions to collaborate across
short and long distances on both short and long term projects. Electronic com-
munication tools such as email, blogs, Skype, and other social media provide
numerous resources for WAC programs and writing centers and the individual
students, teachers, tutors, and clients within them to develop individual and
institutional partnerships to enhance students' engagement and learning. One
essay by a writing center director describes a short-term project in which writing
center consultants in training at her university in the US partner with new con-
sultants in training at a university in Sweden through email discussions about
recent tutoring experiences and shared readings.

    I can attest that such direct personal conversations using electronic com-
munication with distant partners can be extremely rewarding for students and
teachers, sharpening through conversational learning participants' reading and
writing abilities, subject-matter knowledge, and critical thinking. At Clemson
University since 1987, I have seen remarkable engagement and thoughtful and
insightful learning when my students in South Carolina discussed William
Blake's poetry via email exchange with students in Andreas Pellizzari's English
class at Alessandro Volta High School in Bagno a Ripoli, Italy, and when my
students discussed Tim O'Brien's novel The Things They Carried on a blog with
students in Nancy Swanson's creative writing class at Daniel High School in
Central, South Carolina, just five miles from Clemson. In both cases, the often
great distance between high school teachers and students and college teachers
and students was bridged, making these writing-across-the-literature-curric-
ulum projects successful as participants used their language abilities to build
knowledge and perspectives not available to any one individual. In a longer term
project, 2003-2013, students in English classes each year at Clemson University
have discussed various American, British, and Swedish poets on blogs with en-
gineering and science students in Magnus Gustafsson's "Fiction for Engineers"
classes at Chalmers University in Gothenburg, Sweden. Students were quick
to discover the cultural and linguistic differences in the critical interpretations
of Swedish students compared to American students, a multi-cultural collab-

                                                                                                   ix
Foreword

oration not available before the advent of rapid, asynchronous, international
communication.

    I am pleased to offer this foreword to WAC Partnerships between Secondary
and Post-Secondary Institutions, which describes valuable current models for
planning, building, and maintaining partnerships between institutions, as well
as sound advice from experienced practitioners for teachers and students seeking
to extend the boundaries of their learning through collaboration in WAC and
writing center projects.

    WAC Partnerships shows that engineers and scientists are excited to support
"the next generation of STEM professionals." No matter our disciplines, we
teachers strive to strengthen the abilities of all our students as they prepare for
their professional and civic lives. In particular, teachers involved in WAC and
writing centers recognize that students who become more able learners and com-
municators, some of whom are our junior colleagues as consultants in writing
centers and teaching fellows in WAC programs, will one day be strengthening
the language and learning abilities of the students they teach, counsel, and serve.

x
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

    It is hard to acknowledge all of the people who have influenced our profes-
sional work, writing, and thinking over the years. Jacob began considering the
role of WAC and writing centers while he was studying and presenting with col-
leagues at University of Nevada-Reno in 1993. Pam started her study of WAC
and writing centers by partnering with other secondary school and university
people in 1981 through Northeastern University. However, we began collab-
orating at the 1997 IWCA conference in Park City, UT, while Jacob and Bob
Barnett were editing Writing Centers and Writing Across the Curriculum Programs:
Building Interdisciplinary Partnerships. Pam was writing a chapter for the book,
and we met in the makeshift writing center in the lobby of the conference hotel
to work on her revisions. So, over the years we have had the opportunity to work
with a variety of people in multiple settings who have influenced our belief in
the importance of partnerships among secondary schools, community colleges,
and four-year institutions.

    We wish to acknowledge all of those who have shared their experiences with
partnerships and ideas from their own research and presentations at conferences,
questioned what we were doing, attended workshops and presentations we have
given, and supported what we have attempted to do through many missteps
and revisions. We also wish to voice our appreciation to our students in diverse
settings who inspire us and teach us.

    Sometimes we overlook the obvious; it is the volunteer professional organi-
zations that have enabled us to continue to do what we love and come in contact
with one another--NCTE, IWAC, IWCA, CCCC, as well as all the state and
regional groups. We have met or learned about our authors in this collection
through these connections, and they have made us intellectually richer in the
process. We would also like to thank our home institutions that have allowed us
to pursue our research interests and supported our work. And we would like to
thank Nancy Grigg for her editing prowess helping whip the book into shape,
and Malcolm Childers for his vision that became our cover drawing and his
poem, "Serenade in a Kansas Wind."

    Outside of our professional work, we must acknowledge and thank our fam-
ilies for their support. Their encouragement, patience, and understanding make
the work possible. Jacob first and foremost thanks his wife, Helen, who has been
the rock of the family, supporting Jacob as he burned the midnight oil on this
project. He also wants to thank his three sons, Jonas, Micah, and Eli for inspir-
ing this work and making it more meaningful. And finally he thanks his whole

                                                                                                   xi
Acknowledgments

family for dragging him outside to ride a bike or go fishing when they know he
needs fresh air and to feel unfiltered sunlight. Pam thanks her husband Malcolm
for his love, support, and partnership on writing projects and presentations, as
well as in life. She also wishes to thank her parents for their love and work ethic,
her family and friends who challenge her thinking and actions daily, and her
former students from whom she continues to learn. Pam's work with Mesa Land
Trust has given her an opportunity to help conserve our environment and its
riches for future generations.

    Finally, we wish to thank Sue McLeod and Mike Palmquist for their support
throughout this project. The WAC Clearinghouse, an international storehouse of
professional volunteerism, offers everyone open-access materials, journals and
books. What a gift to our profession.

xii
         WAC PARTNERSHIPS
   BETWEEN SECONDARY AND
POSTSECONDARY INSTITUTIONS
SERENADE IN A KANSAS WIND

Malcolm Childers

Stand                              predation,
just here,                         and passing.
in such a way
that the sweeping                  Like
copper lines converge--            a grand expeditionary force,
an ever-shrinking                  they spread a thousand miles north
prophetic mirage                   from here
in both directions                 into Manitoba.
toward the horizon.
                                   Then drying,
Now                                their life
close your eyes                    begins to fall back
and lean your head back,           like a defeated army
so that the sun can wash           clad in the the hissing
your salty brow.                   brittle yellow of autumn.
                                   It retreats
In the amber half light            a thousand miles
behind your lids,                  south from here
your thoughts will focus           into Tamaulipas.
on what your mind can see
and                                Maybe you can sense
something of the middle ground--   there used to be
what it means to be in this place  more.
where East becomes West--
will reach out                     Perhaps
and touch you.                     you can just hear
                                   the American Serengeti
From the early                     that was.
supple greens of spring,
this great grass ocean             The endless brown armadas
begins to spill,                   of large animals
flow,                              plying the grass ocean,
and flower in the wind.            the indigenous nomads
During those living months,        who moved with them,
birds and insects                  who lived from them,
dance and sing--                   who knew great risk
a primal buzzing,                  and even greater freedom,
twittering floor show              who danced and sang
of sex,                            their primal invocations
                                   of sex,

                                                                       3
predation,                    Within
and passing.                  the penetrating hum
                              and breathy moan of it,
Perhaps                       are the lowing of wild herds,
you can just hear             the intimate passion and birth cries
what it was like              of native women,
before these wires            the ceremonial chants
crossed the sky,              of their men,
before the time               the screech of wheeling hawks,
of white men,                 the last prayers of wounded settlers and
before everything changed     dying braves,
to conform                    the raging curses of betrayal,
to their European             the brass of victory bands,
God-given mandate             the hammering of builders,
to subdue                     the buzzing of back-room dealers,
and possess the earth.        the twittering of evening ladies,
                              the rhythmic songs of workmen,
Still                         the whistles and calls of cowboys,
sometimes,                    the throaty din of tractors,
in the thin winter light,     the quiet songs of farm wives,
long after the vacationers    and the lonely rumble
have hurried through          of distant trains passing through at
without seeing,               twilight.
without caring,
as if they had never been;    Within the soft
and only an occasional semi   and strident passages
reads the icy concrete pages  of that longing sound
as it passes indifferently    there are melodies
from Dodge to Wichita,        of a subtle and oceanic nature.
the wires themselves          Within those lost chords
will sing.                    are intervals
And the sound of it.          that might
                              change the world
How to describe               if we only could hear them.
that sound.                   If we only knew them.
                              But then
It is                         it's only you and I listening,
as if all                     and the quite serenade rings
that has passed here in time  endlessly on
where we stand                as if no one
listening                     will ever
comes again                   answer the phone.
as a chorus of the ages.

4
CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION TO WAC AND
PARTNERSHIPS THAT CROSS
ACADEMIC LEVELS AND
DISCIPLINES

Jacob S. Blumner and Pamela B. Childers

    Every day we read about the gap between high school and college writing,
how high schools are not preparing students for college writing, and after all
the handwringing and finger pointing, many teachers and scholars contend
that high school-college partnerships would be the most effective way to solve
this problem. As we wrote in "Building Better Bridges: What Makes High
School-College WAC Collaborations Work?":

         To better prepare students for writing across the curriculum
         in higher education, some high school teachers and col-
         lege professors have formed partnerships. The idea is that a
         cross-pollination of ideas from the teachers, who know the
         students best, and the professors, who know the expecta-
         tions and forms of college writing best, could greatly benefit
         students, teachers, and professors. Why do some programs fail
         and others succeed? What in successful partnerships might be
         replicated by others? (Blumner and Childers 91)

    Through our interactions with teachers at all academic levels involved in
WAC partnerships, we discovered the need to demonstrate a variety of successful
models with various collaborations between schools and institutions, so others
can emulate them and use the book as a model to work with a variety of stake-
holders in promoting this type of collaboration. Our research, done through
our own scholarship, International Writing Across the Curriculum Conference
workshops (2010 and 2012), and a survey that led to a publication (Blumner
and Childers), provides a sound footing for this book as well as confirms the
need for such literature. We present here a collection of collaborative partner-
ships among middle schools, high schools, colleges and universities to improve
writing across the curriculum (WAC). Schools and colleges are forming part-

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2015.0735.2.01                                5
Blumner and Childers

nerships to improve WAC and student matriculation as they have seen an in-
creasing need for more coordinated efforts to prepare students for the kinds of
work and civic engagement that is increasingly required of people to succeed and
contribute to our society. The Common Core State Standards (CCSS) refer to
this as college and career readiness.

    Renée Clift, Mary Lou Veal, Marlene Johnson, and Patricia Holland define
collaboration as "The explicit agreement among two or more persons to meet
together over time to set and accomplish a particular goal or goals" (54). The
purpose of this book is to promote models of collaborative partnerships across
the curriculum and across schools/colleges, so other institutions can design
their own programs or create new innovative ones. Also, we want to encourage
sustainability in such partnerships based on what has and has not worked for
others. These partnerships vary from secondary to postsecondary WAC partner-
ships, all involve WAC, and many include writing centers as part of the part-
nerships. Each chapter has been written by participants from the institutions
at the core of that particular collaboration and detail their program and their
experiences in it, addressing topics such as pedagogy, philosophy, budgeting,
daily pragmatics, problems encountered, benefits, results and recommendations.
Contributors include educators in South America and Germany who wish to
share their partnership experiences as well. All authors have read and responded
to other chapters, and readers will note how authors reference work from other
chapters in their own to create a cohesive connection and model collaboration
throughout the entire book. In fact, this book itself is an example of another
kind of partnership, one in which there are no hierarchical differences among
participants and no standard for what does and does not work. Our authors are
unique educators who approach partnerships based on their own backgrounds,
experiences, research, students, disciplines, institutions, and state or national
standards. Our readers are also exceptional educators who will adapt what is
included in these chapters to their own backgrounds, experiences, research, stu-
dents, disciplines, institutions and state or national standards.

WHY PARTNERSHIPS? ADVANTAGES/DISADVANTAGES

    Whether initiated by the secondary or postsecondary institution, the part-
nership has to be a highly collaborative one. As we noted in our brief intro-
duction, authors frequently refer to the advantages for both partners involved.
And, with knowledge of upcoming changes in the SAT, both secondary and
postsecondary educators will need to know more about what and how their
collaborative partners are teaching writing. For high school partners, there is
an overwhelming need for some professional development to assist teachers in

6
                                                                                                  Introduction

applying WAC theory into practice in all disciplines. Educators know their stu-
dents and understand their potential, but sometimes lack the knowledge of how
to use writing in all subjects to improve critical thinking, learning and writing.
Through collaborative planning with colleagues, they can design ways that do
not make more work for them, but instead help their students learn while they
assess their own teaching as well. Administrators are limited in the amount of
time and monetary assistance they can offer to such projects. In dual credit
(DC) courses, "beginning these programs is typically less expensive and faster
to start for the [high schools], since the (DC) approach does not require exter-
nal workshops to operate, nor does it require an expensive and stressful test to
validate the class" (Uhlenkamp). For instance, in Chapter 8 of this volume, the
authors describe how the high school teacher had to offer assistance in her own
classroom without any funds to do much more until she created a partnership
with the nearby university and began a peer tutoring/coaching program through
the partnership. We believe this experience is not uncommon. And, as we hear
more and more about CCSS, partnerships can be an important advantage if
there is what Annette D. Digby, Barbara C. Gartin, and Nikki L. Murdick re-
fer to in "Developing Effective University and Public School Partnerships" as
"communication, concern, compromise, and commitment" (37) on the part of
all involved. Without these four essential components, they may be unsuccessful
or never partner at all (38).

    For postsecondary institutions, the advantages include recruitment of fu-
ture students to the institution, an understanding of what students have learned
and how they mature before entering their first-year courses, a laboratory part-
nership for secondary education majors, and new perspectives on teaching and
learning. Also, the college has minimal direct expenses in terms of faculty sala-
ries and facility costs; high school teachers instruct dual credit courses on high
school campuses (Uhlenkamp). Many partnerships involve classroom research
that postsecondary instructors can conduct with their secondary partners, some-
times a necessary component for college faculty participation. We both have
observed misconceptions that both partners have had because of the lack of
communication, so a better understanding of what and how teachers are teach-
ing and young adults are learning becomes extremely valuable not only to post-
secondary teachers in all disciplines, but also especially for teachers of writing
and secondary education courses.

    The disadvantages for all partners usually involve working out the problems
of time and money to establish and maintain the partnership. Digby, Gartin,
and Murdick point out that partners have to work on "the synchronization of
both partners' schedules to allow times for meeting and other partnership activ-
ities" (38). Many have noted that institutional structures, rules, and responsibil-

                                                                                                    7
Blumner and Childers

ities cause unanticipated conflicts that can be overcome if the lines of commu-
nication and commitments are there. For instance, at the University of Arkansas
where a team partnered with a public school nearby, the "university partners
wished to research cooperative learning in the middle school science classroom,
but the time selected was at the end of the school year" (Digby, Gartin, and
Murdick 38). The problems of dealing with the end-of-year requirements at
the middle school would not have allowed for authentic research, so the middle
school teachers suggested that the research be conducted at the beginning of the
following school year. Therefore, the partnership was able to continue because
all partners were involved and flexible enough to accommodate each partner's
needs.

    And, what happens when the funds run out? Are the institutions willing to
continue the collaboration by sharing the financial burden of continuing it, or
are individuals involved in the partnership able to apply for and successfully re-
ceive grants to continue it? If these collaborations are to succeed long term, they
are dependent upon the impact on students at both institutions as well. Accord-
ing to Kenneth Bernstein, when preparing students for the AP test, he could:

         not simultaneously prepare them to do well on [the essay]
         portion of the test and teach them to write in a fashion that
         would properly serve them at higher levels of education....
         Now you are seeing the results in the students arriving at your
         institutions. They may be very bright. But we have not been
         able to prepare them for the kind of intellectual work that you
         [college instructors] have every right to expect of them. (32)

    Kathryn Noble McDaniel, a university history professor, writes in "Read
Long and Prosper: Five Do's and Don'ts for Preparing Students for College,"
that her college students are frequently required to complete thesis-length proj-
ects, but with "no preparation in writing longer papers, students become over-
whelmed by the assignment. They do not know how to formulate a topic that
can be explored in more than two or three pages" (85). She concludes that be-
cause of a lack of such experience, they also "lack confidence that they can write
at length and in depth and that there is even anything worth saying beyond
page two" (85). Both of these examples indicate why communication between
secondary and postsecondary teachers could make a difference in the learning
of all students and better prepare them for future writing, thinking, and learn-
ing experiences. It is more than just "transitioning" or bridging the gap. Also,
notice that Bernstein is talking about dealing with test preparation rather than
preparation for the intellectual experience of college, and he is frustrated by his
situation, while McDaniel's frustration is dealing with students that teachers

8
                                                                                                  Introduction

like Bernstein have had to send to her. Imagine a different scenario, like ones
in many of our chapters, where these two educators meet and discuss goals that
would eliminate both of their frustrations and help their students become more
fulfilled writers and learners as they transition from secondary to postsecondary
institutions of learning.

    The challenges Digby, Gartin, and Murdick describe at University of Arkan-
sas presuppose a philosophical and pedagogical alignment between secondary
and post-secondary educators; yet we have seen relationships in which that is
not the case. Though all educators have their students' success at the forefront,
what that looks like and how it is achieved may differ markedly, as well as how
requirements and pressure placed on educators may vary dramatically. Also, ne-
gotiating and understanding different participant and institutional cultures and
roles in the partnership can strain relations between institutions. These presup-
positions, requirements, and pressures can make aligning work between second-
ary and postsecondary education daunting, labor and time-intensive, and often
uncompensated. The time it takes to create and maintain these collaborations
can be exhausting and frustrating, and institutions may not value the work in
meaningful ways that reward the educators involved, rather than simply adding
their efforts to an already heavy workload.

    Secondary and postsecondary partnerships can make a big difference to stu-
dents, especially if they are actively involved in the collaborations. In describing
how the Tar River Writing Project (TRWP) partnered with a local high school
(Pitts County School District, NC) to redesign its graduation project, Stephanie
West-Puckett and William P. Banks explain how "teachers, like any group of
professionals both want and need to have some degree of agency in the construc-
tion of the curriculum that they teach ... Likewise ... students benefit from being
involved in the creation of a new curriculum" (355). The principal and leaders of
J. H. Rose High School had wanted "a curriculum that provides rich literacy in-
struction with embedded opportunities to read, write, speak, and listen in both
virtual and face-to-face environments" (357). With this team of collaborators
focusing on the same goals, the students will definitely benefit from this collabo-
ration. In another collaboration between Boise State and a nearby public school,
Rachel Bear, Heidi Estrem, James E. Fredricksen, and Dawn Shepherd state,
"Our goal is to consider how our pedagogical decisions in these two different
contexts might helpfully echo each other, providing opportunities for richer pro-
fessional conversations and continued productive learning for students" (131).
They conclude their chapter by saying that their high school and college educa-
tors "want our students to make contributions, to feel and to provide support
for one another, to learn from more experienced writers, to write about topics
and in different modes and media that matter to them and to others, and to feel

                                                                                                    9
Blumner and Childers

connected to other members of the classroom community" (135).
    We as educators should not be working in isolation. Educational changes

have been encouraged through many partnerships. For instance, Digby, Gartin,
and Murdick discovered, "The partners must be committed to the idea that
forming a university/public school partnership will lead to improvement in the
education system by increasing the quality of education for all involved" (38). In
a similar way, Candyce Reynolds, Danielle D. Stevens, and Ellen West describe
their cross-disciplinary study of student learning based on Malcolm Knowles'
belief that "learning is facilitated when they [students] are confronted with a
problem that needs to be solved and calls upon them to creatively address the
problem" (53).

EDUCATIONAL MOVEMENTS AND PARTNERSHIPS

    There are several educational movements that connect directly to high
school-college partnerships. As an introduction to those not familiar with each
of these educational movements, we will provide brief overviews with sources
to help readers get a sense of the overlaps and discrepancies among these move-
ments. For this chapter, we will be focusing on the CCSS in writing (http://
www.corestandards.org/ELA-Literacy/CCRA/W) that notes students "develop
the capacity to build knowledge on a subject through research projects and to
respond analytically to literary and informational sources. To meet these goals,
students must devote significant time and effort to writing, producing numerous
pieces over short and extended time frames throughout the year." Some of our
authors delve into more specific connections that promote healthy approaches
to the CCSS without overwhelming secondary teachers with preparing students
for an assessment. Michelle Cox and Phyllis Gimbel make these connections
in "Conversations Among Teachers on Student Writing: WAC/Secondary Ed-
ucation Partnerships at BSU" in the special issue of ATD on WAC in Secondary
Schools (http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/second_educ/cox_gimbel.cfm). Through
partnerships with their postsecondary colleagues, teachers can connect the key
concepts that students need to master in preparation for writing in college; and,
these concepts are also essential to success with CCSS. For instance, the sec-
ondary and postsecondary educators in the Tar River Writing Project (TRWP)
critically examined and questioned requirements of the CCSS in relation to
the Framework for Success in Postsecondary Writing (http://wpacouncil.org/
framework) and learned that "work with teachers around CCSS should move
beyond comprehension of complex (and contradictory) texts and into collab-
orative critique, which creates opportunities for teachers to build capacity and
excise agency in conversations about curriculum reform" (10).

10
                                                                                                  Introduction

    Framework for Success in Postsecondary Writing (http://wpacouncil.org/
framework) outlines expectations for incoming college students. The document
describes eight habits of mind (curiosity, openness, engagement, creativity, per-
sistence, responsibility, flexibility, and metacognition) and literacy-based skills
and experiences (rhetorical knowledge, critical thinking, writing processes,
knowledge of conventions, and the ability to compose in multiple environ-
ments). The Framework connects clearly to the principles of WAC. Authors
of several chapters in this collection make these connections in describing how
their partnerships encourage many of the concepts from the Framework. For in-
stance, both Mary McMullen-Light (Chapter 6) and Marie Hansen et al. (Chap-
ter 8) mention the importance of openness and critical thinking, while Trixie
Smith (Chapter 9), McMullen-Light, and Hansen et al. discuss persistence and
flexibility.

    The newest version of Council of Writing Program Administrators Outcomes
Statement for the First-Year Composition (http://wpacouncil.org/positions/out-
comes.html), last amended in 2008, "describes the common knowledge, skills,
and attitudes sought by first-year composition programs in American postsec-
ondary education." Even though this statement specifically focuses on the first-
year composition course, it serves as a guide for incoming first-year students in
all disciplines; and, therefore, serves as a good place for partners at both academ-
ic levels to begin a dialogue. It is also written in an accessible and non-threaten-
ing way that can engage teachers and faculty from all subjects and disciplines.
Because the Outcomes predate both Framework and CCSS, one can see the
influence of them on both documents.

    The goals of STEM education include encouraging educators to "invite our
children to look at their school work as important to the world" (TIES). As
Pamela B. Childers and Michael J. Lowry point out in referring to the Atlas of
Science Literacy (American Association for the Advancement of Science) and
John C. Bean's Engaging Ideas, "STEM education and WAC programs encour-
age interaction with society, evidence and reasoning in inquiry, application of
knowledge, and engagement of students" (33). Two of our chapters in this col-
lection focus specifically on science partnerships; one, a collaborative chapter,
describes the partnership and its specific goals in relation to writing in science
(Myelle-Watson et al.), while the other explains how a science teacher partners
with others to improve writing, teaching and learning (Lowry).

    Though less directly connected, but certainly influential in high school-col-
lege partnerships is academic achievement and college readiness testing. The
ACT, SAT, and state-specific tests for high school graduation drive school cur-
riculum decisions and influence college acceptance. The importance of the tests
for students, teachers, schools, and districts, as well as colleges' use of tests in

                                                                                                  11
Blumner and Childers

admissions decisions, potentially casts a shadow over partnerships. And histor-
ically, the material tested does not align with the skills necessary for success in
college (Hiss and Franks 2014). That may be changing, though. At the time of
this writing, College Board has announced major changes in the SAT that will
test students' knowledge based on what they have learned in secondary school,
rather than what they should be able to do in college (Lewin 2014). Such chang-
es also will continue over the years and should be impetus for even more second-
ary-postsecondary collaborations across the curriculum.

KINDS OF PARTNERSHIPS

    In our research of existing partnerships, we discovered that many connect to
statewide and community projects, dual credit courses, discipline-specific part-
nerships, volunteer professional organizations, writing centers, National Writing
Project (NWP), pre-service through secondary education projects, and others in-
cluding Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate (IB) programs.

    Community involvement is essential to the success of both secondary and
postsecondary schools within a particular region. Just as the Tar River Writing
Project (TRWP) collaboration with J. H. Rose High School in eastern North
Carolina involved members of the community to act as mentors and role models
in their Project Graduation, other public and private institutions do so in other
ways. Henry Jenkins describes how "Participatory culture shifts the focus on
literacy from one of individual expression to community involvement. The new
literacies almost all involve social skills developed through collaboration and
networking" (4). And, community may go beyond a physical region to a virtual
one. In their digital literacy partnership, Bear, Estrem, Fredrickson, and Shep-
herd explain, "All of us are members of a larger `participatory' culture that dig-
ital work makes possible" (132). In Trixie Smith's chapter of this collection, she
describes short-term collaborations often work with community organizations.

    As described in the Conference on College Composition and Communica-
tion (CCCC) 2012 position statement on dual credit/concurrent enrollment
(DC/CE) courses, "state, national, and corporate leaders ... have identified DC/
CE as one way ... to ensure `college and career readiness' and a seamless bridge
between secondary and postsecondary curricula assessment" (par. 1). College
writing program administrators have focused on ensuring that high school
teachers have credentials to teach college composition, and that course content
in high schools is as rigorous as course content on college campuses (Hansen
and Farris; Sullivan and Tinberg). National Alliance of Concurrent Enrollment
Partnerships (NACEP), which began in 1999, is the accrediting organization for
dual credit programs. Many states encourage accreditation from NACEP, and

12
                                                                                                  Introduction

the standards may be found at http://www.nacep.org/accreditation/standards/
(Uhlenkamp 2014). In this collection, McMullen-Light includes a dual-credit
teacher at the secondary school in her partnership in Chapter 6.

    As previously mentioned, many of the partnerships described in this collec-
tion focus on writing in high school English and first-year composition classes;
two focus on science connections. The collaborative work between the middle/
high school teachers in Illinois with educators at Northern Illinois University
(Chapter 5) demonstrates a clear desire to improve student learning that in-
cludes formative assessment with writing, rather than statewide assessment that
occurs too late to make a difference in the learning of students in classes. By
working as a team, educators can change that situation through a grassroots
movement. Michael Lowry's personal experiences (Chapter 3) creating second-
ary-postsecondary partnerships through a variety of volunteer professional orga-
nizations remind readers that we don't have to wait for someone else to start such
collaborations, and we don't have to wait for formal, institutional structures to
be built; as professionals, all educators can discover ways to work together for the
benefit of their own growth as teachers and the learning of their students. These
examples can clearly be adapted to other disciplines as well.

    In our research on partnerships, we discovered a wide variety of second-
ary-postsecondary writing center partnerships. In her research on the collab-
orative leadership qualities involved in six writing center partnerships in the
United States, Julie Story notes the importance of exploration, power, and dy-
namics that enabled these partnerships to demonstrate the craft of human in-
terdependence. She also mentions the resistance to change on the part of those
outside the collaboration. Writing centers continue to be an ideal place to start
WAC-based collaborations (Childers and Lowry, "Introduction"). The interac-
tion among writing center directors and future directors through International
Writing Centers Association (IWCA) annual summer institutes, as well as their
state, regional and international conferences, allow partnerships to form in a
variety of venues. In this collection Marie Hansen, Debra Hartley, Kirsten Jam-
sen, Katie Levin, and Kristen Nichols-Besel (Chapter 8) describe how one such
partnership began and continues to grow and impact more writing centers on
the secondary level. Many of the authors in this book, for instance, have met at
several of these gatherings over the years and collaborated on other works as well.
In fact, Luise Beaumont (Chapter 7), Kirsten Jamsen (Chapter 8) and Pam led
a workshop on WAC Partnerships at the European Writing Centers Association
conference at Viadrina University in Germany in July 2014.

    As frequently as writing center partnerships were mentioned, many also con-
nected to the National Writing Project. In fact, in many cases the two become
clearly connected because of their similar beliefs in the value of WAC at all

                                                                                                  13
Blumner and Childers

academic levels, the importance of student-centered practices, and their strong
belief in teachers teaching teachers. The Tar River Writing Project partnership
with J. H. Rose High School (JHR) is a perfect example. The school is described
as having "struggled with racial parity and a higher than average dropout rate.
In addition, JHR has struggled to graduate lower-achieving students, and in-
creasing its graduation rate is a top priority for the school over the next few
years" (West-Puckett and Banks 355-56). The principal and a few of the school's
teacher-leaders called on Tar River Writing Project to help create a graduation
project in which teachers could "conceptualize a curriculum that promotes (1)
authentic inquiry, (2) experiential learning, and (3) making a doing--in short, a
curriculum that provides rich literacy instruction with embedded opportunities
to read, write, speak and listen in both virtual and face-to-face environments"
(West-Puckett and Banks 358). Several authors in this collection have partici-
pated in and led National Writing Project sites near their institutions where par-
ticipants in the institutes, as well as their leaders, represent all academic levels.
Just "hanging out" for faculty development with professional colleagues from
primary, secondary and postsecondary institutions breeds more partnerships.

    In his article "The Persistence of Privacy: Autonomy and Initiative in Teach-
ers' Professional Relations," J. W. Little emphasizes that true collaboration de-
mands interdependence. Pre-service/secondary partnerships offer opportunities
for just such interdependence. There is a natural progression from training for
the educational profession to observing, then practice teaching, and eventually
full-time teaching. At each of these stages, professional development and men-
toring have essential roles while students are taking postsecondary courses as
undergraduates and graduates, as well as within the very secondary institutions
where they are teaching. Also, ongoing professional development means that
teachers of secondary education courses, as well as the secondary teachers across
the curriculum, must be aware of the latest challenges to teaching, the knowledge
and social development of new generations of students from K-12, and beyond.
Many of us have experienced an undergraduate or graduate school instructor
referring to "when I was in school" in a similar way to what parents, politicians
and other members of society say. That is not an acceptable response because
advancements in all disciplines and societal changes require us as professional
educators to be familiar with current pedagogical, educational, and global issues
if we are to be effective in the classroom. Also, how are we to know the visions
of future educational possibilities? How better to know what is happening and
what constraints classroom teachers face than partnering with them?

    The chapters in this volume share and celebrate various WAC partnership
manifestations that vary from frameworks to build connectivity between institu-
tions while addressing Common Core State Standards (Chapter 2), to academic

14
                                                                                                  Introduction

and non-academic collaborations around science education (Chapter 3), to two
chapters on non-North American WAC partnerships (Chapters 4 and 7), and
an argument for short-term collaborations (Chapter 9). As you examine the
book, you will see it is broken into three broad sections: Unique Programs,
Process-Based Programs, and Writing Center-Based Programs. Although most
chapters are unique processes that may involve writing centers, we tried to orga-
nize them into these individual sections for emphasis; however, they all represent
models that are replicable once accommodations are made for local contexts.

    In the first chapter of the Unique Programs section, Michelle Cox and Phyl-
lis Gimbel (Chapter 2) detail their using WACommunities as a framework to
bring secondary and post-secondary educators across disciplinary boundaries to-
gether to discuss what the Common Core State Standards will mean for writing
instruction in different disciplines and their implications for teaching writing
across the curriculum and across the secondary-post-secondary divide. Chapter
3, by Michael Lowry, discusses several partnerships that he initiated, includ-
ing the creation of a NASA-sponsored online course, interdisciplinary activi-
ty among science, art and English teachers through Project Zero at Harvard,
and interactions within volunteer professional organizations such as National
Science Teachers Association. All of these projects involve collaboration with
post-secondary communities. The emphasis of the chapter is to place these spe-
cific examples in the larger context of creating connections between secondary
and postsecondary institutions that have an impact on WAC for teachers to
improve student learning. The final chapter of the section (Chapter 4) by Fed-
erico Navarro and Andrea Revel Chion describes the writing program at a high
school, which is an innovative literacy project that has critically adapted the
WAC perspective in the initial and advanced course of a high school in Buenos
Aires, Argentina. In addition, it discusses how the project addresses some of
WAC's major challenges when implemented in a middle/high school.

    The Process-Based Programs section begins with a chapter by Danielle My-
elle-Watson, Deb Spears, David Wellen, Michael McClellan, and Brad Peters
about a grant-funded partnership that studied the use of writing-to-learn activi-
ties to develop critical thinking strategies in ninth-grade science classrooms. The
chapter describes the challenge of accommodating the unexpected to maintain
and value the partnership. It tells of the struggles secondary teachers have and
the thoughtful ways in which they modified their teaching to accommodate
competing needs and interests. Mary McMullen-Light, in Chapter 6, provides
readers with the genesis and development of a partnership that spans the sec-
ondary-postsecondary divide. McMullen-Light explains the seemingly unlikely
partnership and how some shared fundamental goals the educators have for their
students results in a successful and meaningful collaboration that establishes a

                                                                                                  15
Blumner and Childers

sustainable high school writing center and valuable WAC professional devel-
opment opportunities for both the community college and the high school.
The last chapter of the Process-Based Programs section is by Luise Beaumont,
Mandy Pydde, and Simone Tschirpke. They examine the expectations and com-
munication issues surrounding a collaboration between a German university
and a German high school. The project partnered university staff and peer tutors
with high school tutors to develop a WAC-based peer tutoring center in the high
school. Though the project did not go as planned, the authors learned much
about differing expectations and how to negotiate them.

    The final section, Writing Center-Based Programs, begins with an inspiring
collaboration between Burnsville High School and the University of Minnesota.
The authors, Marie Hansen, Debra Hartley, Kirsten Jamsen, Katie Levin, and
Kristen Nichols-Besel, tell a compelling story of a cold-call request for a visit
to bring the high school tutors to the University of Minnesota. From there the
collaboration grew into relationship building, professional development, and
deep friendships, and the authors share the experience and the lessons learned.
In Chapter 9, long-term partnerships are the ultimate goal. Trixie Smith demon-
strates that sometimes partners just need a jumpstart, a little help in conceiv-
ing of and planning for the possibilities, to get started with new programming.
Short-term partnerships also have the advantage of low costs, low commitments,
and fewer logistical problems. Despite these low-stakes investments, the payoff
can be rich and rewarding for area teachers, students, and community members,
as well as the WAC-based writing center, its staff, and the university.

    In the concluding chapter of the book, we zoom out to comment on the
broader trends that emerge from the chapters of this book, as well as survey data
about additional partnerships not included in this volume. We also offer some
possible directions partnerships might head in the future and how they can be
nurtured to offer meaningful experiences for students, teachers, and scholars.
We believe the book offers educators valuable models of high school-college
partnerships and analyses of the experiences of those involved. There are many
barriers to bridging the divide between K-12 and college, but the need to devel-
op partnerships is as great as it has ever been. Finally, we believe the myriad of
successes showcased in these pages offer readers hope that WAC partnerships are
possible, necessary and inspiring.

WORKS CITED

American Association for the Advancement of Science. Atlas of Science Literacy.
   2 vols. Washington: AAAS Project 2061, 2011. Print.

16
                                                                                                  Introduction

Bean, John C. Engaging Ideas. 2nd ed. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2011. Print.
Bear, Rachel, Heidi Estrem, James E. Fredricksen, and Dawn Shepherd. "Par-

   ticipation and Collaboration in Digital Spaces: Connecting High School and
   College Writing Experiences." The Next Digital Scholar: A Fresh Approach to
   the Common Core State Standards in Research and Writing. Ed. James P. Purdy
   and Randall McClure. MedfordAmerican Society for Information Science
   and Technology, 2014. 131-74. Print.
Bernstein, Kenneth. "Warnings from the Trenches." Academe 99.1 (2013): 32-
   36. Web.
Blumner, Jacob, and Pamela Childers. "Building Better Bridges: What Makes
   High School-College WAC Collaborations Work?" The WAC Journal 22
   (2011): 91-101. Web. 1 Nov. 2014.
Childers, Pamela B., and Michael J. Lowry. "Introduction to Writing Across the
   Curriculum in Secondary Schools." Across the Disciplines 9.3 (2012): n. page.
   Web. 25 July 2013.
---. "STEMing the Tide: Writing to Learn in Science." Cases on Inquiry through
   Instructional Technology in Math and Science. Ed. Lesia C. Lennex and Kim-
   berely Fletcher Nettleton. Hershey, PA: IGI Global, 2012. Web. 30 Sept.
   2014.
Clift, Renée, Mary Lou Veal, Marlene Johnson, and Patricia Holland. "Restruc-
   turing Teacher Education through Collaborative Action Research." Journal of
   Teacher Education 41.2 (1990): 52-62. Web.
Conference on College Composition and Communication. "Statement Dual
   Credit/Concurrent Enrollment Composition: Policy and Best Practices."
   Nov. 2012. Web. 30 Sept. 2014.
Cox, Michelle, and Phyllis Gimbel. "Conversations Among Teachers on Stu-
   dent Writing: WAC/Secondary Education Partnerships at BSU." Across the
   Disciplines: A Journal of Language, Learning, and Academic Writing. The WAC
   Clearinghouse. 8 Dec. 2012. Web. 30 Sept. 2014.
Digby, Annette D., Barbara C. Gartin, and Nikki L. Murdick. "Developing
   Effective University and Public School Partnerships." The Clearing House: A
   Journal of Educational Strategies, Issues and Ideas 67.1 (1993): 37-39. Web. 30
   Sept. 2014.
Hansen, Kristine, & Christine Farris, eds. College Credit for Writing in High
   School: The "Taking Care of " Business. Urbana, IL: NCTE, 2010. Print.
Hiss, William C., and Valerie W. Franks. Defining Promise: Optional Standardized
   Testing Policies in American College and University Admissions. National Associ-
   ation for College Admissions Counseling. 2 Feb. 2014. Web. 30 Sept. 2014.
Jenkins, Henry. Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: Media Edu-
   cation for the 21st Century. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Cambridge:

                                                                                                  17
Blumner and Childers

   MIT P, 2009. Web. 30 Sept. 2014.
Knowles, Malcolm. Andragogy in Action: Applying Modern Principles of Adult

   Learning. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1984. Print.
Lewin, Tamar. "A New SAT Aims to Align with Schoolwork." New York Times 5

   Mar. 2014. Web. 30 Sept. 2014.
Little, J. W. "The Persistence of Privacy: Autonomy and Initiative in Teachers'

   Professional Relations." Teachers College Record 91 (1990): 509-36. Print.
Lunsford, Andrea A., and Karen J. Lunsford. "`Mistakes are a Fact of Life': A

   National Comparative Study." CCC 59.4 (2008): 781-806. Web.
McDaniel, Kathryn Noble. "Read Long and Prosper: Five Do's and Don'ts for

   Preparing Students for College." The Clearing House 87.2 (2014): 83-87.
   Print.
Reynolds, Candyce, Dannelle D. Stevens, and Ellen West. "`I'm in a Professional
   School! Why Are You Making Me Do This?' A Cross-Disciplinary Study of
   the Use of Creative Classroom Projects on Student Learning." College Teach-
   ing 61 (2013): 51-59.Web.
Story, Julie A. "Leaders' Experiences with High School-College Writing Cen-
   ter Collaborations: A Qualitative Multiple-Case Study." Diss. U of Phoenix.
   2014. Print.
Sullivan, Patrick, & Howard Tinberg, eds. What is "College-Level" Writing? Ur-
   bana: National Council of Teachers of English, 2011. Print.
Teaching Institute for Excellence in STEM (TIES). (2011). "What is STEM
   Education?" 2014. Web. 30 Sept. 2014.
Uhlenkamp, James. "RE: Thanks." Message to Pamela Childers. 21 June 2014.
   Email.
West-Puckett, Stephanie, and William P. Banks. "UnCommon Connections:
   How Building a Grass-Roots Curriculum Helped Reframe Common Core
   State Standards for Teachers and Students in a High Need Public High
   School." The Next Digital Scholar: A Fresh Approach to the Common Core State
   Standards in Research and Writing. Ed. James P. Purdy and Randall McClure.
   Medford: American Society for Information Science and Technology, 2014.
   353-83. Print.

18
CHAPTER 2

TALKING ABOUT WRITING
ACROSS THE SECONDARY AND
COLLEGE COMMUNITY

      Michelle Cox and Phyllis Gimbel

    Many have commented that higher education is becoming increasingly frag-
mented, leading to the overspecialization of scholars, disciplinary discourses
that are opaque to those outside the field, and lack of cross-pollination among
disciplines (Kerr). WAC has long been seen as a movement that creates connec-
tions among disciplines. In fact, these connections are often created through the
workshop, the quintessential WAC experience, as it "bring[s] faculty together
around the same table" --bringing together people who may work at the same
institution but, in practice, work worlds apart (Cox 317). More recently, this
movement to bring people around the same table has come to include colleagues
from secondary education (Childers and Lowry).

    While this practice of WAC has long been recognized, it has not been ade-
quately theorized. Writing Across Communities (WACommunities), introduced
by Michelle Hall Kells and Juan C. Guerra, was developed to rethink student
writing. This approach to WAC asks us to think of student writing holistically,
as including students' literacy and language experiences outside of the class-
room--online writing, civic writing, disciplinary writing, writing in languages
other than English--as well as the writing students did before they entered our
classrooms and what they'll write after leaving them. In this chapter, we argue
that WACommunities is also a productive theory for reconceptualizing relation-
ships among educators, drawing on an event we organized at Bridgewater State
University (BSU) as an example of this theory in practice.

WRITING ACROSS COMMUNITIES: FROM STUDENTS TO
EDUCATORS

    Writing Across Communities (or, WACommunities) is a conceptual frame-
work developed by Kells for the WAC initiative at the University of New Mex-
ico. Inspired in part by Steve Parks and Eli Goldblatt's "Writing beyond the
Curriculum: Fostering New Collaborations in Literacy," the UNM WACom-

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2015.0735.2.02                                 19
Cox and Gimbel

munities program intentionally reaches across multiple sites and types of writ-
ing. Kells tells us:

         WAC is not a single conversation. It is a ganglion of conver-
         sations that links to an ever-expanding range of practices and
         intellectual pursuits: computer-mediated writing instruction,
         service learning, writing-intensive courses, first-year writing
         seminars, technical and professional writing, interdisciplinary
         learning communities, writing centers, ESL and bilingual
         education, and many more. (91)

    Here, the emphasis is on types of writing and programs that are included
within the scope of a university curriculum. But Kells' view of WAC is more
expansive than this: "I contend that traditional models of WAC too narrowly
privilege academic discourse over other discourses and communities shaping the
worlds in which our students live and work" (Kells 93). We would add that
WAC has too narrowly privileged college-level academic discourse, a view sup-
ported by Juan Guerra, who describes traditional WAC programs as having a
"too-limited and limiting focus on language, literacy, and learning within the
university itself" (emphasis added, 298).

    We can see that Kells' vision for WAC is focused on students--the students'
experiences of literacy across writing programs and within disciplines, but also
beyond the curriculum, across the myriad writing, reading, and language experi-
ences in daily lives. With this article, we use this same inclusive approach when
considering faculty. Too often, educators are separated by level and by discipline.
How often is it that secondary school teachers and college teachers--who may
be teaching down the road from each other--meet and talk about teaching?
How often is it that even educators in the same discipline from different lev-
els--say a math high school teacher and a college professor teaching the same
subject--meet? Our students traverse secondary and higher education, but the
teachers who work with them often only meet teachers within their own in-
stitution, and, at conferences, specialists in their disciplines who teach at the
same level. WACommunities, as conceived by Kells, reconceptualizes writing by
decompartmentalizing it. This approach to WAC, thus, can be used to broaden
our view of the communities we perceive as within the scope of a university
WAC program, namely the teachers who mentor literacy beyond the university
curriculum.

    Doing so benefits all involved. For secondary schools, participation in uni-
versity WAC programs provides models for WAC programming, a need emerg-
ing as schools struggle to meet the Common Core State Standards (CCSS),
which compels content area teachers across the curriculum to include writing as

20
                                                Writing Across the Secondary and College Community

a focus of instruction. Moreover, as CCSS emphasizes college readiness, inclu-
sion of secondary school teachers in university WAC programs creates oppor-
tunities for these teachers to learn more about current college curricula. WAC
programs also benefit from contact with secondary teachers. As we argued in
"Conversations among Teachers on Student Writing: WAC/Secondary Educa-
tion Partnerships at BSU," "In order to create effective programming, we need to
know more about the kinds of experiences with writing students have had before
arriving on campus" (Cox and Gimbel n. pag.).

    This goal of learning about student writing experiences before they arrive at
the university fits with the philosophy of WACommunities. Guerra argues, "the
focus of traditional WAC programs and initiatives on writing across academic
programs has left under-examined the experiences students bring with them
from their earlier grades in school and the varied out-of-school communities
that all of our students inhabit" (298). He states that WACommunities address-
es this issue by "argu[ing] that teachers and contexts can play critical roles in a
student's ability to use the prior knowledge and experiences that every student
brings from previous communities of practice to any social or cultural setting"
(Guerra 298). As writing becomes embedded in content areas across the curric-
ulum, it will become even more important for secondary teachers and college
faculty from the same field to become acquainted with how writing is used and
taught in their respective classrooms, so that secondary teachers can help their
students prepare for college-level writing-in-the-disciplines (WID), and so that
college faculty can help students utilize what they learned about WID before
entering college.

    The panel event we describe later in this chapter was designed to begin this
exchange among content-area teachers in secondary schools in southeastern
Massachusetts and faculty at Bridgewater State University (BSU) teaching in
the same discipline at the college level. During the event, we also distributed an
IRB-approved questionnaire surveying the participants' responses to the event,
as well as their responses to CCSS, which was used as a focal point for the event.
Below, we provide background on our local context, describe the panel event in
more detail, and analyze participant responses to the event and to CCSS, ending
the chapter with a discussion of how WACommunities and CCSS can continue
to frame secondary education-university WAC discussions and collaborations.

WAC AT BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY

    The event we describe below, which was held in April 2012, was one in a
series of events and programs that brought together secondary education teach-
ers and BSU faculty through the BSU WAC program (for more details, see Cox

                                                                                                  21
Cox and Gimbel

and Gimbel). The WAC program at BSU, a regional university in southeastern
Massachusetts enrolling about 11,000 students, was launched in spring 2007 by
Michelle Cox. BSU, unlike many universities, did not have a history of started,
stopped, and restarted WAC programs--this was the first attempt to initiate a
WAC program at BSU. Further, at BSU, WAC is not directly tied to the gen-
eral education curriculum. It provides support for the writing-intensive courses
mandated by the university's latest reform to general education, but is not lim-
ited to working with this program. Therefore, without these restraints in place,
Michelle felt free to not limit the scope of the program to the undergraduate
curriculum, the traditional scope of university WAC programs, but to instead
develop the program's scope in response to needs she observed. The BSU WAC
program would come to include support for graduate student writing, support
for faculty writing (Cox and Brunjes), and a series of programming focused
on connecting secondary and college educators. (This series was informed by
Michelle's participation in Pamela Childers and Jacob Blumner's pre-confer-
ence workshop on WAC-secondary education collaborations at the 2010 IWAC
Conference, a workshop also described in Hansen, Hartely, Jamsen, Levin, and
Nichols-Besel in Chapter 8).

    Secondary-education related programming was strengthened in 2010 when
Phyllis Gimbel, a secondary education leadership professor and former second-
ary school language teacher and middle school principal, joined the WAC pro-
gram as assistant coordinator. Phyllis spearheaded a series of secondary educa-
tion-university events (Cox and Gimbel), including the panel event that is the
focus of this article.

PANEL EVENT AT BSU: "THE TRANSITION FROM HIGH
SCHOOL TO COLLEGE WRITING: COMMON CORE STATE
STANDARDS"

    The focus of this panel event emerged from discussions with area second-
ary school teachers and feedback to other secondary education-university WAC
events. Again and again, we heard from teachers that they wanted to talk about
the impact of CCSS on student work and teaching, and hear about student writ-
ing across academic levels and disciplines. A group that was critical in helping
us plan this event was a group convened by BSU English education specialist
John Kucich, who organized monthly meetings of high school and college En-
glish teachers. The high school teachers at this meeting emphasized the fact that
neither secondary nor college teachers knew what kinds of writing was assigned
at other levels, and that high school teachers in particular would be interest-
ed in seeing samples of student writing from college content areas. As English

22
                                                Writing Across the Secondary and College Community

teachers, they were seen as having the responsibility of introducing writing in-
struction to the social studies, math, and science teachers, and yet they did not
know what writing would look like in the disciplines. This group also helped
us make decisions about the timing and format of the event. With their help,
we planned for an after-school panel discussion that included opportunities for
group discussions and ended with dinner and another opportunity for cross-lev-
el conversation.

    CCSS is not only a focus of practicing teachers. As we began looking for col-
laborators in hosting the event, we learned that the BSU College of Education
and Allied Studies (CEAS) was under pressure to provide programming focused
on CCSS. When we met with the CEAS dean, she immediately offered to fully
fund the event, advertise the event, and handle registration. This was welcome
news, as the WAC program had been level-funded that year and the dinner
requested by our secondary school colleagues had not been part of the initial
budget. Further, we, as WAC administrators, didn't have access to administrative
assistants for such tasks as advertising and registration.

    With the funding and administrative issues under control, Phyllis could fo-
cus on pulling together a cross-level and cross-disciplinary panel. For the panel,
Phyllis recruited representation from secondary schools--a middle school social
studies teacher who was also enrolled as a graduate student at our university, a
high school English department chair, and a public school director of instruc-
tion and assessment and former graduate of our institution. Phyllis also included
administrators and faculty from BSU: the CEAS dean, our WAC Coordinator
(Michelle), an assistant professor of mathematics, and an assistant professor of
math education. The dean was asked to give a brief overview of CCSS, which
was particularly important for those in the audience from higher education, and
Michelle was asked to wrap up the panel discussion. The other four panelists
were asked to, in seven minutes, respond to the following prompts:

   1. What is the role of writing in your field (social studies/history, science,
       math, English/language arts)?

   2. Show/provide us with an example of a writing activity or student writing
       from your classroom.

   3. How do you see the CCSS standards impacting what you are doing now
       with writing in your classrooms?

    On the day of the event, eighty local secondary school educators and admin-
istrators, college faculty and administrators, and pre-service teachers gathered
for this cross-institutional and cross-level discussion of student writing, WAC,
and CCSS. The presenters talked candidly about their concerns about CCSS
and shared their teaching practices related to writing. From our perspective, it

                                                                                                  23
Cox and Gimbel

was quite wonderful to see student writing, often handwritten, projected on the
big screen, as well as to hear how faculty from different disciplines saw writing
as integral to teaching and learning. Indeed, many of the samples of student
writing shared by presenters were from writing-to-learn activities (an empha-
sis also shared by Navarro and Chion, Chapter 4). Based on responses on the
IRB-approved questionnaire we distributed after the event,1 many of the partic-
ipants also saw these aspects as the highlights of the event. Here is a sampling of
responses to the question, "What from today's event impacted you the most?":

      · Examples of student work. [elementary school teacher and BSU grad-
         uate student2]

      · The writing occurring here at BSU across the curriculum. [secondary
         school teacher, special education]

      · The sample math writing examples were interesting. [high school
         teacher, English]

      · Seeing student samples of writing. [secondary school teacher, visual
         arts]

      · The examples of science and math writing. [secondary school adminis-
         trator, curriculum director]

      · All the great ways writing is being used in math learning about the
         CCSS. [college teacher, English]

      · Examples of really rich writing in different disciplines - there are
         lots of great opportunities for engaging, meaningful writing. [college
         teacher, English]

    Here, it is clear that just seeing actual student writing was important to both
secondary and college faculty, while it was seeing samples from disciplines other
than their own, such as math and science, that most impacted them. In response
to the same question, others spoke more holistically about the impact of the
event:

      · Hearing from the teachers and speakers who have great creative ideas
         that are working in the classroom. [middle school teacher, history]

      · The willingness of other disciplines (other than English) to embrace
         the ideas of WAC. [high school teacher, English]

      · Confidence that we can handle this. [high school teacher, history]
      · The sense of optimism that radiates from this kind of dialogue [high

         school teacher, English]
      · The acknowledgement that writing is a complex thought process that

         needs opportunity for practice and specific feedback in a timely man-
         ner. [high school teacher, English]

24
                                                Writing Across the Secondary and College Community

      · Seeing what other schools are currently doing made me aware that
         our school is way behind when it comes to preparing for CCSS [and]
         when it comes to WAC. [high school department head, science]

      · Ideas to incorporate in my teaching practice. [college teacher, early
         childhood education]

      · I was pleased that the conversation is beginning in academic depart-
         ments other than just English (although I appreciate the idea that
         writing is everyone's responsibility now). I like that math and other
         departments will also be conducting seminars/conversations. [college
         teacher, English]

      · It was very valuable to hear from teachers and administrators from a
         wide variety of districts sharing their concerns and ideas surround-
         ing the Common Core. It was a good "zeitgeist-capturing moment"
         for me, since I'm not often involved in wider conversations around
         writing, teaching writing, and the K-12 curriculum. [college teacher,
         mathematics]

    Though the event was designed to facilitate conversation between secondary
and college faculty teaching in the same discipline, most respondents focused in-
stead on the value of cross-disciplinary conversation. Based on these comments,
we can see that both secondary school and college faculty were inspired by the
ways in which writing is taught in fields other than their own. In particular,
English teachers at both the high school and college level appreciated seeing
faculty from fields other than English taking responsibility for teaching writing.
Further, both high school and college faculty commented that just being part
of the conversation was valuable, either to get a sense of where their own insti-
tution stood in relation to WAC programming (as expressed by the high school
science department head), or because such opportunities are rare (as expressed
by the college math professor).

    We also asked participants to comment on what they would want as a fo-
cus for future workshops. Respondents' comments centered on specific teaching
practices (i.e., designing writing assignments, assessing writing), seeing writing
from more disciplines (such as music and art), spending more time on specific
disciplines (such as English or history), and using a workshop structure in place
of a panel, in order to facilitate more small group discussions and hands-on
activities. This year's panel discussion was followed by a question and answer
session, small-group discussions, and dinner, which provided more opportuni-
ties for conversation, which was a change from the previous year's program in
response to requests for more interaction. It is clear that the participants desired
even more time for interaction. Further, not all participants remained for ac-

                                                                                                  25
Cox and Gimbel

tivities that followed the panel discussion. Many public school teachers, tired
from a day that often begins before 7 a.m., wanted to go home to their families
for dinner, and they did not stay for dinner or for small group discussion and
materials exchange.

RESPONSES TO CCSS

    We also used this event as an opportunity to learn more about how educa-
tors in secondary and higher education thought about CCSS, as we felt that it
was important that the panelists' perspectives on CCSS were not the only ones
expressed during this event. Kells criticizes "traditional WAC approaches" for
"replicat[ing] and reaffirm[ing] dominant discourses by socializing new writers
into established systems" (93). In keeping with WACommunities, in our work
with educators, we didn't want the WAC program to be positioned as fully
supporting CCSS, a dominant discourse present in secondary education, but
as interrogating it and as providing space for public dialogue. Further, tradi-
tionally, the secondary school-university relationship is one of uneven power,
with secondary education teachers tasked with preparing students to meet the
expectations of college teachers, a dynamic reified by the CCSS's emphasis
on college readiness. In addition to the other opportunities provided by this
event, the questionnaire created a space where each participant could voice
his/her point of view.

    Before sharing the responses, it is important to provide some context on
the history of standardized testing in Massachusetts, where our institution
is located. In this state, the teaching of writing in public schools, especially
public schools in under-resourced districts, has been largely shaped by stan-
dardized testing, particularly the Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment
System (MCAS). Students take MCAS tests in grades one, three, five, seven,
and nine, with the sophomore test determining high school graduation, and
test scores at each level impacting school funding and ranking of teachers.
Writing in MCAS tests is restricted to two genres: an "open response," which
is a response to a question based on a short reading, and a "long composi-
tion," which is a five-paragraph thesis-driven essay (for more details, see Cox
and Gimbel). Some of the more positive perspectives on CCSS expressed by
some of the secondary school participants may surprise readers familiar with
the criticisms of CCSS for not stressing rhetoric's relation to writing, but the
varied genres and purposes of writing as represented in CCSS are richer than
in MCAS, the point of comparison for many who participated in this event.

    Below, we list each question and then share and discuss sample responses.

26
                                                Writing Across the Secondary and College Community

How has/will the new Common Core State Standards impact you? How will
it affect the ways you write/teach writing/administer a program?

    Some respondents from K-12 talked about CCSS as forcing change:

      · Have to incorporate more writing in my subject area (music). [ele-
         mentary school teacher in music and BSU graduate student]

      · Force me to move history closer to English through writing, research,
         and discipline. [secondary school teacher, history]

      · This will force my school to emphasize argumentation far more. [high
         school teacher, English]

    Others in K-12 discussed how CCSS will have widespread impact:

      · They will change my curriculum. It will involve training, more profes-
         sional development, and different pedagogy. [secondary school teacher,
         subject not provided]

      · The CCSS impact the ways I will administer a program by giving writ-
         ing assignments for every art assignment. [secondary school teacher,
         art]

      · These standards will have a major impact. They will permeate the
         assessments, interaction, and activities in the classroom. The standards
         will give impetus for a history teacher to look critically at student writ-
         ing. Collaboration will be of the utmost importance among faculty.
         [BSU graduate student, accelerated postbaccalaureate program]

      · Greater focus on helping teachers in other disciplines incorporate
         reading and writing, by providing professional development in reading
         and writing pedagogy. [secondary school administrator, curriculum
         director]

    Here, we hear the respondents discussing how writing will now be empha-
sized in disciplines outside of English, specifically in history and art. We hear
faculty development and collaboration among teachers from different disci-
plines emphasized. Change is emphasized, but the change isn't necessarily cast
in a negative or positive light. In contrast, respondents from higher education
seemed to see CCSS as facilitating their understanding of the writing knowledge
and experience students will enter college with:

      · I teach critical writing at the college level and believe that a better
         understanding of the students' previous high school training will help
         me model the class more effectively. [college teacher, theater]

      · It will impact me in terms of what students arrive in first-year writing

                                                                                                  27
Cox and Gimbel

         expecting and how well prepared they are for the variety of assign-
         ments they'll encounter. [college teacher, English]
      · It has not yet, but it will in Fall 2012 when I teach a FYS [first-year
         seminar] course. I am very pleased to see this broad based approach to
         THINKING and writing. [college teacher, criminal justice]

    As, at the time of this writing, 45 states, the District of Columbia, and four
U.S. territories have adopted CCSS (Common Core), they indeed hold the
promise of allowing college educators to have a better sense of the writing edu-
cation of their first-year students, as students from states from different sections
of the country will purportedly emphasize the same writing standards. This stan-
dardization may be especially helpful for colleges that enroll students and hire
faculty from across the country.

How do you think that the new Common Core State Standards will impact
students' transition from high school to college writing?

     Overall, responses to this question were positive. Some responses indicated
 that students should be better prepared to meet the challenges of college writing:

      · I think college students' writing will become more thoughtful. [BSU
         graduate student, English]

      · It should create a more seamless transition as the writing should be
         more precise and at a higher level. [secondary school teacher, subject
         not provided]

      · I think it will better prepare them for the rigor of college courses.
         [high school department head, science]

      · CCSS will change the nature of students' understanding of what can
         be accomplished in writing. I expect that in 8-10 years that entering
         [college] freshmen will have a better sense of the relationships of audi-
         ence, purpose, and genre to writing. [college teacher, English]

    Others focused on how students will be better prepared to write across the
college curriculum:

      · When faced with science and history reading/writing, students will be
         more prepared. [high school teacher, science]

      · Will require students to develop and practice writing skills in many
         different disciplines. [high school department head, science]

    Some responses from secondary school teachers focused on how the in-
creased communication between high school and college teachers will ease the
transition for student writers:

28
                                                Writing Across the Secondary and College Community

      · I am hopeful that we as secondary teachers will be able to more
         adequately prepare students as college professors expect them to be
         prepared. [high school teacher, English]

      · I hope it will make the transition smoother for them as college edu-
         cators gain a better understanding of what level of training to expect
         from incoming students from MA. [secondary school teacher, special
         education]

    Three respondents alluded to MCAS in their responses:

      · My fear is that non-English teachers will rely on traditional, formulaic
         writing (i.e., 5 paragraph essays, MCAS style open response). [high
         school department head, history]

      · [The transition will be] difficult at first as so much has fallen back
         because of teaching to test ... CCSS will bring it back and in the end
         transition will be much more smooth. [secondary school teacher,
         English]

      · It would seem to make the transition more natural by exposing stu-
         dents to a wider variety of writing styles and purposes than MCAS has
         so far. This should benefit them in their first-year writing and first-
         year seminar courses especially, permitting them to focus more on the
         acquisition of college-success (study and research) skills and rhetoric
         rather than on composition. [college teacher, mathematics]

    MCAS writing, with its focus on form over rhetoric and content, encour-
aged a teaching-to-the-test approach. As one high school teacher said when de-
scribing writing instruction in an urban school under MCAS, "I find in my class
that I'm teaching to the test right now. I'm drilling on five paragraph essays,
lots of thesis statements, transitional sentences--talking about things I've always
talked about, but now I'm drilling constantly" (Luna and Turner 83). Writing,
as described in CCSS, is richer and more varied, but at the time of this event,
assessments of the CCSS have not yet been implemented,3 and it is the test of
standards, even more than the standards themselves, that often shape pedagogy,
a concern that was raised in response to the next question.

What concerns do you have about the Common Core State Standards?

     As one respondent answered succinctly, CCSS raised concerns about, "im-
 plementation, assessment, time, budget." Some of the responses spoke to the
 fatigue that comes with being frequently required to adopt new curriculum
 imposed by the state or district. As one respondent wrote:

      · I'm concerned that this is just yet another trendy initiative being

                                                                                                  29
Cox and Gimbel

         driven by corporate America to force school systems and governments
         to spend untold millions of dollars on new texts, tests, programs, etc.,
         only for us to find out in 10 years that students derived no benefits
         from it. [high school department head, English]

    This response indicates a key difference in teaching at the secondary and college
level. In general, college faculty have far more leverage on curriculum than do their
colleagues in secondary education (a generalization that does not hold in second-
ary schools outside of the US; see, for instance, the faculty-led writing program
described by Navarro and Chion, Chapter 4, in which teachers can opt to partici-
pate). In higher education, it is widely recognized that WAC programs developed
as grassroots efforts are more successful and sustainable than those imposed by
administration. The WAC initiatives in secondary education compelled by CCSS
can hardly be seen as grassroots initiatives, as CCSS are adopted at the state level.

    Other responses spoke to concerns that those administering WAC programs
in college will readily recognize. Some of the responses focused on the issue of
faculty development:

      · Millions of teachers will require professional development. [respon-
         dent did not provide information on position]

      · Training for the non-English teachers [will be needed]. [BSU graduate
         student, accelerated post-baccalaureate program]

      · It may be difficult for other content areas to become accustomed to
         integrating literacy instruction. [high school teacher, English]

    Others spoke to balancing time for content and writing:

      · I am concerned that "lines" between subjects (English to math) may
         become more "blurred" or not defined. This may become a very large
         challenge when math subject content has to be eliminated to reach
         standards. [secondary school teacher, visual arts]

    For English language arts (ELA) educators, the new challenge is in balancing
literary and non-literary texts, as this respondent noted:

      · Striking a balance between literature exploration and authentic assess-
         ments of non-fiction. [high school teacher, English]

    The new standards for ELA emphasize expository (rather than literary) read-
ing and writing, with 70% of a student's reading and writing tasks to be focused
on nonfiction texts by the senior year of high school (National Assessment Gov-
erning Board). This 70% refers to the whole curriculum, not just the English
classroom, but ELA teachers will share part of this responsibility.

30
                                                Writing Across the Secondary and College Community

    The concerns these educators express are legitimate, and indicate roles
that college WAC programs can have in supporting WAC initiates in second-
ary schools. Danielle Lillge, writing about the opportunities for WAC created
by CCSS, states, "CCSS offer WAC advocates new possibilities for positively
contributing possible solutions and professional knowledge to the challenges
secondary teachers and schools face" (n. pag.). As we argued in a previous pub-
lication (Cox and Gimbel), college-level WAC programs have a wealth of experi-
ence in initiating cross-disciplinary conversations about writing, offering faculty
development on writing, and guiding faculty across the disciplines in integrating
content with writing. Instructors of writing-intensive courses, such as the math
faculty featured in our panel discussion, can share approaches to integrating writ-
ing-to-learn and writing-to-communicate pedagogies with content-area peers in
secondary schools. Instructors of first-year writing and first-year seminars often
have a wealth of experience in teaching with non-fiction texts and can share this
knowledge with secondary school ELA teachers. This WAC knowledge, gained
over years of WAC work in higher education, is now welcomed by secondary
education as they grapple with CCSS, which Lillge describes as creating a critical
moment for WAC in secondary education:

         Never before has secondary WAC been mandated with such
         wholesale scope and fervor across the United States. Whereas
         previous crises conversations had resulted in recommenda-
         tions that allowed individual states and school districts to
         decide whether or not they chose to adopt these suggestions
         (e.g., Bazerman et al., 2005; Russell, 2009; Sheils, 1975),
         those states that have adopted the CCSS leave no option for
         school districts' voluntary adoption. Like no other historic
         moment, the CCSS has required a new level of buy-in and
         new possibility for secondary WAC. (n. pag.)

What do you see as the benefits of the Common Core State Standards?

     Many of the comments on the benefits of CCSS touched on the same top-
 ics that had been raised as concerns. For example, respondents who teach at
 the college-level saw the new emphasis on non-literary texts and argument as
 positive:

      · More focus on informational/content oriented texts. [college teacher,
         subject not provided]

      · Focus on non-literary texts and argumentative writing. [college teach-
         er, English]

                                                                                                  31
Cox and Gimbel

    Other respondents from both secondary schools and BSU saw the interdis-
ciplinary approach advocated by CCSS not as threatening the content of disci-
plines, but enhancing education:

      · The CCSS also invites all teachers to become teachers of reading and
         writing, recognizing that skills are used differently in a variety of con-
         tent areas and we owe it to our students to prepare them to continue
         to acquire knowledge and skill independently, regardless of their future
         intentions for work or study. [high school teacher, English]

      · It can benefit all subjects and create collaboration among teachers.
         [BSU graduate student, English]

      · Students win a common language among disciplines and therefore
         transferable. [high school department head, science]

      · A serious attempt to integrate learning. I think because academia is so
         narrowly focused with disciplines very much separated from each oth-
         er that students are short-changed. The real world is interdisciplinary;
         academia is not. [college teacher, criminal justice]

      · They foster a WAC approach--reading and writing outside of ELA is
         a real emphasis. They foster conversation among disciplines and levels
         (especially secondary--college). [college teacher, English]

    Some respondents focused on the consistency created by the standards and
the formative approach of the standards:

      · [The standards] are detailed and apply across the curriculum. [second-
         ary school teacher, special education]

      · The uniform standard of measurement it will provide to let us com-
         pare realistically the scores of students in different states. [high school
         department head, English]

      · Consistency at all the schools. [college teacher, English]
      · The focus on college readiness (rather than high-school completion)

         makes this more a "formative" set of standards rather than a "summa-
         tive" set of standards, which will only benefit students looking for-
         ward. It also makes intentional the idea that colleges and high schools
         should be in conversation with one another to smooth students'
         transition. [college teacher, mathematics]

    Other responses focused on the benefits gleaned from an increased focus on
writing:

      · Higher level thinking. [elementary school teacher, music, and BSU
         graduate student]

32
                                                Writing Across the Secondary and College Community

      · More critical thinking and improved literacy. [secondary school teach-
         er, subject not provided]

      · A benefit to promote critical thinking, which is needed not only in
         educational environment but in the workforce of the nation. [second-
         ary school teacher, visual arts]

      · It focuses on the rhetorical force in writing and on writing as an aid to
         developing thought. [college teacher, English]

    It could be that this last set of responses were prompted by the focus of
the event--writing--but the benefits from increased practice with writing as
a mode of learning and writing as a mode of communication, in varied genres,
and for varied audiences and purposes, have long been recognized by WAC.

CONCLUSION

    From our perspective, as the organizers of this event and other secondary
education-WAC programming, these responses on CCSS are useful, in that
they help us determine directions for future exploration. For instance, what are
the connections among writing, critical thinking, and interdisciplinarity? What
kinds of activities and assignments promote writing as an "aid to developing
thought" at the secondary level and college level? What can college WAC pro-
grams do to assist area school districts as they develop WAC initiatives? What
can college WAC programs learn from the ways in which secondary schools
develop WAC pedagogies and programs? And what kinds of cross-level events
on writing can facilitate conversations on these topics?

    Events such as this one are certainly a step in facilitating cross-disciplinary
and cross-level discussions of WAC, but as we know from WAC lore (and also
attested to by McMullen-Light, Chapter 6), a single workshop, without fol-
low-up, does not have much impact. We are happy to report that, since hold-
ing this event, even though Michelle has taken a position at another universi-
ty and Phyllis' term as assistant WAC coordinator has ended, WAC secondary
school-university collaborations have continued at BSU. Throughout the 2012-
2013 academic year, the group of ELA teachers and college faculty convened by
John Kucich (mentioned above) continued to meet to talk about student writing
and exchange teaching materials. John Kucich graciously served as interim WAC
director following Michelle's leave, and led the third annual Transition from
High School to College Writing panel event, this time featuring a middle school
ELA teacher, a high school ELA program director, a BSU librarian, and the di-
rector of BSU's First and Second Year Seminar Program (a program that includes
writing-intensive themed courses taught by faculty across the curriculum).

                                                                                                  33
Cox and Gimbel

    In light of WACommunities, it would be important that these ongoing con-
versations about student writing include investigation into students. WACom-
munities is an approach to WAC that focuses not only on kinds of writing and
locations of writing, but also on the writers themselves: their linguistic, class,
racial, ethnic, and socio-economic backgrounds. Regional colleges such as BSU,
with enrollments drawn largely from local high schools, could learn a great deal
about their students by opening conversations on issues of student diversity with
colleagues from local school districts. These conversations could be especially
useful in investigating linguistic diversity, as most institutions of higher educa-
tion collect information about international students but not resident students
who use English as a second language (L2). Regional colleges, particularly those
in areas rich in immigrant communities, such as BSU, tend to enroll more res-
ident L2 students than international students. Working with secondary educa-
tion colleagues to co-investigate local L2 student populations would only benefit
all involved, especially as linguistic background is important to the teaching and
learning of writing.

    The WACommunities approach and CCSS both open opportunities for
secondary school-higher education collaborations and conversations. WACom-
munities, with its focus on writing across the many communities that students
traverse within college, across school levels, across languages, and across their
daily lives, compels educators to have a more expansive view of writing, as well
as to reach out to educators teaching the same students, whether in different
disciplines, different grade levels, or different institutions. CCSS, with its em-
phasis on writing in different content areas and, in ELA, on non-literary texts,
prompts cross-disciplinary and cross-level conversations on writing, and, as ar-
gued by Lillge, creates a moment when interest in WAC is at a peak in secondary
education. The panel event described in this article is but one response to the
call by secondary schools for cross-level dialogue with college WAC programs
on student writing. College-level WAC programs can play an important role in
assisting secondary schools in negotiating CCSS, as well as interrogating these
state-issued mandates.

NOTES

1. Forty participants completed the questionnaire, representing 50% of overall
participants. Of the respondents, 10 were BSU students (1 undergraduate and 9
graduate); 25 taught in K-12 (1 at the elementary level, 5 at the middle school
level, and 20 at the high school level), 10 taught at the college level, and 7 held
administrative positions (5 in K-12, and 2 at a college). (This number comes to
over 40, as some people had multiple positions: some taught at both the middle

34
                                                Writing Across the Secondary and College Community

and high school level, some were both teachers and graduate students, and some
were both teachers and administrators).

2. For each response, we have provided information about the survey participant's
position, when possible. If the participant simply indicated "K-12" or that they
work in both middle and high schools, we have used the term "secondary school
teacher."

3. At this time, states may choose between two K-12 comprehensive assessment
consortia, the partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Ca-
reers (PARCC) (to date, adopted by 22 states and the District of Columbia) or
the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium (to date, adopted by 25 states).
(Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014)

WORKS CITED

"Assessment 101: PARCC & SBAC." Common Core. Houghton Mifflin Har-
   court, 2014. Web. 4 February 2014.

Childers, Pam, and Michael Lowry, eds. "Special Issue on Writing Across the
   Secondary School Curriculum." Across the Disciplines 9.3 (2012): n. pag.
   Web. 17 May 2013.

Common Core State Standards Initiative. "Standards in Your State." Common
   Core State Standards Initiative: Preparing America's Students for College & Ca-
   reer. 2014 Common Core State Standards Initiative, 2013. Web. 20 May
   2013.

Cox, Michelle. "In Response to Today's `Felt Need': WAC, Faculty Develop-
   ment, and Second Language Writers." WAC and Second Language Writers:
   Research towards Linguistically and Culturally Inclusive Programs and Practices.
   Eds. Terry Myers Zawacki and Michelle Cox. Fort Collins: WAC Clearing-
   house and Parlor Press, 2014. 299-326. Web. 22 January 2014.

Cox, Michelle, and Ann Brunjes. "Guiding Principles for Supporting Faculty
   as Writers at a Teaching-Mission Institution." Working with Faculty Writers.
   Eds. Ann Ellen Geller and Michele Eodice. Boulder: Utah State UP, 2013.
   191-209. Print.

Cox, Michelle, and Phyllis Gimbel. "Conversations among Teachers on Student
   Writing: WAC/ Secondary Education Partnerships at BSU." Across the Disci-
   plines 9.3 (2012): n. pag. Web. 17 May 2013.

Guerra, Juan. "Cultivating Transcultural Citizenship: A Wtriting Across Com-
   munities Model." Language Arts 85.4 (2008). 296-304. ERIC. Web. 13 No-
   vember 2014.

Kells, Michelle Hall. "Writing Across Communities: Deliberation and the Dis-
   cursive Possibilities of WAC." Reflections 11.1 (2007): 87-108. Web. 13 No-

                                                                                                  35
   vember 2014.
Kerr, Clark. The Uses of the University. 3rd ed. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1982.

   Print.
Lillge, Danielle. "Illuminating Possibilities: Secondary Writing Across the Cur-

   riculum as a Resource for Navigating Common Core State Standards." Across
   the Disciplines 9.3 (2012): n. pag. Web. 10 May 2013.
Luna, Catherine, and Cara Livingstone Turner. "The Impact of the MCAS:
   Teachers Talk about High-Stakes Testing." The English Journal 91.1 (2001):
   79-87. JSTOR. Web. 22 December 2014.
National Assessment Governing Board. "Reading Framework for 2009
   National Assessment of Educational Progress." Washington: U.S. Government
   Printing Office. 2008. Print.
Parks, Steve, and Eli Goldblatt. "Writing Beyond the Curriculum: Foster-
   ing New Collaborations in Literacy." College English 62.5 (2000): 584-86.
   JSTOR. Web. 13 November 2014.
CHAPTER 3

NEWTON'S THIRD LAW
REVISITED: ACTION REACTION
PAIRS IN COLLABORATION

Michael J. Lowry

         In 1665 Cambridge University closed as precaution against an
         impending wave of plague. A recent graduate, Isaac Newton took
         time off from further study to begin understanding "the problem
         of motion, both heavenly and earth bound." In a particularly
         productive period of his life, he formalized the physics of moving
         objects while simultaneously inventing a new branch of mathe-
         matics (calculus) to explain motion. His famous Laws of Motion
         were first described in his classic text Principia Mathematica in
         1687. With these generalized principles, it was possible to under-
         stand the workings of the universe. His 3rd Law explored how
         forces interact as pairs: a book rests on a table pushing down on
         the surface and the surface pushes back up on the book.

    How do WAC partnerships relate to Newton's Third Law? The idea of ac-
tion/reaction may be applied to the nature of collaborative relationships in the
following way: the "action" of seeking partnerships creates "reactions" often
of equal (or greater) force propelling the agents in creative directions. Han-
sen, Hartley, Jamsen, Levin, and Nichols-Besel describe how partnerships "are
sparked by curiosity, risk taking and grass roots enthusiasm" that can lead to
sustainable programs in their chapter (Chapter 8). As a science educator deeply
interested in using writing to promote learning, I have pondered how educators
at the secondary school level could form partnerships with postsecondary insti-
tutions to improve the thinking and writing in their classroom. Like Navarro
and Chion (Chapter 4), I know the value of cultivating writing skills to advance
understanding within a discipline; however, as Cox and Gimbel (Chapter 2)
remind us, forging collaborative communities is not limited to college-level set-
tings. This essay will document several partnerships among secondary school
educators and individuals of post-secondary institutions all in the service of im-
proving teaching and learning.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2015.0735.2.03                                  37
Lowry

    Given the often stifling force of isolation that occurs among many teachers,
the need to reach out and connect with other professionals is vital to the growth
of any educator, from novice to accomplished teacher. As a physics and biology
teacher at an independent day/boarding boys' school, I have felt the need to
connect with other professionals who will challenge my thinking and teaching.
At its most basic level, the urge to collaborate begins with an interest in improv-
ing one's craft. In July of 2011, the National Academy of Sciences released A
Framework for the Next Generation of Science Standards (NGSS). Science educa-
tors across the country delved into the document with great interest given the
implications of its content. One of the notable features of the NGSS was the
inclusion of the engineering design process as part of the core practices of science
(Bazerman; Giere, Bickle, and Maudlin; Petroski). It was an element unknown
to many science educators and soon became an interest of mine as I reflected on
how to understand this aspect of the NGSS. I needed to learn more about the
subject and how it might play a role in my classroom.

    One of the leaders in science and engineering design, the National Aeronau-
tics and Space Administration (NASA) has a distinguished history of accom-
plishment in space and earth science, in addition to having a vibrant interest in
supporting the professional growth of science educators. Part of NASA's mission
is to support the recruitment of future professionals. Knowing this, I sought to
partner with NASA in some way to increase my understanding of the engineer-
ing design process and advance my content understanding.

    In 2012 I applied for and was accepted to a two-week workshop sponsored
by NASA called the Airborne Research Experience for Educators and Students
(AREES). The purpose of the program was to provide research-based experienc-
es for middle and secondary educators through the use of the unique environ-
ment of NASA flight platforms (aircraft carrying an elaborate array of sensors).
We were placed into collaborative teams and practiced science by becoming
involved in NASA earth science and flight missions. In addition, these experi-
ences were to be translated into classroom practice through the implementation
of thematic curriculum modules based on a select aircraft, instrument, and re-
search investigation. To advance our content knowledge, we attended lectures
and engaged in activities from subject matter experts relevant to aircraft and
research investigations. Distinguished scientists and engineers from university
faculty, NASA Flight Centers, and research institutions led the lectures. Instruc-
tional content included subject matter in natural events (e.g., earthquakes, vol-
canoes and hurricanes), climate, remote sensing, atmospheric chemistry, and
other relevant subjects. It was an intensive and exciting two-week experience
throwing us into the role of student and learner.

    During our second week, our hosts turned the tables on us and posed the

38
                                                                              Newton's Third Law Revisited

following question: How do you bring this experience back to your classroom?
It was now time for us to construct a thematic curricular unit that would span
grades seven to twelve and address the content and research practices we experi-
enced the week before. We knew that we wanted our students to experience the
"doing" of science and "doing" of engineering (Schwab). In addition, we needed
a topic that was sufficiently broad to allow us to generate different curricular
strands. We needed to create what David Perkins of Harvard's Project Zero calls
"a generative topic" (Checkley; Gardner). Because the workshop took place in
California and we had taken a field trip to see the San Andreas Fault, it became
clear that the study of earthquakes using airborne sensors would be a rich sub-
ject. We settled upon using a Project Based Learning (PBL) approach, posing
an authentic challenge with many possible solutions. The unit needed to stretch
students and challenge them to expand their Zone of Proximal Development
(Vygotsky). It was important to me that writing activities would become an es-
sential part of the unit, from writing-to-learn prompts, writing for social change
challenges, and formal scientific writing assignments.

    The scientists and engineers from the previous week acted as resources in
their areas of content and research authenticity. Interestingly, they became fas-
cinated with how we devised our unit and what role writing would play in it.
One senior engineer asked, "Why are you incorporating all of the writing assign-
ments? Shouldn't that happen in their English classes? I'm interested because I
never really learned how to write until my first real job." They repeatedly men-
tioned that effective writing skills were essential to the success of scientists and
engineers. Another engineer mentioned, "I learned great technical skills during
my time at school; however, it was not until I came to NASA that I discovered
the need to communicate my ideas and write in a persuasive way." One scientist,
an editor of a major scientific journal, shared with us, "I reject many manu-
scripts a month not because the science is poor, but because the authors lack
the ability to communicate their ideas." He stressed the importance of receiving
feedback on writing; "I've learned that other eyes need to read my work before
I'm ready to publish. It takes a lot of work." When we interviewed them about
the kinds of writing they engaged in, we discovered a wide variety of types:
research summaries, grant proposals, requests for proposals, formal technical
writing, email dialogues with colleagues across the country, budget requests,
and staff evaluations were some of the examples they shared. We asked about
how a team of scientists would request funding to use one of NASA's aircraft
for research projects, much like the one we designed in our PBL unit. They
provided the template collaborative teams must submit for evaluation by the
Review Committee. We used a similar template for our project: students had to
describe their research project, the methods they would employ, how they would

                                                                                                  39
Lowry

"pack the plane" with instrumentation, and also include a summary of costs. The
NASA team provided access to a web-based utility that would calculate actual
costs in running a mission. We strived to keep the experience as authentic as
possible, including how middle and high school students used writing as a tool
to advance learning. As one senior scientist mentioned of the unit we created, "I
wish I had such an opportunity when I was a student."

    Our collaboration with NASA created an interesting and unexpected action/
reaction pair. As a participant of the workshop, I was fully prepared to expand
my content knowledge of aeronautics and gain deeper insights into how NASA
accomplishes its mission, "To fly what others only imagine." To my surprise
and delight, I learned the engineers and scientists were interested in supporting
the next generation of STEM professionals through high quality educational
resources. One of the major deficits in their education was a limited ability to
communicate ideas effectively. The scientists and engineers embraced the idea of
fostering this skill early in school, and as a result, a WACommunity was born.
The senior scientist who acts as an editor for a scientific journal began offering
writing workshops for younger colleagues; he was interested in supporting the
growth of his staff. Two of the engineers agreed to act as peer reviewers for my
students who engaged in the curricular unit. They mentioned how they enjoyed
sharing their knowledge by providing feedback to emerging scientists/engineers.
One interesting interaction involved a student who was responding to a writing
for social action prompt; he was composing a letter to his senator regarding the
recent sequestration budget cuts. He interviewed one of the NASA engineers to
learn more about how the cuts were affecting the agency and composed a con-
vincing piece using first-hand knowledge in his letter. My students said, "It went
from being a `so what' letter to an `ah ha' kind of thing." Just as we learned more
about the work of NASA personnel, the staff at Dryden Flight Center delved
into the life of educators. Newton's Third Law of action/reaction was actively at
work during our summer experience.

    Another collaborative experience resulting in unanticipated beneficial out-
comes involves how Volunteer Professional Organizations (VPO) can support
the growth and learning of secondary and postsecondary educators. For exam-
ple, many such VPO's exist for educators: the National Council of Teachers of
English (NCTE); the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM),
and the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA). NSTA is the largest
organization dedicated to supporting the teaching and learning of science in the
country. It offers many professional opportunities to its members: Professional
Development Institutes, regional and national conferences and a dynamic e-pro-
fessional development portal known as the Learning Center (http://learningcen-
ter.nsta.org/).

40
                                                                              Newton's Third Law Revisited

    Teachers may also volunteer to serve on committees with various purposes.
I was appointed to one such committee, the Children's Book Council Review
Panel, whose purpose is to evaluate all new science trade books for a particular
year. With over 150 books published any given year, the committee's task is to
select twenty to thirty exemplary texts that meet committee standards for excel-
lence. Rubrics include criteria such as the accuracy of the science described, age
appropriateness of topics, and the variety of cultures represented in the books. In
particular, research indicated that few children of color see themselves portrayed
as "scientific," so the committee has been interested in identifying texts that
speak to that audience in compelling ways. After I had volunteered for this com-
mittee, I learned how to evaluate the reading level of a book and how important
the interplay between written text and effective visuals can be when explaining
complex scientific phenomena. One member of our committee, a professor of
education and a reading specialist, challenged us "to do more than just review
the books." She wanted us to use them and create assessments to strengthen
students' cognitive development. Long before the Common Core's emphasis on
using non-fiction texts to advance learning, our committee settled upon using
these books to support literacy and language development along with promoting
science understanding. Science teachers at all levels benefit from the reviews and
use them to spur learning within the discipline.

    One early collaboration that resulted from my work on the review panel
centered on the annotated bibliography we created for the Outstanding Trade
Books in Science. The short synopsis, along with a brief commentary of what
made the book exemplary, was an excellent exercise in concise writing. Hansen
et al. describe how curiosity can spark a vital collaboration (Chapter 8). I was
talking with a colleague who mentioned how he was looking for a way to use
writing in his classroom. I suggested we use the trade books in some way. The
director of our writing center (who was my team teaching partner) suggested
we review science books and write our own summaries in the style of the com-
mittee. After reading a book, the sixth graders drafted summaries and then met
with our twelfth-grade students, who were trained about how to offer supportive
feedback to young writers. The sixth-grade students began to master the art of
revising their work to more effectively communicate their ideas. We assembled
their final drafts into an annotated bibliography, which the middle school librar-
ian used as a resource for all students. Twelfth-grade students acted as peer tutors
to the sixth graders, and the librarian and writing center director assisted in
compiling the final bibliographies. The bibliographies expanded in size and pur-
pose, morphing into what Margaretha Ebbers refers to as a text set (41). These
collections of different genres of books (fiction, non-fiction, biographies, field
guides, and reference materials) present scientific information in different ways.

                                                                                                  41
Lowry

Collections of these text sets can be used to support inquiry-based instruction
in science by supporting students as they pose questions, design investigations,
and confirm and expand the knowledge they have learned through direct inves-
tigations. In their book Inquiring Scientist, Inquiring Readers: Using Nonfiction
to Promote Science Literacy, Jessica Fries-Gaith and Terry Shiverdecker bring this
concept to fruition; they weave together best practices for science and literacy
instruction in a way that makes sense for the classroom. What began as a simple
act of working on a review panel created an equal and opposite reaction rich
with collaboration that spawned a host of writing, thinking and learning among
young learners. I shared the assignment with the chair of our committee, and she
used it as the inspiration for a unit with her university pre-service science teach-
ers. It has become a favorite of her students, because they learn science content
while reading the books, and they explore how to use the books with writing
assignments in their classrooms. The "reaction" of my committee service lives on
in the work of these pre-service teachers.

    The previous examples demonstrate how action/reaction pairs between col-
laborators advance the professional growth of educators in oblique ways. Can
the act of writing itself spark direct growth for educators? In other words, can
we apply the principles of the writing process to advance the development of
educators? And what role does collaboration play in the development process?
I explored those questions as I embarked on the long and arduous process of
seeking National Board Certification. Modeled after the bar examination that is
used to determine if a candidate is qualified to practice law in a given state, the
National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS) seeks to identify
what a teacher should know and be able to do as an accomplished teacher. The
originators of NBPTS, a group of outstanding postsecondary educators across
disciplines, has identified five core propositions related to what a teacher should
know and be able to do:

   1. Teachers are committed to students and their learning.
   2. Teachers know the subjects they teach and how to teach those subjects

       to students.
   3. Teachers are responsible for managing and monitoring student learning.
   4. Teachers think systematically about their practice and learn from expe-

       rience.
   5. Teachers are members of learning communities.

    The assessment process requires candidates to complete two major compo-
nents: a portfolio of classroom practice, including samples of student work and
video recordings of instruction, and a content knowledge assessment admin-
istered at a testing center. At the core of the process is writing: writing about

42
                                                                              Newton's Third Law Revisited

practice; writing about assessment; writing about student growth and personal
growth; and reflecting on how to improve as a professional. I was deeply engaged
in the writing process while examining my work as an educator: prewriting
(inventing approaches and aspects of learning to review); carefully responding
to the prompts with supporting evidence; outlining my ideas with a narrative
structure; proofreading; seeking outside feedback; and rewriting and revising my
drafts. I was engaged in this iterative loop for a year as I put my practice "un-
der the microscope" of review and self-reflection. The action of writing created
an equal and opposite force that transformed how I think about teaching and
learning: I no longer just "blazed through" a class, a unit, a semester; the writing
process caused me to continuously question and reflect on what made my ac-
tions effective. Ultimately, I was successful in obtaining certification due largely
to applying the writing process to my work. I joined a group sponsored by the
national board to act as mentors to aspiring candidates. I found that mentoring
a colleague was as valuable as going through the process itself.

    Mary Sandowski, a biology teacher from Seattle, and I attended a dynamic
Professional Development workshop that took place at the Olympic Park Insti-
tute outside the Olympic National Park in Washington. We were learning about
the ecology of old growth forests of the Pacific Northwest. While crawling over
the massive remains of fallen spruce, Mary mentioned that she was interested in
attempting National Board Certification. I encouraged her to start the process
and offered to be a mentor as she moved through the long journey of completing
its requirements. Over the course of a year, we began a dialog that was highly
rewarding to both of us: she would forward drafts of reflective writing about
various submissions and I would offer feedback to her ideas. An interesting pat-
tern emerged in our dialog: she would make claims about "student understand-
ing being advanced" and I would respond "where's the evidence?" Before long,
Mary realized she needed to offer support for any claims; more importantly, she
began to question why she was doing certain actions with her students and how
that supported their learning. The "magic" of self-reflection was beginning to
take hold of Mary: "I never realized how slowing down to reflect on my work
in writing would act as the catalyst for change. We are so focused on moving
forward, that we forget to look back." Mary was grasping what Navarro and
Chion mention in their chapter, that covering a syllabus does not guarantee
deep learning (Chapter 4). Writing becomes the vehicle that "slows us down"
and invites discourse about our practice as educators. I suggested she might try
a writing-to-learn activity to begin a unit and track student comprehension by
using a portfolio system. She instituted the idea, and it became a valuable as-
sessment "artifact" for her certification process. Mary revised her essays multiple
times, demonstrating clearer insight into the work of her students and her role

                                                                                                  43
Lowry

in supporting their growth with each version. My "action" with Mary caused an
equal "reaction" in my own practice: was I practicing what I preached when it
came to using writing in my classroom? My dialog with Mary forced me to re-
evaluate how I use writing and prompted me to take new directions in how I use
this tool with my students. I created an assignment having students delve into
scientific literature and write concise summaries of that literature. It is an assign-
ment that continues to pay dividends with learning today; students mention
in summative assessments that the research summaries forced them to become
more effective communicators. The writing process as practiced by student and
educator alike became the vehicle for professional and personal growth, and this
insight sprang from my collaboration with the National Board for Professional
Teaching Standards.

    Over 350 years ago, Newton created a framework for understanding how ac-
tions of "unlike bodies may interact to move in understandable ways" (Westfall
105). He most likely never imagined his Laws of Motion might extend to col-
laborative "action/reaction" pairs; nonetheless the genius of his ideas lies in their
applicability to other fields. My own collaborations have challenged me to move
outside my classroom and interact with "unlike bodies," with educators in dif-
ferent fields and at other academic levels. By taking the risk of moving outside of
the familiar, I have been rewarded with profound professional growth. Whether
it is forming partnerships through the National Writing Project, IWCA, WAC,
or working closely with a colleague to support writing, thinking and learning,
these partnerships are crucial hallmarks of professional practice.

WORKS CITED

Bazerman, Charles. Shaping Written Knowledge. Madison: U of Wisconsin P,
   1988. Print.

Checkley, Kathy. "The First Seven ... and the Eighth: A Conversation with How-
   ard Gardner." Educational Leadership 55 (1997): 8-13. Web. 13 November
   2014.

Ebbers, Margaretha. "Science Text Sets: Using Various Genres to Promote Liter-
   acy and Inquiry." Language Arts 80 (2002): 40-50. Web. 13 November 2014.

Gardner, Howard. Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences. New
   York: Basic Books, 1983. Print.

Giere, Ronald N., John Bickle, and Robert Maudlin. Understanding Scientific
   Reasoning. Belmont: Thomson Wadsworth, 2006. Print.

Fries-Gaith, Jessica, and Terry Shiverdecker. Inquiring Scientist, Inquiring Read-
   ers: Using Nonfiction to Promote Science Literacy. Arlington: NSTA Press,
   2012. Print.

44
                                                                              Newton's Third Law Revisited

Petroski, Henry. Engineering by Design: How Engineers Get from Thought to Thing.
   Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1996. Print.

Schwab, Joseph Jackson. The Teaching of Science as Enquiry. Cambridge: Harvard
   UP. 1962. Print.

Sylvester, R., and W. Greenidge. "Digital Storytelling: Extending the Potential
   for Struggling Writers." The Reading Teacher 63.4 (2009): 284-95. Web.

Vygotsky, Lev S. Mind in Society. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1978. Print.
Westfall, Richard S. Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton. Cambridge:

   Cambridge UP, 1983. Print.

                                                                                                  45
CHAPTER 4

SHAPING DISCIPLINARY
DISCOURSES IN HIGH SCHOOL:
A TWO-WAY COLLABORATIVE
WRITING PROGRAM

      Federico Navarro and Andrea Revel Chion

    We work in university, high school, and teacher training courses in different
disciplines (applied linguistics and didactics of biology) in Argentina. We share
an interest in the discursive and epistemic singularity of school writing within
the framework of various subjects, and in that regard, we both acknowledge--
and worry about--the rare, specific instances in which they are taught. We are
motivated by our intention to prompt teachers' and students' reflection on the
fact that writing stimulates thinking, generates and fosters learning, and has
inherent features that must be mastered before participating in any classroom
discussion and training.

    It is against this backdrop that the School Writing Program1 was formulated
as a subject compulsorily taken in the school where the program was imple-
mented,2 although it has not been formally introduced into the high school
curriculum nationwide. It is taught by a writing teacher and articulated with
various curriculum subjects on a rotating basis throughout each school year.
Students read and write based on relevant epistemological frameworks, themes,
corpora, reading assignments, and linguistic dimensions that are agreed upon
by the writing teacher and the subject teacher. This proposal is unprecedented
in Argentine high schools' curricula, which are compartmentalized into areas,
except for a few pilot or short-term projects. Besides, some recent interesting
proposals have focused alternatively on the linguistic specificity of school writing
practices (Desinano; Di Stefano, Rizzi, and Axeruld) or on their epistemological
specificity (Carlino), but they do not elaborate sufficiently on the articulation
of both aspects.

    The proposal to create a specific setting for writing-in-the-disciplines was wel-
comed enthusiastically by officials and colleagues when it was outlined in 2011,
and gradually extended to the school curriculum in 2013 to become a required
course taught to first graders (12-13-year-olds), second graders (13-14-year-

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2015.0735.2.04                                     47
Navarro and Chion

olds), and fourth graders (15-16-year-olds). Likewise, students gradually over-
came their initial distrust of a writing-oriented subject that articulates various
areas.

    Usually, educators claim that this type of project is too time-consuming and
thus prevents teachers from covering their syllabi, but it is equally true that an
unconnected heap of knowledge and the completion of syllabi do not guaran-
tee students' understanding, applicability, and transferability of this knowledge.
Completed syllabi, but inert knowledge? We do not think that is acceptable.

    Some educators also frequently assert that subject teachers do not know how
to teach the special features of writing, but this is no less true than the fact that
language teachers do not know the special features of writing vis-à-vis school
subjects. It follows that collaborative work is the most viable alternative in order
to incorporate writing into each subject. The program described below is intend-
ed to show a possible path to solve these concerns.

TEACHING WRITING IN SCHOOL

    There is consensus about the need for students to know and identify the
meanings of natural sciences, social sciences, and the humanities. Thus, students
should be able to master their "languages" so that the gap between them and
their teachers will narrow, and the communication between them will become
more fluent.

    It should be pointed out that, for the most part, subject teachers need appro-
priate and specific linguistic and didactic tools to perform explicit and produc-
tive work with their students' reading and writing practices. That is, training in
the didactics of writing-in-the-disciplines is necessary to identify the dimensions
of language involved in the production of written material, to use a meta-lan-
guage to direct the work, and to structure the development processes of the more
complex writing practices. In line with this, language teachers need training
and specialization in the various conceptual frameworks and rhetorical styles of
the specific disciplinary cultures. As a result, the exchange and the symmetrical
two-way collaboration between writing teachers and subject teachers serve as the
starting point for a comprehensive approach to reading and writing.

    School and academic reading and writing practices at the different levels and
in the different subjects are new practices that must be taught, explored, and
exercised (Carlino; Kelly and Bazerman; Rivard and Straw). Put another way,
they are not natural skills or skills acquired only during elementary education.

    Teaching the specificity of school writing and the specificity of disciplinary
discourse are two closely related aspects. In other words, some relevant aspects
of school writing are inextricably related to the rhetorical and epistemological

48
                                                        Shaping Disciplinary Discourses in High School

specificities of certain fields, while other fields can be generalized, to a lesser or
greater degree, in school writing. Partnerships among secondary and university
educators are important to improve student learning. The contents and compe-
tences addressed by the School Writing Program explore these two dimensions,
as explained later on.

    Besides, teaching contents through language and teaching about language are
two sides of the same coin. While reading and writing enable one to gain disci-
plinary knowledge, it should not be overlooked that disciplinary knowledge is
written and negotiated in the classroom from certain specific linguistic practices
and dimensions, which must be taught and learned (Rose and Martin 18). We
believe that the power of writing as an epistemic practice is associated with its
power as a rhetorical practice.

    Determining the importance of the reading and writing work in all school
subjects falls within the scope of the need to deal with the hidden curriculum
(Jackson). In particular, students have a given cultural capital (Bourdieu; Ezcur-
ra) that comprises cognitive skills (analyzing, summarizing, relating, judging,
and applying information), critical academic habits (using the dictionary, mak-
ing a documentary search, taking notes, reading graphs and charts, synthesizing
information, using information and communication technology tools), meta-
cognitive and self-regulatory skills (monitoring learning, identifying weaknesses
and strengths of their own learning, spotting and fixing mistakes, and organizing
time), and information, concepts, and thinking frameworks. Within these com-
ponents of cultural capital, discipline writing practices play a key role. Unless
students develop literacy practices by reflecting upon and explicitly exercising
the articulation between linguistic and epistemic dimensions under certain
guidelines, too much reliance will be placed on the competences acquired by
them in their cultural and family settings, i.e., on their cultural capital.

A WRITING PROGRAM FOR THE SCHOOL CURRICULUM

    The School Writing Program might be thought of as a special setting of
biology, civics, or math--or any other subject--where written communicative
competence is exercised, or as a subject of reading and writing that borrows con-
tents, epistemic practices, and materials from other subjects of the same school
grade. In fact, it is a combination of both.

    Although the program has its own space in the curriculum, it is articulated
reciprocally with other subjects according to negotiated dynamics that depend
on the participating teachers of secondary levels. It is a subject that does not
revolve around reading and writing exercises isolated from the students' curricu-
lum-related needs and specificities, nor is it limited to surmounting the reading

                                                                                                  49
Navarro and Chion

and writing difficulties not dealt with by traditional subjects.
    Also, one of the goals of the program is to agree on collaborative didactic

interventions with teachers from different areas and subjects. This aspect centers
on the articulation between reading and writing practices and the rhetorical and
epistemic specificity of the various areas of the school curriculum. On top of
that, this articulation implies a true process of interdisciplinary teacher training.
In this way, collaborative work between writing teachers and subject teachers
starts a two-way original training process for the school dynamics, where the
fragmentation of teacher training, subjects, and teacher practice is currently the
norm. This cross-institutional training and collaboration among educators is
especially enriching, because it originated at the actual teaching site, so it makes
full sense to all participants.

    From the students' point of view, the program affords an opportunity to
further their school writing practices by addressing specific needs arising from
their subjects, to become meta-linguistically aware, and to acquire an operat-
ing meta-language that enables them to revise and improve their written work
on their own, and to recognize the role of reading and writing as fundamental
practices for their performance in the specific school subjects. This work is not
intended only for a higher degree of adaptation to school literacy practices, but
also for the development of a fundamental strategy to better learn the contents
of the subject syllabi.

    From the subject teachers' standpoint, the program is an opportunity to re-
flect upon, modify, and state expressly the role of literacy practices in their sub-
jects through the development of specific tools and goals in cooperation with the
writing teachers. In addition, writing teachers can boost their work with written
language in school by incorporating materials and knowledge from other areas.

    The design of the program comprises its own space in the curriculum
through a weekly, eighty-minute class within the regular school schedule that
is like any other required subject. It is taught by a writing teacher that works
in coordination with teachers of different subjects. Every trimester, the writing
course is articulated with a different subject and teacher. In its first year (2011),
the program was implemented in fourth grade (15-16-year-old students), and
writing teachers worked with history, biology, and physics teachers. In its second
year (2012), the program was extended to first-grade courses (12-13-year-old
students) and included math, civics, and geography teachers. In its third year
(2013), second-grade courses (13-14-year-old students) were added and some
courses and teachers remained on the program (math and geography), while
others joined the program (biology). Therefore, a high school freshman would
participate in the program for three years. The program intends to be introduced
into every grade of the school curriculum, because each stage has needs and goals

50
                                                        Shaping Disciplinary Discourses in High School

related to literacy practices that must be recognized and institutionalized by the
school.

    Every trimester, students work on reading material, speech genres, authors,
theoretical contents and frameworks, and communicative needs of a subject that
they are taking simultaneously. If this proposal surprises teachers and officials
alike, it also comes as a surprise to students: A subject that is history, but it's not
history? Why is my writing on biology evaluated if I'm not being taught biolo-
gy? Why are teachers of different subjects teaching the same topic? Part of the
challenge posed to the teacher in charge of the course is to transform students'
representations of the organization, teaching, learning, and evaluation of the
curriculum, areas, and subjects, by showing them the epistemic value of writing.

    The collaboration with each subject teacher cannot be reduced to only one
trimester in a given year or a span of several years. The plan is designed to last
about two years, and then rotate to new teachers. Thus, an attempt is made to
largely impact the teaching community. Collaborative work is assumed to be a
training process that requires a minimum period to mature and settle. After-
wards, when participants develop independent strategies to teach writing, the
work with disciplinary rhetorical practices must go necessarily from the writing
classroom to writing in the classroom. This means that the collaboration is no
longer needed. The rotating nature of the program is one of its most remarkable
strengths: it enables interested teachers to participate, sparks others' curiosity, al-
lows dissatisfied teachers to leave the program in an orderly fashion, and permits
those who are not so sure about participating to wait for the right time to join in.

    However, as the Writing Program aims to tackle specific communication
challenges within the content subjects and engage teachers into a training pro-
cess, the decision on which teachers continue, join, or leave the program is not
only personal, but also, and essentially, institutional. Most teachers in the school
did volunteer to participate, and there is actually a waiting list of teachers willing
to take part in the program. Some of these teachers only teach at the secondary
level, while others simultaneously teach at postsecondary and university levels,
and most of them usually engage in all kinds of educational projects. On the
whole, participating teachers are open to new, exciting educational scenarios, so
gathering colleagues' interest has never been an issue. After three years running,
the impact of the program on students' literacies as perceived by teachers has
definitely reinforced that initial interest.

    In addition, the flexible nature of the curricula organization in Argentina
leaves room for this kind of reform program and allows for bottom-up changes.
Secondary teachers in Argentina are, in general, free to choose or even design
their own coursebooks. They can usually include what they consider relevant
contents for their specific students and their academic, institutional, and socio-

                                                                                                  51
Navarro and Chion

cultural context. This means that innovative, enthusiastic institutions can foster
different kinds of projects and programs on their own without being constrained
by school districts' policies. As a matter of fact, many districts' reports and syl-
labi do encourage writing across the curriculum initiatives (Ministerio de Edu-
cación), although this does not necessarily imply the implementation of actual
writing programs.

COLLABORATING TO TEACH, EVALUATE, AND INNOVATE

    The negotiated collaboration dynamics are a key feature of the program.
This collaboration is neither isolated nor focused on the beginning of the school
year. On the contrary, writing teachers and subject teachers must, to a lesser
or greater degree, negotiate throughout the collaboration period. This creates
a setting for educational projects and innovation that, despite the extra effort
required, proves very encouraging for its participants. Before the beginning of
the collaboration period, participating teachers define several aspects, such as the
disciplinary texts to be used, the evaluation criteria to be followed, and mainly,
the reading and writing practices and dimensions that will be addressed. These
practices and dimensions are directly related to the aspects proper to the reading
and writing practices of the subject, the discipline, and the school. During the
trimester, teachers are in contact with one another over the phone, by email,
and in person to discuss the development and implementation of the activities
planned, apart from any new initiatives. At the end of the trimester, teachers
meet to evaluate the implementation of the collaboration, agree on the students'
final grades, and plan any changes to the following year's collaboration.

    The common grade is also awarded jointly by the writing teacher and the
subject teacher at the end of the trimester; every student's homework, course-
work, and exam grades in both areas are compared, and a final, common grade is
agreed on. This innovative feature derives from the need for students to commit
themselves to take part in a demanding, complex subject, which nonetheless is
not part of the curriculum, strictly speaking. Yet, it has a less expected effect:
it helps consolidate the proposal with the students because of the ties between
epistemic frameworks and writing practices, one of the premises of the program,
and translate into an aspect as significant as the trimester grade.

    Also open to intense negotiation is the evaluation method. The most con-
ventional method of evaluation is an exam integrating reading and writing skills
that tests the topics dealt with throughout the trimester in practice. Albeit inte-
grating topics and texts of the specific subject, this exam is graded by the writing
teacher and is considered to belong to the writing course. Furthermore, written
assignments and participation in classroom discussions and activities through-

52
                                                        Shaping Disciplinary Discourses in High School

out the trimester are also assessed. Another method of evaluation involves incor-
porating reading and writing dimensions into exams explicitly, and homework
assignments of the subject articulated with the program. In this case, the subject
teacher, the writing teacher, or both, grade the students' written work, and a
final grade is awarded in light of the students' literacy practices.

    The subject is not part of the mandatory contents of the school curriculum,
at least for the time being. The introduction of this device into the school sched-
ule like any other subject enables administrators, faculty, students and parents
to envision that, in the future and upon making any modification suggested by
experience, it may become a curricular subject in high school.

WHAT TO WRITE IN SCHOOL

    A didactic proposal to teach and learn to write must primarily define the
specific writing aspects to be explored in the classroom, and how they will be
explored. It becomes necessary to determine the language and writing theory
to be used, the aspects of such theory selected for teaching, and how they will
be taught. This represents one of the biggest challenges presented by the School
Writing Program, because language deeply influences us in our capacity as social
subjects in that it plays an essential role in the construction of our identities.

    Language in general and writing in particular are usually regarded as a single
skill that cannot be segmented into specific and differentiated practices, dimen-
sions, and resources. Further, writing is often related exclusively to important
but insufficient aspects, such as spelling rules or correctness criteria applied re-
gardless of use, and its varying degrees of adequacy. Similarly, language tends
to be considered a natural object that may be addressed alternatively by one or
another linguistic theory without any consequence.

    But this is not the case at all. There are cognitive, formalist, functionalist,
and pragmatic linguistic theories, among others, and each results in language
and writing configurations that are very different from one another. School and
academic writing cannot be taught with a linguistic conception arising from
common sense or with outdated grammars, or dictionaries that disregard the
scientific advances of the past decades. This does not mean that subject teachers
must be experts in linguistics before explicitly incorporating reading and writ-
ing, but they do need to receive some training on these subjects and on collabo-
rative projects. In addition, teachers can take advantage of students' conceptions
of language and writing to enhance classroom work.

    The aspects addressed in the School Writing Program fall into five broad di-
mensions: basic literacy competences; cognitive and linguistic meta-competenc-
es; school speech genres; information and communication technologies (ICTs);

                                                                                                  53
Navarro and Chion

and rules. These dimensions are explored below, pointing out some specific mat-
ters taken up with 15- and 16-year-old students.

    The general methodology that relates the aspects tackled in class focuses on
the transformation of texts according to detailed guidelines that draw distinc-
tions between the various dimensions. Accordingly, students must syntactically
rearrange an excerpt without modifying the meaning or the lexicon, adapt the
lexicon to different readerships, change the punctuation of a paragraph to make
it clearer, reorganize the position and articulation of an authoritative quote in
a reading report, or enlarge the space between paragraphs without modifying
the space between lines, among many other possible transformations. In turn,
this methodology explores ludic aspects, such as the generation of mockery, and
uses non-academic communicative practices familiar to students, like a detailed
analysis of non-school unwritten speech genres. Students follow a basic series of
steps: first, they (individually, in pairs, or the entire class) read and deconstruct
others' texts (materials of the area, other students' texts); then, they (individually
and in pairs) do their own writing based on previously discussed issues; finally,
they read and rewrite those texts, and the process starts again. Providing settings
to rewrite texts is remarkably enriching, because it reinforces the representation
of writing as a complex rhetorical process by stages and with multiple dimen-
sions. At the same time, students have an opportunity to devise strategies to
deconstruct, rephrase, and adapt their own and others' written work. In sum,
texts are not only written, but also summarized, evaluated, reinforced, mocked,
quoted, etc., because mature writing is, in reality, permanent rewriting where
texts and contents are adapted and modified. (Alvarado 47)

BASIC LITERACY COMPETENCES

    The program intends for students to develop basic literacy competences ap-
plicable to all school writing practices, but that can also become more specif-
ic in each subject. These general linguistic competencies include: explaining,
describing, narrating, organizing paragraphs, summarizing, quoting, adapting,
expressly stating, depersonalizing, nominalizing, rephrasing, hedging, boosting,
etc. To a lesser or greater degree, these aspects should be covered by practically
every school and academic writing course, although the particular features of
the respective disciplines may require prioritizing certain writing practices over
others. For example, even though any scientific discipline must quote previous
sources, and the strategies and rules to quote and use a bibliography vary from
discipline to discipline.

    To illustrate our point, we will refer to the work on hedging and boosting
articulated with history. In the introduction and conclusion of a research article

54
                                                        Shaping Disciplinary Discourses in High School

published in a scientific journal and used as required reading in the subject, the
authors identify resources to hedge and boost. These resources are crucial in sci-
entific-academic discourse, not least in the humanities, such as history (Hyland
57-58), because new contributions must be fitted into the body of knowledge
already accepted by the community and, at the same time, must not constitute
a threat to that community (hedging). With that in mind, those contributions
must be put forward with enough commitment and conviction to be taken into
account (boosting). That is, the degree of certainty and accuracy of the asser-
tions does not only depend on how sure we are of those assertions, but also on
a correlation of forces in the socially situated production of discourses (Myers).
This double articulation that embraces the key assertions in scientific-academic
discourse is also relevant when a student presents and defends his positions be-
fore an expert teacher. Thus, the work with hedges and boosters triggers the dis-
cussion about the socio-historically specific ways of negotiating and validating
scientific knowledge between writers and readers. Aside from that, the different
parts of the genre are related to the precedence of hedging (in the introduction)
or boosting (in the conclusion). The excerpts analyzed are rephrased afterwards
by incorporating excessive hedges and boosters to mock the original text. These
games enable students to reflect on the features that make a school text adequate
or inadequate, and also promote students' creativity and interest.

COGNITIVE AND LINGUISTIC META-COMPETENCES

    The development and consolidation of cognitive and linguistic meta-com-
petences might help students adopt a critical attitude towards their own and
others' reading and writing practices and acquire an analysis meta-language. This
dimension enables them to attain a theoretical and reflexive balance in a pre-
dominantly practical pedagogical approach to writing. Meta-competences make
exercises more meaningful, prompt discussions about and the rearrangement of
prior conceptions of the development of writing competences, as well as enable
students to become more autonomous and to gain critical insights as far as their
writing is concerned. Additionally, meta-competences can help foster students'
involvement in the subject and increase their interest. Their reading and writing
backgrounds are reflected upon; mistakes in their written work and in others' are
spotted and corrected; the functional varieties of language are analyzed in view
of political, geographical, social, and situational dimensions; the mass media
discourse (nationwide newspapers) is deconstructed; paragraphs are read and
annotated; and the subjective and objective dimensions of scientific-academic
discourse are discussed among students and teachers.

    With respect to the latter aspect, in articulation with physics, the alleged-

                                                                                                  55
Navarro and Chion

ly objective and impersonal nature of scientific-academic discourse is discussed
analyzing some depersonalization strategies on which that construction is based
(García Negroni), including: nominalization (which eliminates the participants'
roles), metonymy (where an inanimate element, like "the book" or "the theory,"
is an agent), passive voice (which might eliminate the agent), non-finite verb
forms (which provide no morphological information on person and number),
and the first person plural (which conceals the individuality of a single speaker).
Students work with biographical texts of a key author read in physics (Stephen
Hawking) and play at depersonalizing them, thus showing the artificiality of the
mechanism.

    The articulation with biology introduces language functional varieties as-
sociated with contextual factors: national languages (geographical and political
variations: Argentina's language, Spain's language), sociolects (social variations
according to the speakers' age, ethnic group, profession, sex, etc.; teenagers' lan-
guage, lawyers' language), genres and registers (cultural and situational varia-
tions), and idiolects (individual variations). Videos from series, movies, and TV
programs are used to recognize varieties, and dichotomies are discussed that may
arouse students' intense interest, such as correct/adequate and homogeneity/het-
erogeneity. This reflection enables students to elaborate on the explanatory se-
quence in biology (Revel Chion), described as a key feature in the discourse of
that field. The exercises entail rewriting a biology explanation in a specific social
language (and a specific situational context).

SCHOOL SPEECH GENRES

    The program deals with school speech genres that are closely related to the
respective disciplines and relevant to the students' particular writing practices: a
comprehensive history exam; an explanation of a topic in biology; a newspaper
editorial; and a reading report in physics. The genres selected are practiced and
requested in reading and writing assignments in the subjects articulated with
the program. This reinforces the collaborative dynamics and makes coursework
meaningful.

    The work on speech genres is carried out according to three sets of features
used to describe them (Bakhtin). First, their circulation: typical speaker(s), re-
cipient(s), and situational and social contexts. Second, their socio-discursive
goals: the purpose and social role of the genres. Third, their textualization: the
issues addressed and the typical grammatical and lexical resources presented by
the genres, as well as their structures.

    The articulation with history is aimed at deconstructing, in detail, the com-
prehensive exam genre, which students write for the first time during this period

56
                                                        Shaping Disciplinary Discourses in High School

based on real samples from previous years. They identify their readers' expecta-
tions and goals, and some typical features of its textualization. The tasks request-
ed in the assignments are thoroughly analyzed: the aspects that must be manda-
torily included in the answer, the aspects that are taken for granted but must be
accounted for anyway, the key words of the assignment that must be used in the
answer, and how much time will be used in each answer. Because teachers usu-
ally request narrative, explanatory, and descriptive texts, they are distinguished
from one another and described. The writing activity is the preparation of the
tasks of a comprehensive history exam based on a source text in which students
act as the teacher. The degree of difficulty and explicitness of the assignment is
proportionately adjusted.

INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES

    Information and communication technologies (ICTs) influence every con-
temporary school writing practice, and accordingly, it is our intention to include
them in the program. The objective is to make more extensive use of practices
familiar to and used by students in school and university, other than for social
or recreational purposes. Students discuss strategies to assess the adequacy, rele-
vance, and usefulness of online sources found on Google in school; specify the
features of an email account for sending school homework; and explore the use
of the word processor to do school writing.

    In connection with this aspect, one class focuses on a discussion of format.
Students pursue at least three goals: exploring IT tools with which students are
not fully familiar (such as paragraph breaks), placing emphasis on important
aspects (like justifying a text), and proposing formal features (e.g., font type and
size) to practice adapting texts to them. It is a practical approach through the
use of netbooks in class, as students must turn a text without a given format into
one with the format required.

RULES

    Although it is reductionist to consider rules to be the fundamental aspect
taught by school in reference to writing, they permeate school education and,
for that reason, the program emphasizes and systematizes them. The program
also deals with punctuation and accentuation. Instead of going over innumera-
ble rules, teachers employ a mainly practical approach, exploring and practicing
useful general principles and rewriting texts with mistakes. The primary goal is
to underscore the importance of monitoring one's own accentuation and punc-
tuation. Also, teachers examine quotation rules, because they are new to most

                                                                                                  57
Navarro and Chion

students and proper to academic and school discourse. In class, they analyze
relevant general data, namely author, title, and date, as well as the specific rules
for some disciplines.

EVALUATING TO IMPROVE

    The School Writing Program has already been consolidated after having been
implemented and adjusted in three grades of the curriculum (first, second, and
fourth), including the preparation of the first didactic materials in the form of
booklets, with the school officials' permanent support, and the participation of
more subject teachers.

    In the classroom, students first focused on the (in)validity and (in)viability
of the course during its first year of implementation, but afterwards they were
concerned with specific and useful issues, such as the aspects to be practiced and
the subjects with which to articulate the program. In fact, an anonymous survey
of students conducted at the end of the 2012 school year revealed that 80%
found the program useful to a lesser or greater extent, and 42% found it quite or
extremely useful. The importance of this information lies in the fact that it is the
students' subjective, anonymous insight regarding an unprecedented demanding
course. The survey also showed high heterogeneity on the issues that students
had found most and least useful. This means that, through their opinions, they
showed that their perceptions on their writing strengths and weaknesses are
wholly dissimilar.

    In respect to grades, about half of the students earned similar grades in the
participating subject and in the writing course. This general tendency is interest-
ing, because it shows that, broadly speaking, the articulation between the Writ-
ing Program and the subjects translates into a relatively high degree of consis-
tency of the students' performance in the areas articulated. From the rest of the
students, about half attained a higher grade in the writing course, and therefore
raised their subject final grades and, conversely, those who received a lower grade
in the writing course consequently had lower final subject grades.

    The program made a substantial impact on students' literacy practices, bring-
ing back and consolidating previous rhetorical practices and, above all, incorpo-
rating, developing, and making explicit new rhetorical competences.

    Furthermore, the program was embraced readily by participating teachers,
which was evidenced in the year-end self-assessments and in the teachers' work-
shops, which actually led to the collective decision for teachers to continue par-
ticipating. Apart from that, the program made a profound impact on participat-
ing teachers' reading and writing didactic practices. The physics teacher made
the reading report assignments more complex, modified them, and expressly

58
                                                        Shaping Disciplinary Discourses in High School

requested that the answers indicate the strategies to quote, depersonalize, and
argue that were practiced in the Writing Program, which were then assessed.
The history teacher incorporated exam feedback based on collective rephrasing
exercises.

    For writing teachers, permanent collaboration with teachers of the other
subjects enabled them to understand some specific features of the discipline's
discourse, such as the importance of distinguishing social groups and their con-
flicting interests in the explanations of the history class.

    We believe there are five reasons why other schools might implement their
own School Writing Programs: (1) Argentine high schools usually have teachers
eager to innovate in their practices and officials looking forward to implement-
ing policies that systematize the ties between the curriculum and the occasional
or isolated precedents that address school writing; (2) this program responds to
education agencies' demands, both because it works on the reading and writ-
ing of discipline-specific texts and contents, and because it counters problems
repeatedly diagnosed by general tests on school literacy competences; (3) this
program has solid theoretical and empirical foundations arising from updated
literature on the issue, because the program is a critical adaptation of the Writ-
ing Across the Curriculum proposal, combining discipline-specific competences
and courses with competences and courses related to school reading and writing
needs; (4) the logistic design of the program makes it intrinsically elastic, which
enables schools to adjust it to various institutional and teaching frameworks;
and (5) the program gives leeway to experiment and to discover the needs to be
addressed.

CONCLUSIONS

    The School Writing Program seems to be making a huge impact on stu-
dents' literacy practices, on their perceptions and acceptance of the initiative,
and on participating teachers' didactic practices. The differentiated ludic work
performed, under certain guidelines, on dimensions and aspects proper to writ-
ing assists in the training of writers that plan and monitor their work, rewrite
and modify their drafts, and use speech genres and resources adequate for their
purposes and readerships. Thus, the program explicitly incorporates into the
school curriculum a set of communicative competences that are essential, but are
generally invisible or unsystematically taught; at the same time, students learn
these competences in conjunction with diverse subjects and areas. The School
Writing Program, thanks to its collaborative and rotating design, intends to put
the work on these competences on the institutional and didactic agenda. The
ultimate goal is for these competences to be incorporated into the various sub-

                                                                                                  59
Navarro and Chion

jects' syllabi and taught by the subject teachers that participated in this training
initiative or in other similar ones. Hence, the program is intended to produce
effects on teachers' training so that it will not only improve their practice, but
it will also lead them to apply this proposal to other teaching settings with their
colleagues.

    Learning school literacy practices is not a moral "duty" of students or an
element we believe indispensable for an ideal school. Rather, it is what teachers,
institutions, and curricula actually expect and assess of students. Said another
way, students who do not succeed or who are unable to communicate through
the literacy practices expected are unlikely to finish high school or to satisfacto-
rily do so. This is because the irregular or incomplete management of the reading
and writing practices of school and the curriculum disciplines limits students'
access to the subjects' forms of reasoning, and bars them from joining a learning
community that requires recognizable communicative competences.

NOTES

1. This device was discussed in prior research (Navarro; Navarro and Revel Chion).

2. The project described in this book was implemented in Colegio de la Ciudad, a
private school located in the City of Buenos Aires, Argentina.

WORKS CITED

Alvarado, Maite. "Enfoques en la enseñanza de la escritura." Entre líneas. Teorías
   y enfoques en la enseñanza de la escritura, la gramática y la literatura. Ed. Maite
   Alvarado. Buenos Aires: Manantial, 2001. 13-51. Print.

Bakhtin, Mikhail. "El problema de los géneros discursivos." Estética de la creación
   verbal. Buenos Aires: Siglo XXI Editores, 2005. 248-93. Print.

Bourdieu, Pierre. Capital Cultural, Escuela y Espacio Social. Mexico: Siglo XXI
   Editores, 1997. Print.

Carlino, P. "Escribir y leer en la universidad: responsabilidad compartida entre
   alumnos, docentes e instituciones." Leer y escribir en la universidad. Ed. P.
   Carlino. Buenos Aires: Lectura y Vida, International Reading Association,
   2004. 5-21. Print.

Carlino, Paula, and Silvia Martínez, eds. Lectura y escritura, un asunto de todos.
   Neuquén: Universidad Nacional del Comahue, 2009. Print.

Desinano, Norma, ed. Crónica de una experiencia en la Escuela Media. Proyecto
   integral de lectura y escritura. Rosario: Laborde Editor, 2007. Print.

Di Stefano, Marina, Rizzi, Laura, and Axelrud, Brenda. "Didáctica de la lectura

60
                                                        Shaping Disciplinary Discourses in High School

   y la escritura desde disciplinas diversas de la escuela media. Una experiencia
   en escuelas con población vulnerable de la Ciudad de Buenos Aires." Univer-
   sidad Nacional de Catamarca-UNESCO Chair on Reading and Writing, San
   Fernando del Valle de Catamarca, II Reading and Writing Conference [Jornadas
   de Lectura y Escritura], 28-30 June 2006.
Ezcurra, Ana María. "Abandono estudiantil en educación superior. Hipótesis y
   conceptos." Admisión a la universidad y selectividad social. Cuando la democ-
   ratización es más que un problema de "ingresos." Ed. N. Gluz. Los Polvorines:
   Universidad Nacional de General Sarmiento, (2011). 23-62. Print.
García, Negroni, and María Marta. "Subjetividad y discurso científico-académi-
   co. Acerca de algunas manifestaciones de la subjetividad en el artículo de
   investigación en español." Signos 41.66 (2008): 5-31. Print.
Hyland, Ken. Metadiscourse: Exploring Interaction in Writing. London: Contin-
   uum, 2005. Print.
Jackson, Philip. La vida en las aulas. 6th ed. Madrid: Morata, 2001. Print.
Kelly, Gregory K., and Charles Bazerman. "How Students Argue Scientific
   Claims. A Rhetorical- Semantic Analysis." Applied Linguistics 24.1. (2003):
   28-55. USA: Oxford UP.
Lemke, Jay. Aprender a hablar ciencia. Lenguaje, aprendizaje y valores. Barcelona:
   Paidós, 1997. Print.
Ministerio de Educación del Gobierno de la Ciudad de Buenos Aires. Informe
   de resultados del Proyecto Jurisdiccional de Evaluación de Nivel Medio 3° año
   (2010-2011). Buenos Aires: Ministerio de Educación, 2012. Print.
Myers, Greg. "The Pragmatics of Politeness in Scientific Articles." Applied Lin-
   guistics, 10.1 (1989): 1-35. Print.
Navarro, Federico. ¿Qué escribir en la escuela? Análisis de una propuesta insti-
   tucional de escritura a través del currículum. Bellaterra Journal of Teaching
   & Learning Language & Literature (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) 6.1
   (2013): 18-34. Web.
Navarro, Federico, and Andrea Revel Chion. Escribir para aprender. Disciplinas y
   escritura en la escuela secundaria. Buenos Aires: Paidós, 2013. Print.
Revel Chion, A. "Hablar y escribir ciencias." Educar en ciencias. Eds. Elsa Mein-
   ardi, Leonardo González Galli, Andrea Revel Chion, and María Victoria Pla-
   za. Buenos Aires: Paidós, 2010. 163-90. Print.
Rivard, Leonard P., and Stanley B. Straw. "The Effect of Talk and Writing on
   Learning Science: An Exploratory Study." Science Education 84.5 (2000):
   566-93. Web.
Rose, David, and J. R. Martin. Learning to Write, Reading to Learn. Genre,
   Knowledge and Pedagogy in the Sydney School. London: Equinox, 2012. Print.

                                                                                                  61
CHAPTER 5

COLLABORATING ON WRITING-
TO-LEARN IN NINTH-
GRADE SCIENCE: WHAT IS
COLLABORATION--AND HOW
CAN WE SUSTAIN IT?

      Danielle Myelle-Watson, Deb Spears, David Wellen, Mi-
      chael McClellan, and Brad Peters

    Other contributors to this volume note that in high school and university
partnerships, teachers often want extended time to collaborate with professors
so they can learn more about developing specific methods relevant to their own
subject areas (Cox and Gimbel, Chapter 2). However, high school circumstances
and practices can hinder the collaboration (Beaumont, Pydde, and Tschirpke,
Chapter 7). Keeping communication lines open is critical.

    In the project recounted here, three science teachers, a high school reading spe-
cialist, and a university coordinator of WAC collaborated for a year and a half in a
project sponsored by an Illinois state grant from Promoting Achievement through
Literacy Skills (PALS). Modeled on a previous study at the same high school, the
science writing project provided teachers with university credit for a semester's
course that the reading specialist and the WAC coordinator had co-taught on site
many times before (Peters 64-66). The following year, the teachers implemented
what they learned with continued support from the PALS grant and ongoing col-
laboration with the reading specialist and the WAC coordinator (McClellen et al.).

    Similar to other chapters in this volume, the project matched materials and
aims to the needs and interests of the teachers (McMullen-Light, Chapter 6). A
chief concern among the teachers was how writing-to-learn might help ninth-
grade students attain "scientific literacy," especially with the emphasis that the
new Common Core Standards put on "Career and College Readiness Anchor
Standards for Writing" in their science classes (States Standards Initiative 63-66;
Cox and Gimbel). Historically, educators have identified science literacy as:

      · A cultural force in the modern world
      · Preparation for the workplace

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2015.0735.2.05                                     63
Myelle-Watson et al.

      · Applicable to everyday living
      · A trait of informed citizenship
      · A particular way of examining nature
      · An approach to understanding scientific reports or discussions in

         popular media
      · A means of appreciating the aesthetics of natural laws and phenomena
      · A willingness to make use of scientific expertise
      · A way to critique and use technology ethically. (DeBoer 591-93)

    But in a 78.7% high-poverty urban district where the teachers' school was on
academic watch, where standardized tests predominated, and where the majority
of non-college bound students only needed to complete two courses in science
to graduate, such goals seemed out of reach for many (Illinois Interactive Report
Card; Rockford Public Schools 7). How could writing-to-learn help?

    During the spring semester prior to implementing the project, the teachers
studied resources on writing-to-learn. Then, they composed and experimented
with sets of sequenced writing prompts that clarified scientific concepts embed-
ded in class discussions, small-group interaction, and above all, laboratory work.
They piloted and evaluated the prompts, using a rubric that other teachers in
the same school had developed for an earlier project (Peters 65). In consultation
with the high school reading specialist, the teachers decided that all of their next-
year courses--two honors sections of biology, five "average" sections of biology,
and seven sections of physical science--would engage in four National Writing
Project practices:

      · Plan informal writing at least twice a month
      · Discuss writing strategies in the context of course content
      · Do some form of redrafting
      · Collect, examine, and reflect on the writing. (Nagin 44)

    The following summer, the district serendipitously recruited the three teach-
ers and their colleagues in other high schools to design four quarterly tests in bi-
ology and physical science as a move toward instruction-based assessment (Gal-
lagher 58-59). District faculty closely aligned the tests with the curriculum. The
three science teachers felt the quarterly tests could help them gauge the gains of
writing-to-learn in comparison with their students' district peers.

    When the new academic year began, the teachers agreed to form a "Pro-
fessional Learning Community" (PLC) that would meet every two weeks. In
the PLC meetings, they would review and revise prompts that addressed key
concepts in the curriculum. They would discuss samples of student responses,
analyze any problems or concerns that came up, and examine the quarterly test

64
                                                                        Collaborating on Writing-to-Learn

results. They would also provide written reflections on each quarter's progress.
    The first quarter of the next year's collaboration showed great promise. Ev-

eryone attended the PLC meetings. The teachers regularly consulted with the
reading specialist between the meetings. Both the biology and physical science
students responded well to informal writing. In all achievement levels, students
improved substantially in their lab reports and scored approximately ten per-
centage points higher than their district peers in the first-quarter district tests.
Correlated test scores were also statistically significant.

    However, the second quarter did not proceed in the same way. Unexpected
issues interrupted the PLC meetings, forcing cancellations and sporadic atten-
dance. Although the reading specialist tried to help them all keep up, lack of
adequate collaboration as a group had a negative impact. Biology students did
much less writing-to-learn than expected. Physical science students (approxi-
mately 30% of whom were special education students) struggled with prompts
that intimidated or confused them.

    After the second quarter, the nature of the collaboration changed. Debrief-
ing among the teachers as a cohort waned. Maintaining a sustainable struc-
ture for communication became a challenge (similar to Beaumont, Pydde, and
Tschirpke, Chapter 7). Because the project took place at the high school, the
reading specialist and WAC coordinator could still meet with teachers individu-
ally. Nevertheless, prompts in biology were assigned unevenly through the third
and fourth quarters. It was difficult to tell if writing-to-learn made a difference.
Honors biology students received quarterly test scores that remained the same
as, or dropped even lower than, their district peers. Yet average biology students
achieved slightly higher test scores, and one third-semester biology class earned
scores that were statistically significant.

    On the other hand, after the teachers readjusted some of their practices,
physical science students either kept on responding to two sets of prompts per
quarter or focused more on writing well-developed conclusions to lab reports.
These at-risk students accomplished statistically significant test scores in the
third and fourth quarters.

    In addition to correlating the quarterly test scores between students who
wrote to learn and district students who did not, the teachers collected their
students' "write-to-learn" folders to be read, ranked, and examined at the end of
the academic year. Descriptive statistics suggested that the frequency and con-
sistency of writing-to-learn tasks were important variables, in addition to the
impact of changes in collaboration among the teachers, the reading specialist,
and the WAC coordinator. Accordingly, the story that follows is as much a study
of the dynamics of collaboration as it is a study of how writing-to-learn affects
student learning outcomes.

                                                                                                  65
Myelle-Watson et al.

WHY WRITE TO LEARN? A THEORETICAL BASIS FOR EN-
HANCING SCIENTIFIC LITERACY

    National studies show how writing-to-learn can help students "learn more
deeply" and attain "higher achievement in science" (Peery 17-18, 21; Reeves;
Rivard). Moreover, a study conducted by the National Survey of Student En-
gagement and the National Council of Writing Program Administrators claims
that in the most successful classroom experiences, "the amount of pages students
wrote was less important for deep learning and gains than interactive writing,
meaning-making, and clear expectations" (Anderson et al. 1). This claim is sup-
ported by the earlier findings of Johannessen, Kahn, and Walter who asserted
that sequenced writing-to-learn prompts can yield "dramatic gains in only a short
time," enabling high school students to make "essential thinking strategies ... part
of their repertoire" when they encounter new material (5, 22). However, those
sequenced prompts must be clustered around a specific concept and designed
to break a complex thinking process into more manageable steps (Johannessen,
Kahn, and Walter 5). Such claims impressed the science teachers particularly be-
cause the reading specialist had participated in a previous study of writing-to-
learn in their high school, which implied that all students--even low achievers--
could "produce statistically significant learning outcomes" (Peters 85).

    The science teachers already asked students to write a fair amount. Lab
guidelines sharpened the students' observational and procedural skills regularly.
These questions from a physical science lab on magnets are typical:

      · Place iron filings on a blank piece of white paper to create a magnetic
         field around a bar magnet. Draw the magnetic field lines.

      · What observations do you make?
      · Place two bar magnets so the north pole of one is close to the south

         pole of another. Draw the field lined near the poles.
      · What observation can you make?

    Furthermore, one teacher provided her students with the following guide-
lines on "How to write the different parts" of "Power Conclusions" to their lab
reports:

      · Reference to hypothesis--"I thought that ..." (if ... then statement)
      · Reflection on hypothesis--"I found out ... therefore my hypothesis

         was ...."
      · Reference to specific data--"My data showed that ..."
      · Error analysis--"Doing _____ may have affected my results"; "I for-

         got to ..."; "I could have improved on my ____ skill(s) and this would
         have ..."

66
                                                                        Collaborating on Writing-to-Learn

      · Future research--"I would like to investigate more about _____ be-
         cause ..."; "Knowing _____ will help me to ..."; "We should repeat the
         experiment because ..." (adapted from Pierce and Shellhaas)

    Students also wrote papers requiring Internet research, e.g., reports on fa-
mous scientists' discoveries, or detailed profiles of simple to complex animal life.

    All the same, the science teachers welcomed exercises that have succeeded in
science classes nationwide--e.g., freewriting, RAFTs (role/audience/form/top-
ic), the Science Writing Heuristic, Cornell notes, reading logs, interpretations of
graphs, and even poetry--(Chabot and Tomkiewicz 53-55; Childers and Lowry
1; Hohenshell and Hand 271; Keys 116; Peery 127-51; Petersen 99). They rec-
ognized that different written practices could also help their students acquire
and negotiate the disciplinary knowledge they needed to become scientifical-
ly literate (Navarro and Ravel Chion, Chapter 4). Most important, they were
interested in composing sequenced prompts that scaffolded students' thinking
strategies around a specific scientific concept (Johannessen, Kahn, and Walter
3-4; Wood, Bruner, and Ross 89-90).

    During the onsite course, the teachers also questioned and re-examined their
assumptions about how they taught scientific literacy in their classrooms. For
example, one science teacher always asked his students to memorize an acronym
similar to the Science Writing Heuristic: "P.H.E.O.I.C." (define a problem, form
a hypothesis, experiment, observe, interpret data, and make a conclusion). He
would occasionally quiz them or ask them to recite it. But after a lively discus-
sion with his colleagues about how and why students so often failed to translate
this acronym into well-written lab reports, he wondered if he was engaging his
students in "knowledge telling" rather than "knowledge transforming" (Bereiter
and Scardamalia, 1987; Rivard and Straw 586). He went on to compose the
following set of sequenced prompts to help students apply the heuristic more
meaningfully and critically:

      · Define science, pseudoscience, hypothesis, and law.
      · Identify steps of the scientific method for a classmate who was absent

         in class the day we reviewed it. Explain why you think scientists follow
         these steps.
      · Describe all the parts of a controlled experiment. Give reasons why
         you think it's important to include a control group and an experi-
         mental group. Remember to discuss the effects of independent and
         dependent variables.
      · Develop a well-thought out set of instructions that anyone could
         follow for the lab we did on potatoes. Include guides for analyzing the
         data and drawing a conclusion from a hypothesis and its test.

                                                                                                  67
Myelle-Watson et al.

    He assigned these prompts at intervals over a two-week period in one class
and asked students to talk over their answers each time they wrote. He reported
back to his colleagues that it allowed him to intersperse the writing with small-
group lab work and what McCann et al. call "authentic discussion": engaging
the students directly in critical thinking about the concept he was teaching, rath-
er than requiring them merely to recite it (2-3). In sum, he and his colleagues
deduced that writing-to-learn could become part of several "language-based ac-
tivities" that contributed to the complex changes that enabled their students to
acquire scientific literacy (Rivard 438).

    This high-caliber collaboration occurred among the science teachers
throughout the semester's preparatory course, giving rise to a "WACommunity"
that reflected "a true culture of writing" (Cox and Gimbel, Chapter 2; McMul-
len-Light, Chapter 6). In turn, the reading specialist and the WAC coordina-
tor gained rich insights about the value of teachers applying their disciplinary
knowledge to assignment design to address students' specific learning problems.

INSTRUCTION-BASED ASSESSMENT: A RESPONSE TO
STANDARDIZED TESTS

    The district's summer decision to ask all science teachers to develop quar-
terly tests came at a good time. Some state boards of education are discovering
what teachers and scholars have known for years. Too much emphasis on stan-
dardized tests not only "squelches teaching and learning creativity"--it also
"eliminates the need for critical thought" (College Readiness Project, Phase
II; Hillocks 136). Yet a recent national survey shows that secondary teach-
ers care a lot about the accountability that tests produce, as long as it does
not force them to neglect important aspects of their curriculum (Sunderman,
Kim, and Orfield 124). Teachers in a few states have found instruction-driven
assessment based on locally designed tests especially compelling, because it
enables them to parse assessments throughout the year, increasing the possi-
bility of using test scores to discover and redress their students' needs before
those students leave the classroom or fail (Gallagher 63). Instruction-driven
assessment can even encourage teachers to develop individual education plans
for students, using writing-to-learn, portfolios and "student-friendly rubrics
to help students understand learning expectations" (Gallagher 67). Science
scholars in Washington suggest such an approach may in fact reveal that "how
students learn could be more important than what they learn" (College Read-
iness Project, Phase II).

    Nonetheless, it was unusual for the school district to initiate the quarterly
tests. As with other large urban districts, teachers often felt "alienated from core

68
                                                                        Collaborating on Writing-to-Learn

decisions about [...] instruction," where "district objectives, large criterion-ref-
erenced tests, and textbooks" dictated the curriculum (Gallagher 65). Some
faculty suspected the district intended the tests to enforce cookie-cutter syllabi
throughout its four high schools. But after years of reserving nearly a month to
prepare students for the Prairie State Achievement Examination (PSAE) and
the ACT, the three science teachers cautiously welcomed tests that mirrored
what they actually taught. They saw how the quarterly tests could help "develop
and refine their curriculum, instruction, professional development ... and as-
sessment," above all because the tests were also aligned with "power standards"
adapted from the Illinois learning standards for science (Gallagher 64-65; Illi-
nois State Board of Education). Moreover, as in other districts that have tried
instruction-driven assessment, the quarterly tests would let the science teachers
give "heightened attention to particular groups of students, including low-in-
come students, English language learners [ELL], and ethnic or racial groups"
(Gallagher 65). The quarterly tests bolstered the collaboration accordingly as
they began in the preparatory course. The reading specialist and the WAC co-
ordinator were excited that this approach to assessment could take the collabo-
ration to an even higher level, making the project relevant to the whole district.

    While these teacher-designed assessments clearly established expectations for
content coverage at a certain pace, the three science teachers still noted places
where they could apply writing-to-learn most advantageously. The tests also left
room in the curriculum for the teachers to address important issues that re-
quired expanding upon and connecting. For instance, could the physical science
curriculum include a short review of earth science--a subject covered only in
middle school--even though 25% of the PSAE questions focused on it? They
wanted to try.

    After studying the tests in a PLC meeting, the teachers decided the physical
science prompts should address the topics of:

      · The relationship between matter and energy
      · Elements, compounds, and mixtures
      · The earth and its atmosphere
      · Atomic structure
      · Chemical reactions (combustion of gas)
      · The scientific problem-solving process
      · Common uses of electricity
      · Electrical circuits
      · Magnetic fields and uses of magnets

    Meanwhile, the teachers decided the biology prompts should address the
topics of:

                                                                                                  69
Myelle-Watson et al.

      · Characteristics of living things
      · Biotic and abiotic factors in ecosystems
      · Plant and animal cells
      · Differentiating mitosis and meiosis
      · Cell specialization and embryonic development
      · DNA replication
      · Inheritance of genetic traits
      · Evolution of genetic traits

    Because one teacher taught both physical science and biology, it seemed op-
timal for all three to work together and share the prompts they were creating
anew, rather than each teacher create a separate set of prompts. The alignment
that the teachers sought between writing-to-learn and the quarterly tests went
beyond mere attempts to teach to the tests. They hoped to begin recovering
what a decade of No Child Left Behind had done in their district to narrow the
curriculum, to emphasize lower-level skills, and to decrease teacher and student
engagement in the development of science literacy (Gallagher 39).

    Although the three teachers, the reading specialist, and the WAC coordina-
tor collaborated closely upon the prompts for the first quarter--discussing and
revising them in the PLC meetings, as well as examining samples of student's
corresponding work--the rest of the year's prompts on the topic lists remained
unfinished. As chance would have it, the teachers' plan to continue collaborating
on the prompts did not account for the unexpected.

THE UNEXPECTED: FIRST-QUARTER PACING FOR DIFFER-
ENT LEVELS OF ACHIEVERS

    Pacing was one of the biggest problems the science teachers encountered
during the first quarter of their implementation of writing-to-learn. Although
the instruction-based, quarterly tests focused on the actual curriculum that
teachers taught, and the Common Core Standards encouraged richer, more
"varied genres and purposes of writing," the district hadn't abandoned the PSAE
or ACT, which still emphasized shallow coverage over deep learning--pressur-
ing the teachers to move through the curriculum "more quickly than they would
if their professional judgment were their guide" (Cox and Gimbel, Chapter 2;
Gallagher 65-66). Such conflicting exigencies could only complicate the science
teachers' attempts to extend instruction "by doing more exploratory learning
and more constructivist learning" through scaffolding (Gallagher 66).

    To illustrate, one teacher--Dawn--had her students write "bell ringers"
at the beginning of classes, to provide them with the "multiple writing tasks

70
                                                                        Collaborating on Writing-to-Learn

across connected topics" that she had learned to design (Hand, Hohenshell,
and Prain 344). She would spend a few minutes getting the students to focus
on responding to the bell ringers, and then she would lead a discussion of the
students' responses. Next, she would go on to address the day's lesson, which
connected directly to the bell ringer. After several days and two to three bell
ringers, she would give the students the longer prompt to address. She found
out, however, that the impact of the bell ringers differed between her average
and her honors students in biology. When she did a series of lessons on biotic
and abiotic factors, one lesson began with the bell ringer: "Explain the difference
between a rock and a wooden board." Then, she introduced the terms and spent
time discussing the distinctions. The next lesson began with: "Define biotic and
abiotic. Write about three different objects in this classroom that are biotic and
three that are abiotic." She then provided the students with several scenarios that
would affect biotic and abiotic factors--e.g., a hurricane, an oil spill, over-graz-
ing, building a golf course, a nuclear leak, highway construction. She broke the
students into groups, each group to analyze how one scenario would affect biotic
and abiotic factors. They then presented their group analyses. The following day,
she assigned the longer prompt:

         Analyze one of the scenarios we discussed. Identify several
         biotic and abiotic factors, and explain how each of these
         factors would be affected by the scenario. Then hypothesize if/
         how these biological situations could return to their natural or
         normal state over time.

    Dawn used this sequence with both her honors-level and average classes, just
as she had with a previous sequence of prompts on the characteristics of living
things. She found out the honors students had "the cognitive tools and the con-
ceptual building blocks necessary" for completing the task (Rivard and Straw
587), but the average students did not. She needed to supplement the task with
more follow-up prompts and class discussion before they, too, could distinguish
between biotic/abiotic and apply their knowledge to real-life scenarios. She did
so, but barely covered the material her students needed for the first-quarter test.

    The experience with her biology students made Dawn sensitive to her phys-
ical science classes as well. Many of her ELL and special education students not
only needed more scaffolding, but also always needed more time to complete
the culminating prompts (Lee et al. 33; Stretch and Osborn 4). When she gave
these students this extra help and time, they performed nearly on par with their
higher-achieving peers--though their work showed less detail and grammatical
fluency. This finding suggested that even her low-achieving students could bene-
fit from writing-to learn, contrary to opposite claims (Bangert-Drowns, Hurley,

                                                                                                  71
Myelle-Watson et al.

and Wilkinson 6, 53).
    So a dilemma surfaced. Could Dawn ignore that her lower-achieving stu-

dents would learn almost as well as her higher-achieving students if she simply
slowed down the pace of the curriculum? Her physical science students per-
formed quite well on the material they had covered for the first-quarter test, but
when the results of their writing-to-learn compelled her to take longer to accom-
modate their learning pace, she knew they would fail on the material they had
not covered. Unlike Mike, her colleague who taught physical science exclusively,
she had no special education teacher assigned to her class to help her physical
science students keep up.

    Dawn cut back considerably on write-to-learn prompts and focused on help-
ing students improve conclusions to their lab reports instead. The students did
three to four lab reports per quarter. This way, she could manage the curricu-
lar pace. She reasoned that the guidelines she used for writing the conclusions
would provide similar scaffolding. The WAC coordinator noted her reasoning
was supported by researchers who state: "scientific writing genres should be ex-
plicitly taught, so that all children might have access to the discursive power of
scientific texts" (Halliday and Martin xi, 2-4; Keys 118). Above all, researchers
assert how young learners affected by poverty and categorized as "low achievers"
are especially disadvantaged when not taught explicitly to write scientific texts
(Keys 118-19; Rivard 424-25).

    David, a teacher who taught only biology classes for the year, developed
another way to pace writing-to-learn in the first quarter. Influenced by the Com-
mon Core Standards' emphasis on students reading and integrating facts, defini-
tions, and details from informative texts into their written work, he introduced
short articles to supplement the biology textbook and labs (States Standards
Initiatives 65). For example, students could read an article and formulate simple
experiments that tested the claims they read. One article asserted that fish could
see and were attracted to different kinds of colors. The students experimented
with goldfish and multicolored glow sticks to verify the article's claim. Then they
wrote lab reports that involved "peer review, collaborative problem solving, [and]
student partner revision teams" (Mullin and Childers 26; Zimmet 106). David
also had the students read the articles, write brief summaries, discuss them, and
then revise what they had learned (DeBoer 592-93). After reading an article on
scientists who planted a "smart gene" into mice DNA, one student wrote in her
summary that this was a stupid idea. Why did the world need smarter mice?
However, when her class discussed the article, learned its vocabulary, grasped
why the experiment was conducted, and questioned the ethical implications,
she rewrote her summary, saying that she now saw what the article was all about.
She still thought that biologically engineering smarter mice made no practical

72
                                                                        Collaborating on Writing-to-Learn

sense, but if it led to making humans smarter, would it help her learn better and
perform well on tests? Would it give some people an advantage over others? Yet
again, what if gene-planting affected human brains badly? Some of David's most
successful classes were centered on "sociopolitical and moral contexts" such as
these that helped develop his students' science literacy (Soliday 67).

    Although pleased that his students performed well on the first-quarter exam,
David also fell behind in the curriculum. He decided to include only one write-
to-learn task in the second quarter. He eliminated the shorter prompts that led
up to it, using them instead to guide class discussion. In the third and fourth
quarters, he did the same, to see if relying more heavily upon "collaborative talk
as a heuristic" might compensate for cut-backs in writing (Rivard 424).

    Mike, who taught physical science courses exclusively, was the only one who
stayed with the plan to do two sets of prompts each quarter. He made sure that
students responded in writing to the shorter, scaffolding prompts, interspersing
their written responses with class discussion. For instance, he would have stu-
dents compose a T-chart to help them organize and define new terms, then he
would conduct a discussion of those terms in the context of the scientific con-
cept he was introducing. Next, he would have the students do a lab that applied
those concepts. At that point, students could illustrate or graph their findings as
well, as Childers and Lowry recommend (n. pag.). Once the labs provided stu-
dents with the knowledge base they needed, Mike had them write comparisons
of their data (Rivard and Straw 586).

    Yet this pattern pressed Mike for time in the second quarter as well, so he
combined the shorter scaffolding prompts with the longer prompt into a kind
of step-by-step, essayistic quiz. When he initiated these essayistic quizzes, the re-
sults were disappointing. He did not provide enough class discussion or build in
enough shorter prompts to support the students written explanations of atomic
structure or combustion in a gas engine. So he designed later quizzes as part of
a "recursive cycle" with "students applying or practicing each small step" that he
modeled, while he or his aide checked that "the class as a whole [was] succeeding
on each successive step" (Schmoker n. pag.). Moreover, he carefully strategized
the best time to schedule the write-to-learn exercises in relation to lab work. This
approach got much better results. Conversely, Mike discovered that if students
did lab work, recorded observations, and studied results on one day, but wrote
the conclusions to lab reports on the following day, they processed what they
had learned and composed better conclusions (McClellan n. pag.).

    Ironically, what each science teacher found out about their students' learning
needs caused the tightly knit collaboration to unravel. Deb, the reading special-
ist, and Brad, the WAC coordinator, realized that they could not rally the teach-
ers back to the original collaborative model without challenging each teacher's

                                                                                                  73
Myelle-Watson et al.

decision to incorporate write-to-learn principles in her or his own way. While
the group recovered a schedule of meeting regularly, the collaboration with
the teachers occurred on a much more individual basis--often with only one
teacher attending at a time. Although Dawn and David composed a few more
prompts together for their biology students, they stayed mostly with what they
felt more comfortable doing, according to their first-quarter adaptations. And
as Mike focused independently on implementing the physical science prompts
he wrote, Dawn focused on guiding her biology and physical science students
alike to write "power conclusions." For good and thoughtful reasons, the teach-
ers might have lost track altogether of what each was doing had Deb and Brad
not continued to compare and analyze with each the successes or problems that
the others encountered as the year progressed. This adapted model of collabo-
ration sacrificed a uniform approach for an individuated approach. It not only
enriched the project's outcomes, but it also complicated and altered the disci-
plinary conversation that the PLC had sustained to that point.

    Unfortunately, other issues compounded the teachers' efforts to keep pace
with the curriculum. Student absences and truancy were always high. Each of
the teachers walked into classes on days when 50% or even more of the students
were missing. Student mobility presented another challenge. Dawn recounted
one week in the second quarter when ten new students showed up in a section
of physical science. Combining drop-outs with new arrivals, each teacher's ros-
ter for each class included a minimum of five to seven students who would not
finish out the year, and the same number of students who might be added at
any time.

    The probability of a strike during the second quarter complicated the sit-
uation further. The teachers had to cancel three PLC sessions to attend union
meetings instead. A conservative Board of Education had threatened to raise
teachers' insurance to $800 per month, cut 138 jobs, increase class sizes from
26 students to 34 students, shut down four schools, eliminate five major pro-
grams, and cancel orders for new textbooks. Only the spring before, the district
had closed or consolidated ten schools, slashed special education classes, and
dropped 281 jobs (Bayer).1

    Given these issues, the end-of-year results yielded a number of encouraging
surprises.

THE IMPACT OF WRITING-TO-LEARN UPON INSTRUC-
TION-BASED ASSESSMENT

    Although this project went in three different directions after the first quar-
ter--reverting to the kinds of "fragmented individualism" that can characterize

74
                                                   Collaborating on Writing-to-Learn

secondary teachers even when they belong to the same department--the quar-
terly tests provided an anchor that helped the teachers measure the effects of
their varied approaches the rest of the year (Siskin 28-29).

    During the first quarter, when all three science teachers incorporated two
sets of write-to-learn prompts, the students' higher scores in David's and Dawn's
combined biology classes differed from the other district classes by 11.72 per-
centage points (Table 1, below).2

Table 1: First-quarter biology

1st Quarter        of           of       Possible  Avg.    Avg. %
Biology Tests     Questions    Students  Points    Points  Correct
                  35           181       35        21.77   62.20%
Biology students
                  35           1369      35        17.67   50.48%
who did writ-
ing-to-learn

District biology
students

    Biology students who wrote to learn outperformed the rest of the district
on 89% of the questions. When a two-sample t-test compared the 181 writing-
to-learn students with the 1369 ninth-grade district biology students, results
yielded t(68) = 2.94, p < .05--suggesting less than a 5% probability that higher
scores among writing-to-learn students were coincidental. The effect size r was
also calculated with a result of .3--a medium effect--indicating that writing-
to-learn had made a positive impact on the students' retention of biological
concepts (Steinberg 366).

    Scores in Mike's physical science classes were even more compelling (Table 2).3

Table 2: First-quarter physical science

1st Quarter Physi-   of         of       Possible  Avg.    Avg. %
cal Science Tests   Questions  Students  Points    Points  Correct
                    30         129       30        18.6    61.99%
Physical science
students who did    30         598       30        14.3    47.56%

writing-to-learn

District physical
science Students

    Mike's 129 students who did writing-to-learn scored higher on 90% of the
questions. The t-test showed that t(58) = 3.06 < p .005. There was less than a

                                                                    75
Myelle-Watson et al.

.05% probability that coincidence could explain the percentage of correct answers
among students in his classes, bolstered by a .4 effect size r--or large effect size.

    Dawn's shift from prompts to a writing-to-learn (WTL) emphasis on better
conclusions in lab reports had a moderate, upward effect on her average biology
students' scores (Table 3), but the honors biology students' scores fluctuated in
comparison to the rest of the district.

Table 3: Comparison of 2nd to 4th-quarter biology, write-to-learn
emphasis on lab report conclusions/no known WTL emphasis

Achievement Levels,       WTL Emphasis on            District--No Known
Biology                   Lab Report Conclusions     WTL Emphasis

Average-2nd Quarter       47.88%                     44.36%
Honors-2nd Quarter        59.05%                     61.72%
Average-3rd Quarter       51.05%                     42.88%
Honors-3rd Quarter        65.14%                     63.86%
Average-4th Quarter       54.50%                     51.26%
Honors-4th Quarter        65.10%                     69.06%

    Because the third-quarter percentage of correct answers for Dawn's 23 av-
erage students were so much higher, a t-test was run. Calculations showed that
t(60) = 2.07 < p .25, with a .256 or medium effect size r. These results suggested
that a WTL emphasis on lab report conclusions might account for her average
biology students' higher percent of correct answers, at least in the third-quarter
test, if not on the second and fourth quarters as well (Table 4). The less positive
impact that a WTL emphasis on lab report conclusions had upon honors stu-
dents will be addressed in the discussion section.

Table 4: Third-quarter biology, Dawn's "average class"

3rd Quarter Biology,   of         of       Possible  Avg.    Avg. %
Dawn's Average Class  Questions  Students  Points    Points  Correct

Students with WTL 31             23        31        15.83   51.05%

Emphasis on Lab

Report Conclusions

District biology      31         744       31        13.29   42.88%

students

    The most pronounced correct-answer percentages between WTL classes and
the rest of the district came from physical science during the third and fourth

76
                                                       Collaborating on Writing-to-Learn

quarters. It was apparent that both writing-to-learn prompts and a WTL em-
phasis on lab report conclusions pushed all of the classes' percent of correct
answers above the students' district peers (Tables 5 and 6).

Table 5: Third-quarter physical science

3rd Quarter Physical     of         of       Possible  Avg.    Avg. %
Science Tests           Questions  Students  Points    Points  Correct
Physical science stu-   30         119       30        19.2    63.84%
dents who did writing-
to-learn                30         494       30        14.3    47.61%

District physical sci-
ence students

    The 119 third-quarter physical science students who wrote to learn scored
63.84% more correct answers than the 494 students in the rest of the district,
yielding a t-test of t(58) = 4.75, p < .005--less than a .05% possibility that the
impact of writing-to-learn was coincidental. Effect size r was large at .53. Given
the high percentage of ELL and special education students, these results were
worth noting.

    In the fourth quarter, the 111 physical science students who wrote to learn
scored an average of 65.33% correct answers, while the 448 district students
who did not write to learn scored 44.08%.

Table 6: Fourth-quarter physical science

4th Quarter Phys-    of             of       Possible  Avg.    Avg. %
ical Science Tests  Questions      Students  Points    Points  Correct
                    30             111       30        19.59   65.33%
Physical science
students who did    30             448       30        13.44   44.08%
writing-to-learn
District physical
science students

    The t-test revealed that t(58) = 6.79, p < .005, or less than a .05% coincidence
that writing-to-learn had no impact. Effect size r came in at .66, which was large.

    The least encouraging results derived from David's increased emphasis on
class discussion to compensate for less writing-to-learn. Table 7 shows a possible
negative impact--especially for average biology students in the third quarter.

                                                                        77
Myelle-Watson et al.

Table 7: Effects of increased class discussion and decreased writing-
to-learn

Achievement Levels,   Increased Discussion,  District--No Known
Biology               Decreased WTL          WTL Emphasis
Average-2nd Quarter   45.16%                 44.36%
Honors-2nd Quarter    60.69%                 61.72%

Average-3rd Quarter   37.41%                 43.84%

Honors-3rd Quarter    62.01%                 63.86%
Average-4th Quarter   50.29%                 51.26%

Honors-4th Quarter    49.13%                 51.26%

    At the end of the year, student folders were also collected to get a sense of
what quality of work had been achieved, and how the work might provide in-
sights about differences among honors, average, and lower-achieving students.
For students' responses to the write-to-learn prompts, the science teachers used
the rubric in Table 8 to gauge their students' comprehension of task, content,
thinking strategies, and language use (Johannessen, Kahn, and Walter 11-12;
Peters 65-66).

    The WAC coordinator then selected student folders that contained at least
60% of the assigned prompts, rated them, and calculated the averages of the two
ratings per folder.

    A rating of 8 out of 12 possible points meant that student folders had met
expectations. Seventy-four percent of 50 honors biology students who turned
in folders completed a minimum 60% of all writing-to-learn prompts assigned.
The overall average rating for those honors biology folders was 9.56, with a S.D.
of 1.5. Fifty percent of 109 "average" biology students who turned in folders
completed a minimum 60% of all writing-to-learn prompts. The overall average
rating for the "average biology" folders was 8.35 with a S.D. of 1.1. Forty-six
percent of the 163 physical science students who turned in folders completed
60% of all writing-to learn prompts. The overall average rating for the physical
science folders was 8.05 with a S.D. of 1.2. Fifty-four percent of honors biolo-
gy students achieved a rating of 10 or higher, while 9% of the average biology
students, and 4% of the physical science students, rated in the same range. Two
percent of honors biology students, 6% of average biology students, and 9% of
physical science students rated 7 or lower.

78
                                                     Collaborating on Writing-to-Learn

Table 8: Rubric               Exceeds              Meets                 Misses
                              expectations         expectations          expectations
 CRITERIA

Comprehension of              3                    2                     1
Task--your ability to         You understand       You understand        You misunder-
respond informally to what    and follow instruc-  and follow instruc-   stand or disregard
the writing prompt asks       tions exactly.       tions adequately      instructions.

Content--your ability                                                    
to convey knowledge of        You provide very     You provide           You provide inac-
course content received       accurate informa-    accurate informa-     curate information
from reading or listening     tion and thorough    tion and sufficient   and/ or insufficient
                              detail               detail.               detail.

Strategies--your ability                                                 
to apply, analyze, back up,   You show clear
compare, classify, critique,  control over         You show satisfac-    You show little
define, describe, evaluate,   the strategy or      tory evidence of      or no evidence
explain, exemplify, graph,    strategies that the  understanding and     of understanding
hypothesize, illustrate, in-  prompt requires.     practicing required   required strategies.
terpret, observe, organize,                        strategies.
predict, question, reflect,
review, show cause-effect,    Your response is                           
solve, summarize, or          articulate; errors
synthesize.                   minimal.             Your response is      Your response
                                                   easy to read; errors  is hard to read/
Language use--your                                 don't prevent un-     understand; errors
ability to write a readable                        derstanding.          confuse.
response and use con-
ventions of grammar and                                                  
punctuation

IN RETROSPECT

    In terms of student learning outcomes, perhaps the most thought-provoking
finding in the foregoing data has to do with the performance of students who
were categorized as low achievers. After a year of consistent writing-to-learn,

                                                                                             79
Myelle-Watson et al.

they successfully demonstrated what they retained in the quarterly tests. Ri-
vard points out: "The ways in which learning strategies have traditionally been
utilized in the classroom have effectively denied equal access to knowledge for
all students" (424). Yet as he points out, the research literature--including this
project--

         suggests that classroom activities which emphasize conceptual
         understanding, real-life applications, language use, and small-
         group work may be particularly effective for enhancing the
         learning of students who have traditionally been marginalized
         by the educational system: low-ability students, underachiev-
         ers, and potential school leavers. (Rivard 424)

    Moreover, the data in this study indicate that so-called low achievers are
capable of responding well to specific instruction in specialized forms of dis-
ciplinary writing when it is structured "to foster more reflective thinking and
enhanced student learning from laboratory activities" (Bazerman et al. 42). The
same apparently held true to a lesser extent for "average" biology students who
more sporadically wrote to learn.

    The drop in honors students' test scores when they decreased writing-to-
learn coincides with other research that shows "high achievers may benefit more
from the use of writing" than average or low achievers--for them, especially,
"the use of writing enhances learning more than just talk" (Rivard 432). This
project suggests that writing-to-learn has a far more substantial effect upon high
achievers than previously thought, and they achieved less when they stopped
doing it. Furthermore, the results seem to reiterate the National Writing Proj-
ect's recommendation of planning write-to-learn activities a minimum of twice
a month (Nagin 44).

    Nonetheless, as all three science teachers noticed, if combined consistent-
ly with writing-to-learn, "opportunities for all students to engage in extended
dialogues signals the expectation that all learners will meet challenging aca-
demic standards" (McCann, Johannessen, Kahn, and Flanagan 6-7; Rivard and
Straw 567-68). The progressively higher physical science test scores indicated
as much.

    Commercially prepared tests that do not align with the local curriculum
may not measure such success. Indeed, such tests may have held sway over the
potential of low and average-achieving students for far too long. Local, instruc-
tion-driven assessment offers real promise for counteracting their detrimental ef-
fects, above all if this assessment is aligned with state standards and the national
Common Core Standards. As the data here shows, if teachers can be encouraged
to find the best, most workable methods for themselves to pace their students

80
                                                                        Collaborating on Writing-to-Learn

through the curriculum, they may use instruction-driven assessment combined
with informal writing activities "in a strategic way throughout the school year
... to the extent that students [don't] even know when they [are] being formally
assessed and when they [are] simply carrying out `regular' classroom activities"
(Gallagher 63-64).

    In terms of collaboration, this project's findings are equally thought-provok-
ing. While some contributors to this volume rightly assert that even short-term
partnerships between high schools and colleges or universities can have a positive
impact, productive collaboration often must begin with some kind of formalized
arrangement on the part of the post-secondary institution (Cox and Gimbel,
Chapter 2; McMullen-Light, Chapter 6; Smith, Chapter 9). High school fac-
ulty not only need opportunities to learn, but also need to apply principles of
writing across the curriculum and discuss the results. It helps tremendously if a
project includes a high school faculty member who can co-facilitate, and at the
same time relate with or convey the teachers' circumstances and concerns (Peters
63). Conducting several projects at the same school increases the likelihood of
success, as one project informs another (McClellan n. pag.). Grants or other
sources of funding provide participants with the incentive to keep the project
going (McClellan n. pag.; Peters 63;). As McMullen claims, "In all aspects of
WAC, context is everything," so if professors can collaborate on site with teach-
ers, it helps tremendously (Chapter 6). Establishing "joint commitments" to a
sustained time to meet and regularly work together must be set up for exchang-
ing ideas and keeping goals equally in perspective (Blumner and Childers 94).
Mapping out a plan and setting specific milestones, even if they only serve as a
point of departure, enable participants to stay focused.

    In addition, participants of such projects--in large American public schools,
at least--should probably realize that the current culture of testing and standards
mitigates against a "culture of collaboration," especially when those standards are
imposed rather than adapted through collective activity (Siskin 28). For exam-
ple, "Logistical constraints of size, time, and space" complicate the situation,
engaging teachers in a kind of "parallel piecework" in their departments, where
they are more likely to "work alone, learn alone, and [...] derive their most im-
portant personal satisfactions alone" (Huberman 22-23; Siskin 29). Even when
collective activity occurs and collaboration is successfully sustained, the pull in
the opposite direction is strong. Participants will want to find a system by which
they can analyze and reconfigure their collaborative model so that the project
survives (Beaumont, Pydde, and Tschirpke, Chapter 7).

    Ultimately, some outcomes might not be met. Some problems will not be
resolved. But recognizing this much allows for new discoveries and insights to
emerge, as well as guidance for another project, another time.

                                                                                                  81
Myelle-Watson et al.

NOTES

1. In fact, a three-day strike did take place later in the school year.

2. In an earlier publication on this study (McClellan et al. 2012) errata occurred
because of a mistake in the formula that adjusted percentages of correct answers
between the writing-to-learn classes and the rest of the district's classes. The errata
are corrected here.

3. Dawn's Physical Science scores were removed from the data set because her
students hadn't been able to cover all the material on the 1st quarter test.

WORKS CITED

Anderson, Paul, Chris Anson, Bob Gonyea, and Chuck Paine. "Summary:
   The Consortium for the Study of Writing in College." Handout. Coun-
   cil of Writing Program Administrators Summer Conference, Minneapo-
   lis, MN. Web. 17 July 2009. <http://nsse.indiana.edu/webinars/Tuesday-
   sWithNSSE/2009_09_22_UsingResultsCSWC/Webinar Handout from
   WPA 2009.pdf>.

Bangert-Drowns, Robert, Marlene Hurley, and Barbara Wilkinson. "The Effects
   of School-Based Writing-to-Learn Interventions on Academic Achievement:
   A Meta-Analysis." Review of Educational Research 74.1 (Spring 2004): 29-58.
   Print.

Bayer, Cathy (2011, March 3). "Administration's Proposed Cuts." Rockford Regis-
   ter Star. Web. 3 Nov. 2011. <http://www.rrstar.com/carousel/x1174964897/
   Rockford-School-Board-still-has-3-1-million-more-in-cuts-to-make>.

Bazerman, Charles, Joseph Little, Lisa Bethel, Teri Chavkin, Danielle Fouquette,
   and Janet Garufis. Reference Guide to Writing Across the Curriculum. West La-
   fayette, IN: Parlor Press. Fort Collins: WAC Clearinghouse, 2005. Print.

Bereiter, Carl, and Marlene Scardamalia. The Psychology of Written Composition.
   Hillsdale: Erlbaum, 1987. Print.

Blumner, Jacob, and Pamela Childers. "Building Better Bridges: What Makes
   High School-College WAC Collaborations Work?" The WAC Journal 22
   (2011): 91-101. Web. 11 November 2011.

Chabot, Chris, and Warren Tomkiewicz. "Writing in the Natural Science De-
   partment." Writing Across the Curriculum 9 (1998): 52-59. Web. 17 Novem-
   ber 2014.

Childers, Pamela and Michael Lowry. "Connecting Visuals to Written Text and
   Written Text to Visuals in Science." Across the Disciplines 3 (2005): n. pag.
   Web. 7 Feb. 2011. <http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/visual/childers_lowry.cfm>.

College Readiness Project, An Initiative of the Higher Education Coordinating

82
                                                                        Collaborating on Writing-to-Learn

   Board to Define English and Science College Readiness in Washington State.
   Phase II (2008-09) Science Teams. Web. 17 June 2013. <https://web.archive.
   org/web/20130831194446/http:/collegereadinesswa.org/index.asp>
DeBoer, George. "Scientific Literacy: Another Look at Its Historical and Con-
   temporary Meanings and Its Relationship to Science Education Reform."
   Journal of Research in Science Teaching 37.6 (2000): 582-601. Print.
Gallagher, Chris. Reclaiming Assessment: A Better Alternative to the Accountability
   Agenda. Portsmouth: Heinnemann, 2007. Print.
Halliday, Michael A. K., and James Martin. Writing Science: Literacy and Discur-
   sive Power. Pittsburgh: U of Pittsburgh P, 1993. Print.
Hand, Brian, Lisa Hohenshell, and Vaughan Prain. "Examining the Effect of
   Multiple Writing Tasks on Year 10 Biology Students' Understandings of Cell
   and Molecular Biology Concepts." Instructional Science 35.4 (2007): 343-73.
   Print.
Hohenshell, Liesl and Brian Hand. "Writing-to-Learn Strategies in Secondary
   School Cell Biology: A Mixed Method Study." International Journal of Science
   Education 28.2-3 (2006): 261-89. Print.
Hillocks, George, Jr. The Testing Trap: How State Assessments Control Learning.
   New York: Teachers College P, 2002. Print.
Huberman, Michael. "The Model of the Independent Artisan in Teachers' Pro-
   fessional Relations." Teachers' Work: Individuals, Colleagues, and Contexts. Ed.
   Judith Little and Milbrey McLaughlin. New York: Teachers College P, 1993.
   11-50. Print.
Illinois Interactive Report Card. 2012. Web. 13 June 2013. <http://illinoisre-
   portcard.com/School.aspx?schoolId=041012050250004>.
Illinois State Board of Education (ISBE). "Illinois Learning Standards: Science."
   Web. 14 March 2013. <http://www.isbe.state.il.us/ils/science/standards.
   htm>.
Johannessen, Larry R., Elizabeth Kahn, and Carolyn Walter. Designing and Se-
   quencing Prewriting Activities. Urbana: National Council of Teachers of En-
   glish, 1982. Print.
Keys, Carolyn. "Revitalizing Instruction in Scientific Genres: Connecting
   Knowledge Production with Writing-to-Learn in Science." Science Education
   8.2 (1999): 115-30. Print.
Lee, Okhee, Jaime Maerten-Rivera, Randall Penfield, Kathryn LeRoy, and Wal-
   ter Secada. "Science Achievement of English Language Learners in Urban
   Elementary Schools: Results of a First-Year Professional Development Inter-
   vention." Journal of Research in Science Teaching 45 (2008): 31-52. Print.
McCann, Thomas M., Larry Johannessen, Elizabeth Kahn, and Joseph Flana-
   gan. Talking in Class: Using Discussion to Enhance Teaching and Learning. Ur-

                                                                                                  83
Myelle-Watson et al.

   bana: National Council of Teachers of English, 2006. Print.
McClellan, Michael, Dawn Myelle-Watson, Brad Peters, Debora Spears, and

   David Wellen. "Writing Science in Hard Times." Across the Disciplines, 9.3
   (2012). Web. 29 May 2013. <http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/second_educ/mc-
   clellanetal.cfm>.
Mullin, Joan A. and Pamela B. Childers. "The Natural Connection: The WAC
   Program and the High School Writing Center." The Clearing House: A Journal
   of Educational Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 69.1 (1995): 24-26. Print.
Nagin, Carl. Because Writing Matters: Improving Student Writing in Our Schools.
   San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2003. Print.
Peery, Angela. Writing Matters in Every Classroom. Englewood: Lead+Learn P,
   2009. Print.
Peters, Bradley. "Lessons about Writing to Learn from a University-High School
   Partnership." Writing Program Administration: Journal of the Council of Writ-
   ing Program Administrators 34.2 (Spring 2011): 59-88. Print.
Petersen, Meg. "The Atomic Weight of Metaphor: Writing Poetry Across the
   Curriculum." Writing Across the Curriculum 12 (2001): 97-100. Print.
Pierce, Bettina, and David Shellhaas. "How to Write a `Power Conclusion.'"
   Irvine Unified School District. Web. 3 June 2013.
Reeves, Douglas. Accountability in Action: A Blueprint for Learning Organiza-
   tions. Englewood: Lead and Learn P, 2000. Print.
Rivard, Leonard P. "Are Language-Based Activities in Science Effective for All
   Students, Including Low Achievers?" Science Education 88 (2004): 420-42.
   Print.
Rivard, Leonard P., and Stanley Straw. "The Effect of Talk and Writing on Learn-
   ing Science: An Exploratory Study." Science Education 84 (2000): 566-93.
   Print.
Rockford Public Schools. High School Planning Guide 2011-2012. Web. 5
   Apr. 2013. <http://www3.rps205.com/District/Documents/Old%20Plan-
   ning%20Guides/2011-2012_HSPlanningGuide.pdf>.
Schmoker, Mike. "The Lost Art of Teaching Soundly Structured Lessons." Ed-
   ucation Week, 4 June 2013. Web. 10 June 2013. <http://www.edweek.org/
   tm/articles/2013/06/04/ fp_schmoker_lessons.html?tkn=QOTFkyJRaX-
   74kUeRDdmIZji7rSRatnFx%2B8n7&cmp=ENL-TU-NEWS1>.
Siskin, Leslie. "Subject Divisions." The Subjects in Question: Departmental Orga-
   nization and the High School. Eds. Leslie Siskin and Judith Little. New York:
   Teachers College P, 1995. 23-47. Print.
Soliday, Mary. "Mapping Classroom Genres in a Science in Society Course."
   Genre Across the Curriculum. Eds. Anne Herrington and Charles Moran. Lo-
   gan: Utah State UP, 2005. 65-82. Print.

84
                                                                        Collaborating on Writing-to-Learn

States Standards Initiative. Common Core Standards for English Language Arts
   and Literacy in History/ Social Studies, Science, and Technical Subjects. Web. 5
   Feb. 2012. <http://www.corestandards.org/ELA-Literacy>.

Steinberg, Wendy. Statistics Alive! Los Angeles: Sage Publications, 2008. Print.
Stretch, LoriAnn S., and Jason Osborn. "Extended Time Test Accommodation:

   Directions for Future Research and Practice." Practical Assessment, Research,
   and Evaluation 10 (2005): 1-8. Print.
Sunderman, Gail, James Kim, and Gary Orfield. NCLB Meets School Realities:
   Lessons from the Field. Thousand Oaks: Corwin P, 2005. Print.
Wood, David, Jerome Bruner, and Gail Ross. "The Role of Tutoring in Problem
   Solving." Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 17 (1976): 89-100. Print.
Zimmet, Nancy. "Engaging the Disaffected: Collaborative Writing Across the
   Curriculum Projects." English Journal 90 (2000): 102-06. Print.

                                                                                                  85
CHAPTER 6

IN OUR OWN BACKYARD:
WHAT MAKES A COMMUNITY
COLLEGE-SECONDARY SCHOOL
CONNECTION WORK?

      Mary McMullen-Light

    In June of 2011, the Writing Across the Curriculum (WAC) Program at
Metropolitan Community College-Longview provided a unique professional
development experience for two-year college WAC coordinators, The WAC In-
stitute for Community Colleges. The institute offered a hands-on, highly prac-
tical approach to designing and sustaining a WAC program within a two-year
college setting. Bolstered by the success of the WAC Institute, Longview's WAC
Program agreed to take on a very different kind of challenge the following year.
At their request, create a meaningful WAC professional development experience
for middle and high school teachers from a local Christian school (K-12). Re-
sponding to this request led to a relationship between the two schools, which
yielded mutual pedagogical and intellectual benefits.

    This chapter describes core elements of this pilot in partnering: sharing re-
sources, helping establish a sustainable high school writing center, and provid-
ing meaningful WAC professional development opportunities for middle school
and high school teachers, as well as the college instructors who helped facilitate
the WAC workshop sessions.

    The best way to establish such a relationship is to ground it with the premise
that both groups enter the partnership with the belief that they have much to
learn from each other. For example, significant time on the front end of this
engagement involved putting people at ease, given that these academic environ-
ments are constructed very differently and have radically different missions: a
private K-12 institution serving a very specific population of children and teen-
agers, all Christians; and a public open-admissions college serving a very diverse
population of adults of all ages from varied socio-economic and educational
backgrounds. Such consideration and planning permitted a genuine synergy to
emerge when the groups met for the first time and explored WAC topics to-
gether in a workshop setting. Beaumont, Pydde, and Tschirpke "strongly agree

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2015.0735.2.06                                  87
McMullen-Light

with the author's suggestion to take time at the beginning of a collaboration and
acknowledge each other's experiences and realities. In fact, we experienced that
omitting this step can lead to miscommunication and misunderstandings as we
describe in Chapter 7" (Chapter 7).

CONTEXT: TWO DIFFERENT SCHOOLS--ONE SHARED
INTEREST

    When Summit Christian Academy began a writing initiative, one of their
history instructors, Ruth, remembered her WAC experiences as an adjunct at a
nearby college, Metropolitan Community College-Longview (MCC-Longview).
She contacted her administrators and suggested they request support from the
WAC Program at MCC-Longview at the outset of their writing initiative.
Next, Ruth initiated contact with the WAC director at the college. Within a
few months and several dozen emails, Summit Christian Academy (SCA) and
MCC-Longview were positioned to pilot a relationship over student writing.

    Shared interest quickly morphed into the kind of shared inquiry described
by Danielle Lillge in her discussion of secondary WAC as a resource for sup-
porting Common Core State Standards (CCSS): "As teachers struggle with how
to meet CCSS expectations, WAC advocates can invite them to the table by
considering their pressing questions" (6). Though SCA was not seeking to sub-
scribe to CCSS, they were eager to understand how best to support the writing
initiative they had already developed. They had pressing questions about reason-
able expectations of teachers, students, and parents, as well as questions about
addressing error and cultivating critical thinking through writing.

    Those pressing questions were a wonderful way to begin the conversation.
However, because context is key in all aspects of WAC, it is important to under-
stand these questions within the curricular context in which they arise. More-
over, on the front side of any WAC collaboration, it is essential to take into
account the specific context of each school. These two schools are located within
a few miles of each other in Lee's Summit, Missouri, a suburb on the south-
east edge of the Kansas City metropolitan area. Prior to this experience, they
had little by way of a formal connection, though some SCA graduates attend
MCC-Longview. It only took one person with a tie to both schools to forge the
connection.

    In his essay "Whistling in the Dark," Merrill J. Davies asserts the value of sec-
ondary and college English teachers in the same geographic area finding ways to
communicate regularly in order to better mitigate the gap between high school
and college writing experiences. He suggests that such dialogue would benefit
both groups of faculty as they grapple with articulating what constitutes col-

88
                                                                                      In Our Own Backyard

lege-level writing. His idea can and should be broadened to apply to instructors
across the disciplines as well, because such conversations about writing would
otherwise be unlikely to occur.

    Initially, there was some hesitation and even a small amount of trepidation
on the part of those responsible for the WAC Program at MCC-Longview. The
prospect of responding to the request for support from SCA by offering even
basic WAC professional development to an audience of middle school and high
school teachers seemed daunting on a number of levels. The primary concerns
emanated from the sensitivity the community college personnel had about their
limited knowledge of teaching at K-12 levels.

    In their WAC Journal article "Building Better Bridges: What Makes High
School-College WAC Collaborations Work?" Jacob Blumner and Pamela
Childers note patterns of such collaborations which show that successful rela-
tionships between schools must involve "joint commitments," whereby schools
seek to work together (93). If joint commitments don't exist, misunderstood
agendas can undermine all of the best intentions. They explain that a frequent
complaint of secondary school teachers is that "university people want to `come
down' and tell them how to teach writing" (94). Community college personnel
are acutely aware of this phenomenon from a slightly different perspective, one
that reflects their position in the education universe sandwiched between high
schools and four-year colleges. Because they operate from primarily a teach-
ing-focused rather than a research-focused mission, community colleges can be
caught in a similar predicament in their relationships with four-year institutions,
especially if key features of the two-year college setting and curriculum are not
fully understood.

    Myelle-Watson, Spears, Wellen, McClellan, and Peters (Chapter 5) state:

         As researchers at a public high school in Illinois, we discov-
         ered a substantial advantage in having an experienced high
         school faculty member who could act as a colleague and a
         liaison to help build bridges and establish joint commitments
         between our institutions. The National Writing Project model
         of "teachers teaching teachers" resides at the heart of such an
         arrangement so that a difference of perspectives and missions
         do not get mistaken as symptoms of an unhelpful hierarchy.
         (Peters)

    It was precisely this concern that caused those affiliated with the MCC-
Longview WAC Program to want to be certain that they were equipped to offer
what SCA was seeking. Follow-up questions asked of the SCA administrative
contact person to clarify their purposes and goals quelled fears rather quickly,

                                                                                                  89
McMullen-Light

though it wasn't really until the teachers met face-to-face in the WAC workshop
that all lingering concerns were eradicated.

    However, the difference in grade levels was not the only source of concern;
the significant differences in missions and student populations made these two
schools an unlikely pairing. It is useful to understand just how different these
two schools are in terms of demographics and missions. As one campus of a
large, multi-campus district serving a metropolitan area, MCC-Longview is a
secular, public, two-year institution with an enrollment of approximately 6000
students that serves the Lee's Summit suburban community. Like most commu-
nity college environments, MCC-Longview offers both general education and
vocational curriculums for a wide range of adult learners, including those who
have just exited high school, as well as those returning to school after years away,
and often with substantial work and family responsibilities. Student skill levels
range from developmental to honors, and student goals and reasons for attend-
ing college are quite diverse.

    By contrast, Summit Christian Academy is an independent, nondenomina-
tional Christian school serving over 685 preschool through high school students.
It is accredited both through the North Central Association and the Association
of Christian Schools International. The school boasts a 13:1 student-teacher
ratio, and has a stellar reputation in the Kansas City area. SCA is noted for its
academic rigor and offers 46 college-credit hours each year to high school stu-
dents; in 2011, SCA graduates averaged a score of 25.2 on the ACT. In addition
to pursuing a writing emphasis, the school has embraced a technology initiative.
Google Chromebooks and interactive whiteboards have been provided to ele-
mentary classrooms, and individual iPads are a required school supply for high
school students.

    SCA's mission is "to inspire students to achieve their God-given potential
through excellent academics and Christian training in a compassionate envi-
ronment" (Summit Christian Academy, Mission Statement). The school teaches
from a biblical worldview, and seeks "to prepare students spiritually, morally,
socially, and academically, so they will grow in grace and the knowledge of God
and affect their world for Christ" (Summit Christian Academy, Our Mission
and Philosophy).

    Cox and Gimbel point out in their article on secondary-college WAC collab-
orations that "college and university WAC programs are uniquely positioned to
offer local school districts support in developing and sustaining WAC programs"
(3). They are absolutely correct, as long as a joint commitment underpins the
relationship. The common ground SCA and MCC-Longview found was their
mutual dedication to providing exceptional educational experiences for their
students through writing. Both schools were passionately committed to gradu-

90
                                                                                      In Our Own Backyard

ating critical thinkers who were confident in their writing skills, and this bond
diminished any differences that existed in missions and constituencies and ulti-
mately provided the necessary foundation for fruitful collaboration.

    Though common ground and mutual aims are paramount, so too is the as-
sumption that both groups stand to gain insight and knowledge through their
partnership and collaboration. Henry A. Luce explains that "collaboration be-
tween the sectors, then, becomes the means for bridging the gap between high
school and college, for ensuring the continuity of excellence throughout the sys-
tem (129). Although he wrote his article "High School-College Collaboration,"
over twenty years ago, his further point resonates even more deeply now: "So if
American education is to improve to the extent now demanded by public and
private sectors alike, then collegiality must become the most natural act of all"
(Luce 129).

BACKSTORIES: THE PATH TO COLLABORATION

    In addition to the demographic and mission context, it is helpful to con-
sider specifically each school's writing context. Schools just beginning a writing
initiative or WAC program don't always recognize the complex ways writing
exists in a school setting, because they focus solely on where writing instruction
takes place in the curriculum. Also, schools sometimes overlook activities and
endeavors that reflect WAC principles and practices, because they fall outside of
language arts instruction. In this case, SCA had already dedicated itself to a focus
on writing in order to enhance the college-readiness of their graduates, improve
test scores of their students, and directly engage their broader community of
teachers and parents to support the development of their students as writers and
critical thinkers. Beaumont, Pydde, and Tschirpke (Chapter 7) comment:

         The importance of considering the writing context of collab-
         orating institutions cannot be emphasized enough. Fostering
         communication about each specific writing culture helps
         collaborating partners to shed light on potentially deviant
         writing practices that, when unnoticed, make it difficult to
         design writing programs that are acknowledged and support-
         ed by all collaborating parties equally. (Herkner)

    With those goals in mind, the school had adopted a grading procedure that
applied to students beginning in January of their junior year of high school and
held them accountable for editing papers for which rough drafts were produced.
The grading policy covered content, organization, grammar, and mechanics. The
administration created a FAQs document explaining the policy that was distrib-

                                                                                                  91
McMullen-Light

uted to teachers and parents. The policy encouraged students to consult resourc-
es, like peers, teachers, handbooks, and parents, and included the opportunity
to revise for credit. The school also used Turnitin.com for seventh to twelfth
grades as a tool for detecting plagiarism. By the time SCA and MCC-Longview
connected, the SCA school community was familiar with the grading policy and
accustomed to submitting student work to Turnitin. SCA had also integrated
a comprehensive literacy program into the elementary grades that encouraged
critical reading and analysis of written texts.

    In contrast, the WAC Program at MCC-Longview began in 1986 and has
since been considered a best practices model of WAC for community colleges.
The primary goal of the program has always been to support faculty directly in
their efforts to integrate writing into their courses as a tool for learning, and
to provide significant writing experiences for students beyond the composition
curriculum. To those ends, the program offers introductory WAC workshops
for faculty, follow-up workshops for faculty interested in teaching writing in-
tensive courses, a myriad of kinds of forums to foster campus-wide discussion
of writing-related topics, and individual consultations for instructors led by a
full-time WAC director. Faculty participants had a long history of engaging fully
in writing assessment efforts from design to implementation, including a large-
scale portfolio project that captured authentic artifacts from courses across the
college. Faculty members were able to access the WAC program in multiple ways
and determine their own level of involvement, which was entirely voluntary. The
program had sponsored a writing fellows program for fifteen years that attached
peer tutors to WAC courses, and had hosted a student project showcase event,
Imagination Longview, for the past five years.

    Just a few months prior to the email query from SCA, MCC-Longview of-
fered a comprehensive, three-day learning experience for new WAC directors
called the WAC Institute for Community Colleges. The desire to develop and
host such an experience arose during the celebration of the 25th year of MCC-
Longview's WAC program when faculty attached to the program and cogni-
zant of the institutional and administrative support the program had always
been afforded, wanted to give back by helping other colleges create a blueprint
for a sustainable program. The WAC director, along with the WAC Cadre, a
representative, interdisciplinary group of WAC faculty who helped guide the
MCC-Longview WAC Program, spent considerable time over an 18-month pe-
riod planning and implementing the WAC Institute, which drew attendees from
across the country. They wanted to stress practical strategies that could guide any
community college program and decided to do so through the lens of the theme,
"Creating a Culture of Writing: What Works."

    What is crucial to note is that this effort represented a unique opportunity

92
                                                                                      In Our Own Backyard

for some high-level professional development for veteran WAC faculty, as well as
for the WAC director. None of them had ever been involved in creating a WAC
program from the ground up, because all had joined the Longview community
after its WAC Program was established and flourishing. The planning of the
institute was based on the idea of honoring all situations that drove interest in
WAC at the attendees' colleges, whether it was a full-fledged institutional com-
mitment to a QEP, an administrative mandate, or the interest of a few faculty
members to help students write more effectively. And, importantly, this endeav-
or and approach required each of those involved in this planning to reexamine
the fundamental features of thriving WAC programs from the point of view
of starting from scratch and assuming limited resources. Consequently, the in-
structional content of the institute emphasized the decision-making processes
attendant to WAC programs, strategies for prioritizing program goals and cre-
ating reasonable expectations, and concrete ways to engage faculty and identify
administrative allies.

    The WAC Cadre had become extremely facile in serving as resources to their
peers at MCC-Longview, and especially at helping facilitate WAC and Writing
Intensive workshops. But the success of the WAC Institute bolstered their con-
fidence and heightened their awareness of how to communicate broader WAC
ideas to colleagues from other institutions. This, in turn, positioned them to serve
in a similar role with SCA by helping the school take its writing initiative to the
next level, shifting from a culture emphasizing writing to a true culture of writing.

    Finally, proximity alone invites such collaborations. Cox and Gimbel note
in Chapter 2 that "too often, educators are separated by level and by discipline."
The narrow universe that educators typically work in is organized in ways that
can limit exposure to and contact with other disciplines and other grade levels;
teachers tend to meet those primarily on their own campus, and attend confer-
ences with those in their own discipline. Creating a WAC community of teach-
ers within driving distance of each other could have huge implications for their
teaching and for student learning as the students move from one segment of the
educational system to the next.

MAKING CONNECTIONS

Logistics

    The initial emails were critical in establishing the relationship between the
schools; there was a lot of discussion to try to nail down the details of when
and where. One consideration when working with K-12 faculty is timing, both
in terms of when during the school year the teachers are available, and at what

                                                                                                  93
McMullen-Light

time of day. MCC-Longview and SCA negotiated the optimum time first based
on SCA's available in-service days that could be dedicated to WAC workshops,
and then to accommodate the MCC-Longview teacher availability. A second
consideration is location. It was clear at the outset that having SCA faculty come
to MCC-Longview campus was the best option, because it meant that WAC
instructors from across the college would be available to help facilitate around
their class schedule. Another advantage of going to the college campus was that
the high school teachers were distanced from the everyday distractions at their
own school. Myelle-Watson, Spears, Wellen, and Peters (Chapter 5) state:

         Such logistics can be contingent upon a number of factors.
         When Northern Illinois University tried to host high school
         faculty in a similar way, the high school faculty soon lost
         interest in sacrificing their Saturdays to workshops. The best
         results came from university faculty going to the high school
         on a mutually convenient weekday, where professors saw first-
         hand the conditions and exigencies that existed in the teach-
         ers' professional lives. Yet there is still a lot for all participants
         to learn from site visits that go both ways, as McMullen-Light
         later suggests. (Peters)

    Another key logistical decision was to have the high school teachers attend
one day and the middle school teachers attend the following day for the first
WAC workshop in October. This separation allowed them to work with col-
leagues who were teaching at similar grade levels for their initial WAC expo-
sure, something that is never necessary to consider at the college workshops.
However, for the second workshop in the spring, both middle school teachers
and high school teachers attended the half-day session, but worked primarily in
discipline-based groups, which permitted vertical planning and course content
discussions. This strategy proved particularly effective, as both sessions yielded
full and active participation.

    Splitting the SCA faculty into two groups permitted the workshops to be
conducted in a way that allowed maximum engagement and interaction, espe-
cially in the large group setting, where conversations are critical to the efficacy
of the workshop.

Planning

    In order to develop suitable and relevant materials for the workshops, the
WAC director and the WAC Cadre at MCC-Longview spent time discussing
the plethora of activities and exercises they had developed and used previously

94
                                                                                      In Our Own Backyard

in WAC workshops with college faculty and in the WAC Institute with WAC
directors. It was this decision-making process and the desire to match materials
to the needs and interests of the SCA teachers that provoked valuable discussion
and cultivated new insights regarding WAC theory and practice for the planners.
For instance, the WAC Cadre determined that an assignment critique exercise
featuring a hypothetical college learning community course typically used in the
MCC-Longview WAC workshops wouldn't work as well with the K-12 teach-
ers, because it assumes conditions that don't exist at lower levels. Instead, they
developed an assignment design exercise that invited interdisciplinary teams of
teachers to generate an assignment in response to a more credible scenario (Ap-
pendix A).

WAC Workshop I

    The first workshop was an all-day session in October and covered traditional
WAC topics, like assignment design principles and strategies for responding to
and evaluating student writing. The day included a mix of informational presen-
tations on WAC, small group activities and discussions, large group discussions,
responding to scenarios, collaboratively creating assignments and rubrics, writ-
ing and sharing individual responses, and viewing the brief film Shaped by Writ-
ing, produced by Harvard's writing program. Other unplanned conversations
naturally related to writing emerged throughout the day, especially because the
SCA teachers were instructors keenly interested in how college instructors view
and use writing. Seeing actual college assignments and real student responses
inspired animated discussions of writing expectations among all present.

WAC Workshop II

    The second session took place in February and was designed to revisit ideas
related to responding to student writing, giving SCA instructors an opportunity
to get collegial feedback on any projects they brought to the table. The session
began with a review of how to respond to student writing by using the heuris-
tic of higher order and lower order concerns. After viewing the film Across the
Drafts: Students and Teachers Talk about Feedback, also produced by Harvard's
Writing Program, participants read and analyzed two college student texts and
brainstormed how to provide useful feedback to students and best communicate
with students to encourage revision. The second half of the session was spent
brainstorming any ideas/strategies/projects the teachers had brought with them
with the intent to solicit peer feedback, using a tool called "WAC Chat: A Guide
to Collegial Conversations," designed to maximize each group's time (Appendix

                                                                                                  95
McMullen-Light

B).
    One SCA teacher described the powerful impact both of these sessions had

on her, noting it was "unlike any in-service I have ever experienced." She said
she was struck by the way the first session started with everyone seated at tables
arranged in a circle, with all participants making eye contact and conversing,
taking in information, applying the ideas, sharing personal insights in different
ways, moving in and out of small groups, and watching the films.

    Though more difficult to arrange with colleagues who are not on your own
campus, follow-up sessions ensure impact and ownership (Cox and Gimbel,
Chapter 2). Having SCA teachers come to MCC-Longview twice gave the high
school teachers an opportunity to apply the strategies they had learned and re-
flect on their effectiveness. The conversations were decidedly more pointed and
specific at Workshop II.

Writing Center Consultation

    After the first workshop, SCA's academic dean invited MCC-Longview's
WAC director to consult with key staff about the possibility of creating a writing
center. Having directed a writing fellows program, the director felt comfortable
sharing information about the value of peer tutoring, tutor selection and train-
ing, desirable center space and arrangement, and useful resources and materials
in an on-site meeting. The WAC director framed a brief set of guiding questions
to assist SCA personnel in prioritizing considerations related to creating a writ-
ing center in a secondary school (Appendix C).

    In "The Natural Connection: The WAC Program and the High School Writ-
ing Center," Joan Mullin and Pamela Childers explain that since high school
writing centers are able to involve all of the stakeholders--students, teachers,
administrators, and even parents--they "can create community support for cur-
ricular change in ways often unavailable to universities (24). Once the key SCA
staff and administrators made their initial logistical decisions about how the
writing center could be set up to support SCA's WAC efforts, student and parent
input was sought to ensure that the center could effectively and efficiently serve
all constituents.

IMPACTS

SCA Teacher Perceptions from Surveys

    During the final minutes of the second workshop, teachers completed a writ-
ten survey asking them to assess their professional development experiences.

96
                                                                                      In Our Own Backyard

Overall, responses were quite positive and very much in sync with what MCC-
Longview instructors convey after workshop experiences, and what other WAC
programs typically report about their faculty. Some of the questions are listed
below with a smattering of representative comments:

Did you find the WAC workshops worthwhile?

         "Yes, I enjoyed seeing colleagues enthusiastic about a topic
         that is promised to generate more work."

         "I appreciated the opportunity to `check in' with other teach-
         ers and identify with their joys and frustrations. I feel that I
         benefitted in some practical and philosophical ways."

         "Yes, totally made writing relevant and helped give me confi-
         dence in all aspects of trying to initiate."

Which topic of the workshops was most beneficial to you and why?

         "Light bulb moment: It should have been obvious, but it had
         not occurred to me to put the majority of my effort as the
         teacher/evaluator into responding to drafts. I spent a goodly
         amount of time writing intently to my students' final prod-
         ucts, but really it makes far more sense to use that effort in a
         draft that they'll actually pay attention to later (and confer-
         ence about). --critical use of technology--which tasks are
         better suited to it, and which are not."

Would you recommend this workshop (one or both sessions) to your col-
leagues at other K-12 schools? Why or why not?

         "Yes - practical tools; stuff relatable and took fear out of writ-
         ing; multidisciplinary staff helpful in seeing possibilities across
         curriculum."

         "Yes. It was helpful in terms of explaining the writing process
         and evaluation for non-English teachers."

         "Yes--it has been very encouraging and could be a help to
         others."

         "Absolutely! The balance of inspiration and practicality was
         superb. I left feeling, `I can do this!'"

                                                                                                  97
McMullen-Light

         "Yes. Writing encourages higher level thinking. If students are
         not able to think critically, they won't do as well in college."

Impact: SCA Teacher Perceptions from Interviews

    At the end of the school year, SCA teachers were invited to share their per-
ceptions about the impact of WAC on their pedagogy and the SCA teaching
community. The teachers interviewed acknowledged that they saw positive im-
pacts on their teaching and on student learning, and some shared plans for next
year, as well as changes they had incorporated this year. Some teachers were
interviewed individually and some in a small group.

Ruth, Tenth-Grade History

    When asked if she had incorporated an idea or strategy from the workshops
or from discussions with SCA or MCC-Longview colleagues, she responded,
"I can't begin to tell you how many ideas and strategies I've been inspired to
incorporate following WAC workshops. In many ways, it's been overwhelming
to consider all of the possibilities. I felt like I was trying to take a drink from one
of those giant hoses firefighters use to battle skyscraper blazes."

    She then shared her strategy for constraining that vast universe of possibil-
ities:

         Getting back to the tyranny of the immediate in the class-
         room, I quickly realized I'd have to start by taking three steps:
         1) being more aware of whether or not I was giving students
         multiple opportunities to use writing as a way of thinking, of
         learning material, and as a gauge of their own understanding;
         2) teaming up with a colleague in the English department
         who would be a combination of accountability partner and
         bridge to increasing the number, variety, and depth of writing
         students would tackle; 3) and setting time aside this summer
         to come back to the workshop material and bringing focus
         and intentionality to the task of weaving writing into my
         lesson plans and course curriculum spreadsheet.

    Myelle-Watson, Spears, Wellen, and Peters (Chapter 5) agree:

         Both the wisdom and the rhetoric this teacher gives voice to
         reflect the "aha moment" that teachers also experienced in
         our Illinois project. While intimidating to launch and sustain
         such a collaborative venture, such an experience can also be

98
                                                                                      In Our Own Backyard

         tremendously liberating from a "tyranny of the immediate"
         (Siskin 29)--which includes so many pressures that isolate
         from rather than connect teachers to productive professional
         relationships with their colleagues. (Peters)

Anthony, Ninth-Grade English

    Anthony identified one critical shift he made this year in working with his
English students after he attended the WAC workshop: expending more energy
on assessing and providing critical feedback on drafts, rather than spending that
energy on the final product. He realized that the draft represented the best time
to "really coach the students." He envisions that next year he will be "more in-
tentional" in working with students on their drafts by conferencing with them
individually over their drafts during class as they obtain peer feedback. The iPads
make this a tenable activity, especially if students are working with their assign-
ment checklist in hand. He anticipates shifting his classroom time to accommo-
date important in-class experiences like this.

    He likes that WAC promotes writing in all classes and thinks a consistent ex-
pectation level regarding writing is present throughout the school and catching
the attention of the students. He has already had conversations with a history
teacher about how they can collaborate on projects when he teaches Elie Wie-
sel's Night and F. Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby. He was enthusiastic about
working with the history teacher to make overt connections between the literary
analysis and the historical context, and sees further opportunity for collaboration
with this teacher in relation to their overlapping coverage of Greek mythology.

    An interesting application of the ideas that surfaced for Anthony through the
workshops was a project for the ESL students he teaches. He decided to have the
students write in pairs to encourage their collaboration and to provide increased
opportunity for conversing. Though the students were a bit frustrated by this
exercise, Anthony says it achieved the goal he had in mind: the paired students
talked extensively to each other during the process of creating a single paper. It
heightened their awareness of key language features and of the writing process.
He stressed that the final draft wasn't nearly as important as the consistent com-
munication that occurred throughout its development. He plans to repeat this
project in the fall.

    Anthony is still thinking about what he learned through WAC, especially as
it plays out against the reality of teaching high school. He wonders about strik-
ing that appropriate balance between valuing the ideas and the "grammar piece."
He realizes this is an essential topic for discussion next year with his colleagues.

Thomas, Twelfth-Grade English and Dual-Credit

                                                                                                  99
McMullen-Light

    Thomas presently teaches twelfth-grade English, dual credit courses, and on-
line college-level composition courses. For him, the impact of WAC was mani-
fest in greater collegiality, and he sees the opportunity for learning groups, col-
laboration in writing, and common assessment of students as outgrowths of the
school's engagement with WAC:

         We have been in the process of upping our writing game over
         the last year and a half. Every teacher was required to assign an
         essay per semester in their discipline and the 75% rule regard-
         ing grammar was put into force. Now, we are in the process
         of establishing a writing center and using both teachers and
         students to staff the center. Additionally, grammar and writing
         norm workshops are in the works for next year. Teachers I have
         spoken to are excited and more interested in collaboration and
         WAC assignments than they have ever been before.

    Tom will be released from some of his teaching load to coordinate the writ-
ing center and from that vantage, will encourage the cross-discipline projects
other teachers are creating and begin collecting assignments and rubrics to help
the peer tutors understand the assignments they will be working with. He will
also offer mini-workshops, called "Grammar Slammers," for his colleagues to
help them clarify and troubleshoot grammar issues.

Ramona, Ninth-Grade-Science

Diane, Tenth-, Eleventh-, Twelfth-Grade Science

Donna, Middle School Science

    Three Science teachers gathered in a conference room at SCA at the end of
the school year to share their observations and plans related to WAC:

    They plan to meet over the summer to formalize some of their vertical plan-
ning which began during the follow-up WAC session at MCC-Longview in the
spring. There, in the discipline brainstorming sessions, they spent time identi-
fying writing projects and genres that serve their varying levels of instruction.
These and other "eye-opening" conversations led them to discover much more
about what other science teachers were doing at other grade levels. For example,
one of the high school teachers was surprised to learn that a lower grade teacher
had been sending students to the local science fair. They see their collaboration
as colleagues as an opportunity to coordinate and build on all of the science
experiences SCA students have.

    They plan to visit MCC-Longview in the fall to re-connect with Keet, the
Biology instructor who facilitated their brainstorming session where they began

100
                                                                                      In Our Own Backyard

their vertical planning and observe the lab setting context in which he has his
students write.

    Some of the changes they instituted this year as they became engaged in WAC:
    Donna mentioned that she had set up next year's units to include one writing
day per unit, approximately every ten days. On this day, her students will focus
on writing and gain experience in several genres relevant to science, including
summary, compare and contrast, and creating definitions. Students will have op-
portunities to use iPads for in-class research, which will be included in one-para-
graph write-ups they will produce during class. She gave a sample prompt: What
is aquaculture and what are its costs and benefits?
    Donna came away from this school year believing that students felt more
relaxed and less tense about the prospect of writing; she attributes her integra-
tion of informal assignments as the key to taking the fear out of writing for the
students. She says, "For some, the writing became more inviting and they could
see that they got more out of it." She watched the in-class paragraphs become
more focused over the year, and she believes informal assignments like these
were "more organic" and "allowed students to put their thoughts down and to
focus on learning the science."
    Ramona said that her mindset had shifted significantly and that writing had
not at all been the burden she'd feared it would be. She offered the example
of having her ninth-grade students watch a documentary on Nikolai Tesla and
write a brief informational report using only ideas gleaned from the film. She
issued a rubric with the assignment via the iPad, and was quite pleased with the
student performance on this task. She felt the writing was clear. She had no pla-
giarism issues because students were acknowledging the ideas they used from the
film, and the students were far more invested in their viewing of the film because
they knew they would be using it as a source. From her perspective, this exercise
yielded "strong writing and better learning."
    Diane teaches anatomy and physiology and asked her students to write their
notes by hand. She is sold on the value of the kinesthetic experience of writ-
ing and received positive results by having students create their notes this way,
which was a challenge, given the iPad initiative. She says there is a temptation
for students to default to rote memorization if she issues PowerPoint notes. She
believes their fundamental understanding of symptoms, causes, and science ter-
minology in this course is enhanced by this approach. Interestingly, very recent
research on college students and the positive impact of handwriting course notes
(Mueller and Oppenheimer) was mentioned during the first workshop.

Greg, Eleventh- and Twelfth-Grade History

    According to Greg, "There are natural conversations occurring between

                                                                                                 101
McMullen-Light

teachers, especially about prospective collaborations." He says they are tweaking
assignments and even exploring ways to work around classes that include both
juniors and seniors when they seek to devise grade-specific writing experienc-
es. Here's how he knows that the topic of writing is becoming more organic:
"Around the lunch table or at the copy machine, teachers used to ask each other,
`How're your kids?' or `How are the Royals doing?' Now it's become more nor-
mal to ask about your writing assignments."

A Conversation:

    Around the conference table, this conversation about the effect of WAC on
their teaching community emerged:

    History (Greg): "The more cohesive faculty become, the less opportunity
there is for students to play one teacher against another."

    History (Ruth): "This school-wide approach rescues us from the tendency to
say my little classroom is my world and not consider the larger context."

    Science (Ramona): "Without WAC, it always made the English teacher look
like the bad guy."

    English (Andrea): "WAC lets the English classroom expand and explore even
more because other classes are supporting these ideas."

    History (Ruth): "Also, I would not have had the confidence to tackle some
of the assignments without the support of the English composition teachers."

    English (Andrea): "I found enjoyment in working with colleagues. It can get
lonely in your own room."

    The high school teachers also pointed out natural connections that could be
made to the literacy program that SCA offers at the elementary levels, which
focuses on critical reading and analysis. They planned to consult with elemen-
tary teachers for strategies to cause students to review the skills they learned in
this program, and apply them overtly to discipline-specific reading at the high
school level.

Reflections by MCC-Longview WAC Cadre members

    The MCC-Longview instructors responded to an email interview after the
second session to capture their perspectives as facilitators. The interview prompts
focused exclusively on the second workshop, but insights that emerged in meet-
ings and discussions throughout the year signaled that the connection with SCA
represented a valuable and worthwhile experience on a number of levels for the
WAC Cadre members.

102
                                                                                      In Our Own Backyard

Matthew, Psychology instructor

    Matthew first explained how the teachers at his table responded to the task
of evaluating the two student papers:

         Our focus was on the Hierarchy of Concerns and how dif-
         ficult it is to stay high on the list when reading papers with
         multiple lower level concerns. I suggested reading with empty
         hands--no correcting pen, in order to focus on the ideas
         rather than allowing one's self to be distracted by spelling or
         sentence errors. There was debate over which paper needed
         more revision, and what types of revision, how meeting with
         the students to discuss their papers would go. We talked
         about whether one type of error, done repeatedly through the
         paper was really one error or multiple, and how to count it.

         The discussion of justifying the points subtracted from a per-
         fect score, and writing enough comments to show the reason
         for the subtraction, was topic. There's the trap of only showing
         what is wrong because that's all the teacher has to justify, leav-
         ing any compliments or strengths unmentioned. It's no won-
         der students don't like to write, or receive their papers back.

    As expected, each group responded differently to the WAC Chat Exercise,
tailoring it to the needs of those present around the table. In describing how his
group handled the WAC Chat exercise, Matthew explained:

         Our group took turns giving and getting feedback. One
         member had to leave early, so another chimed in that she re-
         ally wanted his feedback because they teach the same subject,
         though at different grade levels. This collegiality was great to
         see and foster.

         Another wanted feedback on a rather complex, multi-part
         assignment examining culture, language, history, etc. We
         considered the timing of parts, rather than doing a group
         assignment, because the ability to do each part was one of
         the goals for the students. We ended up talking about spac-
         ing segments over the semester, so it wasn't overwhelming to
         students to receive it all at once. I referred back to Cathy's
         music appreciation assignment, which the faculty member
         then recalled from the first workshop session in October, and

                                                                                                 103
McMullen-Light

         we talked about her connecting with Cathy for brainstorming
         or other ideas.

         Another instructor wanted brainstorming and problem solving
         with a combined English/history paper. She wanted to provide
         students with one grade for the paper, jointly arrived upon by
         both instructors. There were several questions before any advis-
         ing, which was good to see. It ended up with encouragement
         to try, and let the students know they are experimenting, and
         that if it doesn't work the way they want it to, they'll change
         the grading process. Most couldn't see how to make it a single
         grade, but that it was worth experimenting with."

    In terms of his overall impression of the engagement with SCA teachers,
Matthew shared this:

         What surprised me at this session and at the original work-
         shop in October was the way the Cadre performed. I had a
         real concern going into it that we didn't have specific things
         to say, or points to make, but it turns out we didn't need to
         because we have been so embedded in WAC for so long that
         we can be fluid in responding to questions or needs.

         I was also very impressed with the creativity, depth, complexi-
         ty, and appeal of the assignments I heard these faculty present.
         There were many moments I found myself wanting to either
         participate or copy. The assignments were intriguing and
         should help meet the educational goals they have established.

    Unquestionably, his comments reflect a veteran WAC instructor's deep un-
derstanding of the concepts presented and applied at the workshop sessions.

Anne, Physics Instructor

    Anne writes of the collegial brainstorming the teachers at her table engaged
in, and offered the example of a sixth-grade history teacher who had prepared
for the exercise by bringing student work to share, but seemed reticent about
bringing it up to the group, thinking that it wasn't as deep or important as some
of the other assignments the group had considered:

         We collectively convinced her that she began the foundation for
         future work and we were interested. She has her students jour-
         nal about being on a wagon train. Her project is very realistic
         in that if it doesn't happen at that period in history then they

104
                                                                                      In Our Own Backyard

         aren't going to do it. Historical records show that ten percent of
         the people died during their journey, so she has 10% pretend
         to die during the journaling about the journey. They have
         various hardships along the way and have to overcome those.
         They hit key places and times in history and journal about that.
         Her questions centered around whether she is doing enough
         and what else she could add. I think the upper grade history
         teachers were impressed with her work--they really validated
         what she was doing. They actually had a hard time giving her
         any new ideas. The one idea that they came up with was taking
         a class sharing and instruction time and becoming the Indians
         around a campfire and telling the events and histories.

    Another brainstorming success occurred when a dual credit government
teacher sought a way to create a meaningful assignment combining current
events with Articles of the Constitution. Anne recounts the discussion:

         He said that it sounded like a good idea but most times it
         ended up dry and uninteresting (my words, not his but that
         is the gist). He wanted ideas that would liven up his class.
         We suggested he ask the students to become Supreme Court
         justices and write briefs on the current events using the Con-
         stitution; we suggested they may also become lawyers arguing
         in the Supreme Court, or become legislators trying to get a
         bill made into law about these current events; or compare our
         constitution with another country's and see how the current
         event would look based on the two different constitutions.
         It seemed like he was pleased with the ideas and it gave him
         the opportunity to think about it in a new light and come up
         with some of his own ideas, too.

    Anne summarized her experience as a facilitator:

         I was really pleased that the sixth-grade teacher went away
         with some validation of her project when she initially felt
         intimidated by topics of the first person in the group. I also
         think the last teacher to share didn't think he'd get any good
         ideas, but I could see the slight surprise on his face when
         we started giving him some fresh ideas. I think those two
         things--validation and fresh ideas--are some of the best
         things that can happen when teachers share their ideas, desires
         for objectives, and projects. Having others with a teacher's

                                                                                                 105
McMullen-Light

         perspective but little direct knowledge and no personal in-
         volvement look at your work can really strengthen the project.

    Again, a seasoned WAC teacher is in a unique position to guide other teach-
ers and not only fully appreciate the value of collegial feedback, but also orches-
trate a conversation so that it can occur.

Cathy, Music Instructor

    Cathy facilitated a table of music and arts teachers who had no trouble gen-
erating rich and productive discussion of assignment possibilities. Cathy report-
ed that there was "so much exchange that we ran out of time." She further writes:

         It was so exciting to see the engagement of Longview folks
         with SCA. I was looking for ideas as much as the SCA art/
         music faculty. The choir teacher needed some ideas for devel-
         oping the historical context for music. I suggested the Time
         Period project we used in Music Appreciation. She is going
         to adapt it for use in her concerts. For instance, she will have
         students develop a digital collage around the context of a
         particular piece of music and present it to the audience during
         a concert. All kinds of things were discussed--everything
         from performance art to poetry slams. The art, drama and
         music faculty had no lack of things to talk about. They have a
         fully-developed collegial relationship.

    In discussions at meetings after both sessions, all of the WAC Cadre mem-
bers indicated that they had felt invigorated by these sessions and had come away
from them with solid ideas they planned to incorporate in their own teaching.
One of the most poignant and quite unexpected elements of the workshops that
touched these college instructors was the profound way in which the spirituality
of the SCA teachers so naturally marked their discussions of their pedagogy and
the ideas they shared in this context.

Writing Center Update

    Mullin and Childers note that "no writing center or WAC program can be
simply lifted from one institution and used successfully in another; it must be
adjusted to each school's objectives and demographics" (25). To that end, SCA
spent the spring semester designing a plan for a writing center that suited their
ongoing writing initiative and WAC. At the end of the school year, the academic
dean reported that critical space had been identified and dedicated as the loca-

106
                                                                                      In Our Own Backyard

tion of the new writing center, to be staffed by ten student tutors, called Writing
Fellows, who would be supervised by two teachers to cover both before and after
school times. One of the teachers would be released from a class to coordinate
the center when it opens the following year.

    The Writing Fellows are excited to be the first at SCA to serve in the role of
writing tutors. They met as a group and determined the name of the center: The
Writer's Corner. The Writing Fellows also chose a Scripture foundation from
1 Corinthians 14:33, King James Version: "For God is not the author of confu-
sion, but of peace ..." The dean explained that the Writing Fellows wanted every
student to remember that they didn't have to be stressed when writing, "that it
would all come together." Clearly, the students involved already have ownership
of the idea as well as the space since they have imagined it having a coffee-shop
atmosphere-replete with a Keurig coffee machine.

    Chad E. Littleton lays out the benefits of shared training between the college
and high school writing centers and promotes engagement with local affiliates
of the International Writing Centers Association. The MCC-Longview WAC
director identified a comprehensive tutor training opportunity and accompa-
nied SCA staff and writing tutors in August to a valuable, day-long tutor retreat
developed and hosted by Kansas City area college writing center directors who
gather regularly to support one another professionally. This group, "The Greater
Kansas City Writing Center Project," includes writing center directors from area
two and four-year colleges and universities who are members of IWCA.

    One primary project they have developed is an annual tutor retreat. It is run
like a conference, with seasoned student tutors, along with writing center direc-
tors from each college, conducting breakout sessions on a wide range of relevant
topics offered in various formats. Through mock tutorials, presentations, and
discussions, they provide a rich training experience with "writing, role-playing,
listening, questioning, observing, and information-sharing" (Luce 134). The
participation of both high school and college tutors establishes the authentic
"community of writers" that Luce calls for (133). As luck would have it, the key-
note speaker and presenter this year was a highly regarded high school writing
center expert, Andrew Jeter, founder and coordinator of the Literacy Center at
Niles West High School in Skokie, Illinois, who generously shared his expertise
with SCA administrators over lunch.

STRATEGIES/RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CREATING A
K-12-COMMUNITY COLLEGE CONNECTION

    What follows is a set of general, guiding principles for connecting with a

                                                                                                 107
McMullen-Light

high school or community college in your area. This list is by no means exhaus-
tive, but it does convey key strategies for a successful high school-community
college connection:

      · Reach out to another school in your area and suggest a WAC collab-
         oration based on what each has to offer by way of expertise, and what
         each is interested in learning from the other school.

      · Talk early and often in the process to determine needs, and get a sense
         of the other institution; consider this part of the relationship (phone,
         email, text, in person).

      · Overcome fear about saying/doing the right thing, because you don't
         know each other's context; if each institution enters into the partner-
         ship in an authentic way, good things will happen.

      · Plan for interactions that permit open, honest discussion in a safe
         environment.

      · Give faculty time and space to process and apply ideas beyond the
         initial professional development experiences.

      · Reconnect at a later point to dive deeper into topics covered.
      · Negotiate: don't let dictates of school calendars get in the way of

         getting teachers together; find comfortable and convenient spaces in
         which to have interactions.
      · Don't be surprised when you get much more than you give. Teachers
         are resourceful and imaginative by trade. The process of putting teach-
         ers in touch with WAC enriches everyone.
      · Honor the good work going on at both places and be prepared to learn.
      · Be collegial and respectful by thinking of concrete ways to express and
         promote collegiality.
      · Make site visits in both directions.
      · If you have a WAC Program, consider ways in which planning such
         experiences can provide significant and valuable professional develop-
         ment for veteran WAC faculty.
      · Document all interactions; assess effectiveness through surveys and
         interviews and other means.
      · Develop mechanisms for keeping track of what happens with both
         schools once connections are established (email, website, blogs, up-
         dates, Skype, social media, newsletters).

TEACHER TO TEACHER, SCHOOL TO SCHOOL

    Finally, what came out of this successful pilot partnership were vital teacher
connections within each school and between the two school environments, en-

108
                                                                                      In Our Own Backyard

hanced collaborations between disciplines at SCA, vibrant and transformative
professional development experiences for all of the participants and facilitators,
genuine appreciation of the challenges teachers face at each grade level, openness
on the part of all to sharing ideas and resources and providing collegial feedback,
and the promise of new beginnings with the launch of the SCA writing center,
The Writer's Corner.

WORKS CITED

Blumner, Jacob, and Pamela Childers. "Building Better Bridges: What Makes
   High School-College WAC Collaborations Work?" The WAC Journal 22
   (2011): 91-101. Web.

Cox, Michelle, and Phyllis Gimbel. "Conversations Among Teachers on Student
   Writing: WAC/Secondary Education Partnerships at BSU." Across the Disci-
   plines 9.3 (2012). Web. 10 June 2013.

Davies, Merrill. "Whistling in the Dark." What is "College-Level" Writing? Eds.
   Patrick Sullivan and Howard Tinberg. Urbana: NCTE, 2006. 31-35. Print.

Herkner, Luise. "Fwd: Kommentare." Email to Jacob Blumner and Pam
   Childers. 31 August 2013.

Lillge, Danielle. "Illuminating Possibilities: Secondary Writing Across the Cur-
   riculum as a Resource for Navigating Common Core State Standards." Across
   the Disciplines 9.3 (2012). Web.

Littleton, Chad E. "Creating Connections Between Secondary and College
   Writing Centers." The Clearing House: A Journal of Educational Strategies, Is-
   sues and Ideas, 80.2 (2006):77-78. Web.

Luce, Henry A. "High School-College Collaboration." The High School Writing
   Center: Establishing and Maintaining One. Ed. Pamela B. Farrell. Urbana:
   NCTE, 1998. 127-35. Print.

Muller, Pam A., and Daniel M. Oppenheimer. "The Pen is Mightier than the
   Keyboard: Advantages of Longhand over Laptop Note Taking." Psychological
   Science, 23 (2014). Web.

Mullin, Joan, and Pamela Childers. "The Natural Connection: The WAC Pro-
   gram and the High School Writing Center." The Clearing House: A Journal of
   Educational Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 69.1(1995): 24-26.

Peters, Bradley. "Comment on Chapter 6." Email to Jacob Blumner. 1 Septem-
   ber 2013.

Siskin, Leslie. "Subject Divisions." The Subjects in Question: Departmental Orga-
   nization and the High School. Eds. Leslie Siskin and Judith Little. New York:
   Teachers College P, 1995. 23-47. Print.

Summit Christian Academy. Mission Statement. Who We Are. Web. 1 January

                                                                                                 109
McMullen-Light

   2013. <http://www.summit-christian-academy.org/sca-who-we-are.html>.
Summit Christian Academy. Our Mission and Philosophy. Media Fact Sheet.

   Web. 1 January 2013. <http://www.summit-christian-academy.org/sca-me-
   dia-fact-sheet.html>.

APPENDIX A: ASSIGNMENT DESIGN SCENARIO

    A new Department of Secondary Education and Department of Conserva-
tion policy has determined that all Missouri high school students will be provid-
ed an opportunity to learn about native flora and fauna of the state. This effort
is intended to heighten awareness of the environment and can be incorporated
into any course. There is no expectation of student assessment regarding this
experience, but innovative teaching and learning approaches will be showcased
in local forums throughout the state.

    Choose the grade level and at least two design principles from the list to feature.
Grade Level:

    Course(s):
    Purpose:
    Idea:
    Kind of product:
    Process/Steps for completion:
    Principles to be featured:
    Signal if this experience is high stakes or low stakes:

APPENDIX B: WAC CHAT: A GUIDE FOR COLLEGIAL CON-
VERSATIONS

    This exercise affords each group member the opportunity to serve once as an
initiator of a discussion and multiple times as a respondent in a discussion. Each
initiator should be granted ten minutes of group attention.

    As an initiator, you will choose to solicit from your group ONE of three
responses:

      · feedback on an existing project, rubric, idea, strategy, task, assignment
      · brainstorming for a new project, rubric, idea, strategy, task, assign-

         ment
      · troubleshooting for a problem or concern

    INITIATOR-Choose one of these options:

    FEEDBACK
      Describe in detail the project, rubric, idea, strategy, task, assignment.

110
                                                                                      In Our Own Backyard

    BRAINSTORM
      Describe the context of your class (subject, level, learning outcomes).
      Describe any relevant circumstances or conditions.
      Share the idea you want to develop.

    TROUBLESHOOT
      Identify the problem or concern.
      Explain any complicating factors.
      Share solutions you have tried thus far.
      As a respondent, you will actively listen to each initiator and respond ac-
      cording to the parameters indicated in the guidelines below.

    RESPONDENT-Provide one of the following:

    FEEDBACK
      Actively listen to description of project, rubric, idea, strategy, task, assign-
      ment.
      Ask questions until you fully understand nature of it.
      Imagine you are a student and consider: what else do you need to know
      to be successful?
      Is this subscribing to WAC principles of assignment design and evalua-
      tion/response ?

    BRAINSTORM
      Actively listen to context and conditions shared by initiator.
      Pitch ideas as they occur to you.
      Piggyback onto ideas of others.
      Examine trends if any emerge.

    TROUBLESHOOT
      Actively listen to problem presented.
      Survey solutions tried thus far.
      Imagine alternative solutions.
      Offer advice.
      Consider options.
      Poll and pool resources of group: what can you offer your colleague by way
      of support?

APPENDIX C: WRITING CENTER CONSIDERATIONS

    1. Premises:
       · All writers benefit from feedback.
       · All writers should learn to be critical readers of their own work.
       · Tutoring is not simply about remediation or editing; it focuses on

                                                                                                 111
McMullen-Light

            supporting the process of writing and revising.
       · There are substantial benefits derived from peer-to-peer contact.
    2. Logistics
       · Where will it be located?
       · How will students access it?
       · When will students access it?
       · What will it be called?
       · What will be its services?
    3. Staffing
       Tutors
       · Who are the tutors?
       · How will they be selected?
       · What are the necessary qualifications?
       · What training will be provided and how often?
       · What do they receive for serving? (Service hours, credit?)
       Faculty
       · Who trains tutors?
       · Who supervises tutors?
       · How is their workload accommodated?
    4. Oversight
       · Who guides the development of the center?
       · Is there a designated director--permanent/rotating?
       · Is there a faculty advisory group?
       · (an interdisciplinary mix of faculty from different grad levels; some

            centers include other community stakeholders--parents/business
            community, etc.)
      Connecting to writing center resources-regional/national
       · Will they interact/collaborate with nearby WAC-based writing cen-
            ters at other academic levels?

112
CHAPTER 7

NEGOTIATING EXPECTATIONS:
OVERCOMING OBSTACLES
INTRODUCING WAC THROUGH
COLLABORATION BETWEEN A
GERMAN UNIVERSITY WRITING
CENTER AND GERMAN HIGH
SCHOOLS

      Luise Beaumont, Mandy Pydde, and Simone Tschirpke

    The curricula of most German high schools still lack what writing research
and writing pedagogy have been postulating for years: teaching and applying
writing as a process and as a tool for critical, creative and reflective thinking and
learning across subject borders. Instead, writing is widely taught and learned as
linear process and applied as an instrument for testing knowledge. The writing
process itself is left in a black box, as well as differences between product-ori-
ented and process-oriented approaches to writing. The product-oriented ap-
proach is still prevailing in teaching and learning writing (Bräuer 20). In fact,
writing activities, apart from the Aufsatzunterricht (essay lessons), mainly focus
on transcribing text from a course book, a blackboard or from other text ma-
terial (Merz-Grötsch 131). Only little or no room is provided for alternative
approaches, revision practices, or constructive feedback.1

    However, some initiatives exist that focus on enriching students' writing ex-
periences by fostering writing as a tool for learning in and across the disciplines.
Projects range from writing across the curriculum (WAC) workshops given by
academic staff (Micheel and Vogel), to tutoring sessions in writing by university
students (Rapp; Schiller), and peer tutoring sessions by high school students
for their classmates (Pydde, Tschirpke, and Herkner) --mostly introduced to
schools by external writing specialists. From our own experiences and from
the experiences of colleagues, we know that such projects struggle mostly with
changing the culture of writing on a long-term basis.

    In this article, we use the opportunity to look at data we collected through-

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2015.0735.2.07  113
Beaumont, Pydde, and Tschirpke

out our project, Peer Tutoring and Writing Workshops by High School Students for
High School Students, that focused on establishing student-run high school writ-
ing centers as a physical space for WAC activities and peer tutoring in writing.
We, as university writing center peer tutors, were appointed to put the project
into practice. Because it was not possible to establish sustainable structures, we
focused this study on finding reasons for these shortcomings. We assume that
the expectations of all participating project partners played an important role in
the development and outcome of the program. Our research question for this
article, therefore, is as follows: What expectations can arise in a collaboration
between high schools and universities, and how did these expectations, if differ-
ing, develop? We will analyze our data according to Philipp Mayring's qualitative
content analysis using teacher interviews and university tutors' field notes to fil-
ter teachers' and university tutors' expectations. We will then present and discuss
our findings and give recommendations for similar future projects.

PROJECT "PEER TUTORING AND WRITING WORKSHOPS
BY HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS FOR HIGH SCHOOL STU-
DENTS"

    The idea of bringing writing center practices to high schools grew strong
in 2008, when the director of our writing center at the European University
Viadrina (EUV), Katrin Girgensohn, wrote a concept for a project that would
aim at establishing writing centers at German high schools. As a large part of the
belief in successful learning stems from the concept of collaborative learning, it
was understood that peer tutoring--as a learning and teaching method--would
have to be at the heart of this project. Another reason to choose peer tutoring as
our primary working method was that peer tutors are closer to students in terms
of age and status. Peer tutors are able to relate to personal experiences, and thus
can approach and reach writers differently than teachers (Harris 27). Having
only a few years difference between us as peer tutors, as well as being students,
we saw ourselves as possible peer tutors to juniors and seniors of the respective
high schools.

         After the Robert Bosch Stiftung,2 an institution that grants funding
for educational projects, approved the proposal, we started assembling a project
team and actively searched for schools to partner with. Three university peer
tutors formed the university team and selected schools that either approached
us, knew the director of our writing center, or were one of the members of our
project team.

         In order to find suitable students to educate into peer tutors, we pro-
moted our project among teacher assemblies and went into classrooms to pres-

114
                                                                                   Negotiating Expectations

ent our program to students. We asked applicants to write a letter of interest
and discussed students' participation with their teachers. We then chose three to
eight juniors or seniors from each school that showed social competence, com-
mitment, and reliability. These students took part in a three-day training at our
university and the writing center. This training took place once every year when
a new project cycle with new juniors and seniors began.

         In the three-day course, the university team imparted basic knowledge
about writing processes, writing strategies, and academic working techniques,
which the students practiced and reflected upon.3 Principles of peer tutoring
were elaborated upon and practiced in mock tutorials. A workshop for exploring
ideas on how to implement the newly learned peer tutoring processes, strategies,
and techniques at the respective schools was one of the most important units at
training.

    With these objectives, the implicit aims of the project were the following:

      · Promote student autonomy;
      · Promote collective acquisition of learning content on student level;
      · Promote thinking and writing across disciplines;
      · Build writing competencies as key competence for educational

         processes through targeting and linking students' creative likings and
         individual interests, maximizing the potential of writing as an educa-
         tional medium at school;4
      · Transfer research findings (didactics of writing) from university to
         high school; and
      · Familiarize teachers with writing-specific, didactical findings to ensure
         the establishment of sustainable structures at the respective schools.

    After the initial training, two members of the university team met frequent-
ly with the student peer tutors at their schools to set up workshops and one-
on-one tutoring sessions. During the frequent meetings, we trained and devel-
oped the students' peer tutoring skills continuously, and made sure they were
able to implement what they had learned. The third member of the university
team was responsible for coordinating the project. Due to other commitments
and university tutors finishing their degrees, studying abroad, etc., the compo-
sition of our team changed multiple times. Only the coordinator stayed with
the project for all three years.

    Although our team dynamics changed many times, we consistently worked
on keeping a strong rapport with our student peer tutors. Our meetings were
almost always informal and we held them at our own apartments more than
once. We also tried to have many activities that didn't include work, but rather
focused on personal writing. We wanted the peer tutors to enjoy writing,

                                                                                                 115
Beaumont, Pydde, and Tschirpke

and therefore, we went on explorative walks through Berlin, and asked them
to document their impressions and write in any form they wanted to. These
activities were the basis for making collages and other posters that were hung
in their writing center in order to keep them motivated and to attract other
students.

    Unfortunately, we weren't able to devote the same time and energy to work-
ing with the teachers from the respective schools. One of our main concerns in
working with the teachers and the board of schools was building a steering com-
mittee. We thought that a steering committee, consisting of teachers, parents
and us as tutors, would ensure the project's sustainability. We knew that teachers
were often at capacity, and we hoped that parents could become engaged and
take active roles. Unfortunately, due to limited teacher involvement, we weren't
able to form such a committee at any of the three schools.

    After three years the project had the following results:

      · Twenty-one high school students were trained and became peer tutors;
      · High school peer tutors offered individual writing consultations;
      · Thirty individual writing consultations were held;
      · High school peer tutors gave multiple workshops;
      · Social competence of high school peer tutors was nurtured through

         inter-year collaboration with peers;
      · Writing competence of high school peer tutors, as well as some peers,

         was further developed;
      · Writing centers and ongoing peer tutoring could not be established;
      · One school wanted to continue peer tutoring by training a teacher

         that functions as trainer for future student peer tutors; and
      · Teacher commitment was insufficient for establishing sustainable

         structures at their respective schools.

Analysis of Data Material

    Throughout the entire project, the university team compiled notes, reports,
and other qualitative material. This material provided crucial information about
varying aspects of the work of the project team. In order to filter the multiple
expectations participants had, we performed a qualitative content analysis,5 ac-
cording to Philipp Mayring,6 which will be summarized briefly.

    Qualitative content analysis integrates elements of hermeneutics and, in
general, aims at analyzing text material of every possible origin (Gläser; Flick).
There are three types of qualitative content analysis: summary, explication, and
structuring (Mayring Grundlagen und Techniken). For this study, the summary

116
                                                                                   Negotiating Expectations

technique is most important. The large amount of material is gradually reduced,
and through methods of abstraction, the central content is extracted.

    The qualitative content analysis is a very detailed method of analysis, and
is strictly controlled methodologically (Mayring, Grundlagen und Techniken;
Mayring, Forum). First, the text is put into the context of its communicational
situation. Factors, such as who the author of the text is and the situation in
which the piece has been written, play a crucial role (Mayring, Forum). Then,
the material is segmented into small units and analyzed step-by-step (Flick; May-
ring, Grundlagen und Techniken). The categories for the analysis are developed
directly from the material (inductive categorization), but the whole analysis
process is theoretically controlled. Categories, once developed, are revised con-
stantly during the analytical process (Flick; Mayring, Forum; Grundlagen und
Techniken 86). The following chart illustrates the procedure of a summarizing
qualitative content analysis (Flick 201f ), which was performed in this research:

Table 1: Procedure of a summarizing qualitative content analysis (cf.
Flick)

 1 Choice of material
 2 Analysis of situation of the origin of material
 3 Formal characteristics of material
 4 Direction of analysis
 5 Theoretical differentiation of research question
 6 Definition of techniques for analysis and decision on specific model of analysis
 7 Definition of analysis units
 8 Paraphrasing text parts that contain important content
 9 Definition of aspired level of abstraction, generalization of paraphrases under this level
 0 First reduction: selection. Elimination of paraphrases with the same meaning
 1 Second reduction: grouping. Integration of paraphrases according to aspired level of

        abstraction
 2 Compilation of new statements as a system of categories
 3 Revisal of the summarizing system of categories with regard to original material
 4 Interpretation of results according to research question
 5 Performance of quality criteria concerning content analysis

    In order to make our research both transparent and comprehensible, we will
shortly summarize the individual steps we took when performing Mayring's
qualitative content analysis.

         The project was assessed by Gerd Bräuer, the external evaluator who

                                                                                                 117
Beaumont, Pydde, and Tschirpke

supported us in terms of choosing training methods for students, collaborating
with teachers, and communicating with the Bosch foundation. One particu-
lar piece of advice he gave us was to write field notes in order to capture our
work and to reflect on it on a continual basis. Accordingly, an extensive amount
of protocols accumulated over the three years of the project. Additionally, one
member of our team interviewed teachers who were involved in the project
shortly after it ended.

    In order to answer the main question of this article concerning the expec-
tations of the different participants in the project, we decided to focus on the
following material for the perspective target group:

Table 2: Material chosen for qualitative content analysis

Expectations of university team  Field notes from various team members
Expectations of teachers         Interview transcripts

    Only members of the university team wrote field notes. Each member took
notes individually whenever it seemed necessary or helpful. The following ques-
tions structured these notes:

      · Documentation of events: What happened? What were the results?
      · Analysis of events: Which circumstances led to a positive or negative

         outcome?
      · Evaluation: What surprised you?
      · What are the consequences for your future actions?

    We circulated our notes with each other at regular intervals, which ensured
an exchange of perceptions. As the content of the field notes indicate, this mate-
rial is oftentimes very personal and subjective. We selected parts of every mem-
ber's field notes in order to display the perception of the whole team. Protocols
that only described the ongoing work, but didn't fit the research question, were
not considered for analysis.

         The teacher interviews used in this analysis were part of a master the-
sis that studied teachers' perceptions about the project. Each of the teachers
interviewed played a crucial role within the project. It was expected that their
responses contained personal evaluations of the project, because each of them
answered the questions from memory. The interview questions allowed the
teachers to narrate their perceptions, which some did more extensively than
others. All interviews were recorded and later transcribed. To ensure an equal
presentation of each school and a variety of expectations, we chose one teacher
interview per school.

    When reaching the last step of Mayring's inductive categorization, we start-

118
                                            Negotiating Expectations

ed to compile the statements into a category system. It became evident quickly
that we had to let go of the separation of the university teams' statements and
the teachers' statements. We originally thought that we would look at the two
groups separately and compare the categories of both groups. The material, how-
ever, suggested that we look at the statements of the project team in general,
because not only did expectations differ between the university team and the
teachers, but also within those groups. We found that there was no homogenous
group that opposed the other. Rather, the entire project team (consisting of
teachers and us) was very heterogeneous and expectations diverged between all
participants.

Communication, Engagement and Conditions

    Having analyzed the data material as described above, a category system was
developed that revealed the expectations of the participating parties in the proj-
ect. The following categories with the corresponding subcategories were formed:

Table 3: Results

Category          Subcategory

1. Communication  1.1 Style

2. Engagement     1.2 Content
                  2.1 Responsibility

                  2.2 Pro-activeness

                  2.3 Continuity

3. Conditions     2.4 Cooperativeness
                  3.1 Time

                  3.2 Space

                  3.3 Finance

                  3.4 Structure

                  3.5 Administration/staff

                  3.6 Legal

    It became evident that within the project, the participating parties had differ-
ent expectations concerning engagement, communication, and the conditions
in which the project operated. With this, we mean that participating parties
had different expectations concerning how and in what circumstances to work
together, and how to communicate with each other. These expectations had an

                                            119
Beaumont, Pydde, and Tschirpke

impact on the development of the project and are subsumed accordingly under
the categories Communication, Engagement, and Conditions.

    First, we want to briefly describe the categories, and then elaborate and illus-
trate them by providing examples.

Communication

    This category summarized university tutors' and teachers' expectations to-
wards their style of communication with each other, as well as the content that
was expected to be communicated. We therefore divided this category into the
following subcategories: Style (1.1), with the subdivisions Mutual and Respectful,
and Content (1.2), with the subdivisions Tasks, Needs, and Assumptions.

    As Style, we understood the manner in which communication would take
place. Mutual highlighted the university team's expectations that all communi-
cation would happen in a bilateral understanding. Respectful showed that it was
expected that all participants would communicate in a manner of respect with
each other.

    As Content, we understood the communication about assignments, tasks,
and needs that the project would address and work towards.

    According to the collected material, these expectations were mostly addressed
by the university team in reference to communication with teachers and high
school students. In most cases, members of the university team were surprised
about the manner in which communication happened. Those moments of sur-
prise depicted underlying expectations very well, especially about the two sub-
categories of Mutual and Respectful. There were, for example, occasions where
teachers thought we were high school students and addressed us as such, when
we had already worked regularly at the schools. In these situations, two things
struck us most: on the one hand, according to our field notes, communication
towards students seemed to be rather harsh, impatient and sometimes even dis-
respectful. On the other hand, it was quite disturbing for us to have to explain
our position and authority repeatedly. The atmosphere between teachers and our
team could best be described as distant, stressed, and charged, especially due to
the style of communication.

    The interviews with the teachers also showed that expectations concerning
the content of communication differed a lot. There were incidents when teachers
felt belittled or not taken seriously when it came to being experts in their fields,
especially when it came to student support in the classroom. Our team saw itself
as experienced in peer tutoring, setting up writing centers, and WAC, and thus
aimed to support and enable teachers to effectively support their high school
students both inside and outside the classroom. Meanwhile, teachers expected to
effectively distribute tasks and finish meetings sooner rather than later.

120
                                                                                   Negotiating Expectations

Engagement

    This category entailed modes of engagement that were anticipated by the
participants of the project and was divided into: Responsibility (2.1), Pro-active-
ness (2.2), Continuity (2.3), and Cooperativeness (2.4).

    The subcategory Responsibility indicated that it was expected that all par-
ticipants would feel responsible for the project. The subcategory Pro-activeness
highlighted expectations about taking active roles in the project. The subcatego-
ry Continuity subsumed project members' expectations towards the continuity
of tasks and the constant engagement with these. It also related to the stability
of the project and continuous efforts to establish peer tutoring and a writing
center. Cooperative engagement described what level of cooperation participants
expected from each other.

    The different expectations about engagement can best be displayed with our
attempt to set up a steering group. This task turned out to be extremely frustrat-
ing for all participants. Our team felt alone with this task, and repeatedly got
the impression that the teachers' commitment to engage in the project was very
poor. Teachers felt continually pressured by us to engage more, and therefore
emphasized multiple times how limited their time and resources were, and how
difficult it is to change certain aspects in the school structure. Engagement was
clearly but very differently defined by all members of the project, and those dif-
ferent assumptions constantly led to misunderstandings, frustrations, and poor
results in the ongoing project work.

Conditions

    This category related to the fact that all participants, especially our team, had
several expectations about the conditions they would be working in and with.
This category showed how everyone's expectations relied on outside factors. The
classification was developed with the following subcategories: Time (3.1), Space
(3.2), Finance (3.3), Structure (3.4), Administration/Staff (3.5) and Legal (3.6).

    The subcategory Time comprised participants' expectations towards handling
the limitation of time. From the beginning of the project, all participants were
under time constraints. Teachers had little spare time due to limited capacities
and full curricula, and our team was continuously at capacity due to unforeseen
obstacles that challenged us in ways we did not anticipate.

    One of these unforeseen obstacles for our team was how difficult the
team-building process and the establishment of basic rules of social behavior
amongst the high school students was. We expected the high school students to
be at a much higher level concerning communication and team-working skills.
The time we originally planned for tutoring the students had to be doubled and
still was not enough.

                                                                                                 121
Beaumont, Pydde, and Tschirpke

    The classification Space consisted of our expectations towards the existence of
space that we could use for tutoring peers and establishing a writing center. Most
schools had very limited space resources, which we did not anticipate. When it
came to the challenge of space, it became obvious that the categories of commu-
nication and engagement were interlinked. During the process of finding proper
space for tutoring and setting up a writing center, communication turned out
to be very difficult between teachers and our team. Teachers often felt pressured
to deliver a space for the project that in their opinion, was not available. Our
team continuously felt urged to emphasize the importance of space for the high
school students, because no space became available. Also, the expectations about
the engagement to eventually secure this space were very different. Teachers ex-
pected our team to be understanding and patient. We, however, expected teach-
ers to be more proactive and creative in making space for the writing center.

    The subcategory Finance dealt with expectations towards the project's finan-
cial situation, entailing mostly our assumptions about financial compensation
and financial stability for our work. The expectations were that we would not
have to worry about getting paid. Also, the time invested in the project did not
represent the salary our team received. Because we needed more time to support
the students than we anticipated, we expected our salary to increase proportion-
ally. This, however, did not take place, because funding did not increase. Our
financial situation became difficult for the entirety of the project, and repeatedly
caused frustration and disappointment.

    The subcategory Structure comprised expectations towards the structural
integration of the project into the school syllabus, and also towards the inner
structural conditions of the project itself. After having conducted the first train-
ing of high school student peer tutors, and after confronting and dealing with
obstacles at the prospective schools, we soon realized that it was necessary for
the project to become an integrated component of the school syllabus. At this
point, it became very clear that in order to establish peer tutoring in writing, we
needed teachers to collaborate. We suggested specific writing assignments that
allowed students to work in a process-oriented fashion, and consult with their
peer tutors to benefit from the assignments in multiple ways. In doing that, we
faced a lot of resistance directly when teachers explained why they could not do
what we suggested and justified it with their experience, and indirectly when
teachers simply did not give the assignments. It became obvious that we tried to
introduce peer tutoring in writing, and at the same time, we tried to establish
WAC at the schools. We soon found out that introducing WAC to the schools
was an expectation that only university tutors shared. In contrast, the participat-
ing schools expected our project to be rather integrated in the structure of our
university writing center, and regarded the initiatives as external impulses with

122
                                                                                   Negotiating Expectations

no need of integration into school structures.
    Finally, the subcategory Administration/Staff consisted of expectations to-

wards the availability of teachers and staff at the school, and our team at the
university. The sub-group Legal encompassed our team's expectations towards
legal issues with the project.

Discussion: Service-Oriented vs. Collaborative-Oriented Approach

    Looking at the categories that derived from the text analysis, it became ev-
ident that diverse expectations among teachers and our team concerning en-
gagement, communication, and various external conditions existed. In fact, we
found that expectations concerning the way of how project parties engaged in
setting up a student-run writing center, as well as the way parties expected to
communicate with each other, can be arranged on a continuum between what
we call a service-oriented approach and a collaborative-oriented approach to-
wards the project. These two terms describe very well what kind of expectations
project participants had, especially about how to engage in the development of
the project, and about how to communicate with other project participants.
Before discussing how far the occurrence of both approaches has influenced the
development of the project and, indeed, caused several problems, we will look at
each approach separately to better understand the underlying concepts.

    As a service-oriented approach, we understand the expectation of giving or
receiving a service. Within the mindset of a service-oriented approach, an indi-
vidual expects to be on the receiving end of a cooperation. Also, there can be a
service-oriented producer who is willing to deliver a service to other cooperat-
ing participants. Thus, a service-oriented perspective goes hand-in-hand with a
certain expectation on how different parties engage in a project, as well as the
way parties communicate with each other. From a service-oriented perspective,
engagement is merely thought of as delivering or receiving a service, and com-
munication is thought of as a tool for giving or receiving information. There is
no need for in depth exchange, because it is not the goal to create something
from the basis of shared knowledge. Rather, it is the goal that each party gives
whatever it is they have to offer, and thus a goal can be reached effectively and
time efficiently.

    In contrast to a service-oriented approach, a collaborative-oriented approach
entails that a project is steered, developed and pushed forward collaboratively.
This means that all participants expect to be in continuous exchange with each
other and share responsibilities for the success of the project. From a collabora-
tive-oriented perspective, engagement is seen as an active and responsible partic-
ipation, and communication is expected to be an exchange and a discussion of

                                                                                                 123
Beaumont, Pydde, and Tschirpke

ideas from which a consensus is reached. This approach seems to be much more
time consuming, because an in depth exchange of knowledge and ideas is essen-
tial. Parties who take this approach do not merely want to reach goals in a co-
operative manner, but learn from one another and thus, create more knowledge.

    The data revealed that among teachers and our team, both approaches and
a corresponding set of expectations was found. However, the texts of the anal-
ysis suggested the tendency that teachers from the cooperating high schools
were more service-oriented, and our team was more collaborative-oriented. On
the one hand, this might be explained with writing centers' philosophy that is
strongly focused on collaboration and jointly created knowledge. On the other
hand, the participating high schools never really owned the idea of setting up
a writing center, establishing peer tutoring in writing, and introducing WAC
into the school syllabus. Accordingly, there was no room for the participating
teachers to interact collaboratively with a project team that would consist of
teachers, university tutors, high school students and parents, especially within
their normal workload.

         The material showed that expectations on both sides ranged from as-
sumptions that all participants take shared responsibility and actively push the
project forward, to expecting that the project is a service to the institutions,
meaning that some participants expected to have everything handed to them
instead of having to work together. The same was noticed when it came to terms
of communication. Here, expectations ranged from having a mutual exchange
of information, to dictating information without any kind of negotiation.

    It is obvious that this mixture of partly conflicting expectations led to frus-
trations and caused several problems and misunderstandings due to lack of com-
munication and transparency. The following example highlights such a situa-
tion: Teachers asked our team to give a workshop for ninth graders who were
supposed to submit a short research paper, and the papers had to be submitted
on the same day the workshop was held. Due to lack of time from the teachers'
side, no collaborative efforts were made concerning the content and structure
of the workshop. Hence, all responsibilities (preparation, conduction and re-
flection of the workshop) stayed with our team and the high school peer tutors.

    This example shows that the school outsourced the completion of a task to us
without being able to discuss and think through possible workshop designs. In
this situation, we took the positions of substitute teachers, which was not a job
we had agreed upon or were familiar with. The service expected by the teachers
did not match the philosophy of the project. Where our team wanted to focus
on process-oriented writing, the teachers expected a "do-it" service within a very
short amount of time. As this example shows that teachers tended to take the
service-oriented approach, we can use the same example to show that the uni-

124
                                                                                   Negotiating Expectations

versity team took this approach as well. Instead of communicating to the teacher
that this kind of task is against peer tutoring philosophies, we took it on and
fulfilled it as best as possible. This occurred many times when teachers asked
for workshops. Not once did our team insist on teacher participation when de-
signing workshops. Instead, we hoped that when we delivered the service, the
teachers would recognize value and finally engage in the project in general.

    Ambivalent expectations also became visible in the following example: A
participating school in the project had stated their interest in establishing peer
tutoring in writing, because they saw a need in supporting students with their
"Facharbeit," which is a short research paper. However, at the same time, the
school emphasized that teachers already offer enough guidance within their
classes to support students.

    In another case, our team had very clear expectations about what was needed
in order to establish a student-run writing center, and they expressed and de-
manded these needs to teachers and deans. Here, we tried to establish a steering
group that was supposed to serve the purpose of collaboratively developing and
nurturing the project. Yet, such a team never formed, because school administra-
tions and teachers did not see the need for it. Instead of sitting together and dis-
cussing possible actions that would be in the interest of all parties, participants
were frustrated because their expectations were not met.

    Expectations, in fact, often cannot easily be met, because only rarely are
they stated explicitly or made transparent. Even more so, expectations influence
our actions unconsciously. In order to make expectations visible, we have to ac-
tively monitor and reflect our actions. Field notes, protocols, reports, and team
meetings are excellent means to reveal underlying dynamics, and can uncover
misunderstandings to help minimize frustrations. We also argue that the tasks of
monitoring, reflecting, and adjusting actions as well as expectations throughout
the course of a project are part of overall project management. Unfortunately, we
had no one to fill this position. Instead, the project was poorly staffed, and only
a few people had to manage everything.

         Apart from that, time was a crucial factor that was missing, because
participants rarely sat together and openly spoke about their expectations con-
cerning the project itself. Even though the project team tried to communicate
expectations along the way, that very crucial moment of setting the agenda for
the project together with school board, teachers and students at the very begin-
ning of the project was not given enough time. This can be explained by the
four-month delay with which our team started the project.7 Because time played
a major role from the beginning of the project we constantly worked under a lot
of pressure and under the impression that things needed to develop very quick-
ly. This was true for all participants, including the high school students. It was

                                                                                                 125
Beaumont, Pydde, and Tschirpke

most likely because of these circumstances that all participants started working
on practical aspects of the project before aligning a theoretical framework and
plan together. Conditions, such as allowing our team to form and learn how to
express and negotiate individual expectations in a constructive manner, simply
had to be omitted. Thus, the importance of negotiating expectations at the very
beginning of the project was clearly underestimated, which we again ascribe to
the lack of proper project management.

         The qualitative content analysis clearly confirmed our hypothesis that
expectations needed to be made visible through transparent communication and
sound project management. The analyzed material showed that most of the chal-
lenges that occurred throughout the project can be traced to diverging expecta-
tions amongst the overall project team. Had these expectations been identified,
made transparent, acknowledged and properly negotiated, frustration amongst
participants would have decreased profoundly, and the project might have been
able to achieve its goals.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE PROJECTS

    When we started the project, not much had been published on high school
and writing center collaboration in Germany, because only few projects existed.
However, considering the current development of writing center work and WAC
initiatives, we are optimistic that more projects will be initiated and shared. This
will undoubtedly increase our learning opportunities, as we will have more pos-
sibilities to gain insight into other projects, learn about best practice examples,
and share our experiences.

    The following recommendations derive from the experiences we made and
might help to negotiate expectations in future projects:

      · Make sure all potential participants want to be involved. Often, the
         school administration is excited about a project, but are the teachers
         on board?

      · Make sure all participants understand the concept of the project and
         are willing to a) accept and fully support it, or b) negotiate and appro-
         priate it to the different schools.

      · Establish rules of communication. This sounds much like teaching
         school children to respect each other, but when different education-
         al worlds meet, it is absolutely essential that everyone knows what
         (content), when (in what time span), and how (in what manner) to
         communicate.

      · Take time to sit down and ask teachers, high school students, and the

126
                                                                                   Negotiating Expectations

         school administration what their goals and expectations are for the du-
         ration of the project, as well as after the project concludes. This seems
         like an "of-course" fact, but the key is to make time for meetings
         before you start the project, and to keep these meetings happening
         during the course of the project.
      · Clearly define and negotiate on a regular basis participants' roles in the
         project (especially if new members are anticipated).
      · Document, share, and sign all agreements with all participants to
         ensure everyone knows and commits to the established rules, etc.
      · Establish a steering group that is willing to support your endeavor
         before any practical steps are taken.
      · Decide on tools for documenting and reflecting upon what is hap-
         pening throughout the project, e.g., through the use of field notes,
         minutes, and reflections. The purpose of documenting should be made
         clear to all participants so that everybody understands the importance
         of those notes. Furthermore, consider how these documents are eval-
         uated throughout the project--they can be very valuable when they
         are discussed within the project team and decisions are made based on
         them.

    We are aware that the recommendations we give from reflecting on our proj-
ect are not universally applicable, because every team and every project is differ-
ent. However, some aspects, especially concerning communication and engage-
ment, are issues that should be addressed whenever trying to establish WAC or
a writing center at an external institution.

NOTES

1. At this point it is worth mentioning that schools in general show no collabora-
tive approach to learning when it comes to writing, because there is no exchange
of ideas, feedback, etc. between students. Students receive feedback from teachers,
which is only given with the final grade.

2. "The Robert Bosch Stiftung is one of the major German foundations associated
with a private company and has managed the philanthropic bequest of company
founder Robert Bosch for more than forty years. Indeed, it was his entrepreneurial
vision, political farsightedness, moral fortitude and charitable initiatives that set
the standards for the work of the Robert Bosch Stiftung." (Robert Bosch Stiftung)

3. A more detailed description of the three-day training and the entire project can
be found in: "Paving the Way for Writing Across the Curriculum: Establishing
Writing Centers and Peer Tutoring at High Schools in Germany" (http://wac.

                                                                                                 127
Beaumont, Pydde, and Tschirpke

colostate.edu/atd/second_educ/herkneretal.cfm).

4. As Girgensohn explains insufficient writing competence can often be a reason
for failing or even beginning a tertiary education (2).

5. The qualitative content analysis originally emerged from communication
studies. It was first developed in the US in the twentieth century as a quantitative
research method (Gläser; Mayring). In Germany the Mayring model, developed
in the 1980s, is most central when qualitative content analysis is performed (Flick;
Gläser).

6. Mayring is a German psychologist, sociologist, and pedagogue, as well as found-
ing member of the qualitative content analysis.

7. The proposal for the project funding suggested a start of the project in the
month of June, but funding was only granted in September.

WORKS CITED

Becker-Mrotzek, Michael, and Ingrid Böttcher, eds. Schreibkompetenz entwick-
   eln und beurteilen. Berlin: Cornelsen, 2006. Print

Blumner, Jacob, and Pamela Childers. "Building Better Bridges: What Makes
   High School-College WAC Collaborations Work?" The WAC Journal 22
   (2011): 91-101.Web.

Bräuer, Gerd. "Plädoyer für einen anderen Umgang mit Texten." Schreibend(d)
   lernen. Ideen und Projekte für die Schule. Ed. Gerd Bräuer. Hamburg: Körber,
   2004. 20-26. Print.

Flick, Uwe. Handbuch qualitative Sozialforschung. Grundlagen, Konzepte,Meth-
   oden und Anwendungen. Weinheim: Beltz Psychologie-Verlag-Union, 1995.
   Print.

Gläser, Jochen, and Grit Laudel. Experteninterviews und qualitative Inhaltsanal-
   yse als Instrument rekonstruierender Untersuchungen Wiesbaden: Verlag für So-
   zialwissenschaften, 2009. Print.

Harris, Muriel. "Talking in the Middle: Why Writers Need Writing Tutors."
   College English 57.1. (1995): 27-42. Web.

Herkner, L., Mandy Pydde, and Simone Tschirpke. "Paving the Way for Writing
   Across the Curriculum (WAC): Establishing Writing Centers and Peer Tu-
   toring at High Schools in Germany." Across the Disciplines 9.3. (2012). Web.
   28 November 2013. <http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/second_educ/herkneretal.
   cfm>.

Mayring, Phillipp. Qualitative Inhaltsanalyse: Grundlagen und Techniken. Wein-
   heim: Deutscher Studien Verlag. 1993. Print.

---. "Qualitative Inhaltsanalyse." Forum: Qualitative Sozialforschung 1.2 (2000).

128
                                                                                   Negotiating Expectations

   Web. 10 August 2013. <http://www.qualitative-research.net>.
Merz-Grötsch, Jasmin. Die Wirklichkeit aus Schülersicht. Eine empirische Analyse.

   Freiburg: Fillibach, 2001. Print.
Micheel, Christine, and Meike Vogel. "Schreiblabor Bielefeld: Workshops zum

   wissenschaftlichen Schreiben für Schülerinnen und Schüler." Schreibend(d)
   lernen. Ideen und Projekte für die Schule Ed. Gerd Bräuer. Hamburg: Körber,
   2004. 191-207. Print.
Rapp, Rune. "Die Ausbildung von Pädagogikstudenten zu Schreibberatern."
   Schreibend(d) lernen. Ideen und Projekte für die Schule. Ed. Gerd Bräuer.
   Hamburg: Körber, 2004. 171-81. Print.
Robert Bosch Stiftung. Robert Bosch Stiftung: Fifty Years Shaping the Future. n.
   pag. 2013. Web. 23 June 2013.
Schiller, Erdmuthe. "Online-Bertatung am Schreibzentrum der PH Freiburg."
   Schreibend(d) lernen. Ideen und Projekte für die Schule. Ed. Gerd Bräuer Ham-
   burg: Körber, 2004. 182-90. Print.

                                                                                                 129
CHAPTER 8

"SO MUCH MORE THAN JUST
AN `A'": A TRANSFORMATIVE
HIGH SCHOOL AND UNIVERSITY
WRITING CENTER PARTNERSHIP

      Marie Hansen, Debra Hartley, Kirsten Jamsen, Katie Levin,
      and Kristen Nichols-Besel

    In late 2011, Burnsville High School (BHS) teacher Marie Hansen con-
tacted Kirsten Jamsen, director of the Center for Writing at the University of
Minnesota (UMN), with what she thought was a kind of wild request--"Can
I bring my high school writing coaches to campus to visit your writing center?"
In true Minnesota fashion, Kirsten and the Center's assistant directors Debra
Hartley and Katie Levin, along with graduate writing consultant (and former
K-12 teacher with an interest in high school writing centers as sites of teacher
development) Kristen Nichols-Besel responded, "Ya, you betcha!"--welcom-
ing the opportunity to embark on an experimental and collaborative journey
together. The story of this developing partnership between a well-established,
multi-location university writing center with a strong focus on writing across the
curriculum (WAC) and a small high school writing center located in an English
teacher's classroom reveals how curiosity, risk-taking, and grassroots enthusiasm
can start and sustain a partnership despite minimal resources.

    At the beginning, not one of us had any idea our partnership would go so far,
but now, more than two years later, we have created a mutually beneficial pro-
gram of cross-institutional professional development for both high school stu-
dent writing coaches and university student writing consultants. Although the
success of our partnership is due in large part to our willingness to communicate
with each other, jump into action, make mistakes, and be flexible, this is more
than a story of individuals. The BHS-UMN partnership grew out of--and con-
tinues to enrich--a strong, professional community of educators committed to
teaching writing, most notably our mini-regional organization of writing center
professionals and the local network of National Writing Project teacher-leaders.
In this way our partnership seeks to be what Henry Luce describes as an ideal
writing center collaboration: "an on-going and growing community of writers,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2015.0735.2.08  131
Hansen et al.

mutually supportive, mutually instructive" (130).
    With our deep and broad engagement in a wide variety of cross-institutional

communities of practice, all participants in the partnership saw the collabora-
tive, experimental, inquiry-based values at its core to be a natural part of their
writing center work. From the start, we five co-leaders have been energized and
sustained by two convictions: (1) student coaches and consultants are capable
of--and can learn from each other about--engaging their peers in meaning-
ful conversations about writing across the curriculum, and (2) observing and
experiencing the work of another writing center helps us to reflect upon and
improve our own practice. We hope this story of our partnership will inspire
others to seek out their local networks and take the courageous steps of reaching
out across institutional boundaries to find out what others are doing, to ask for
help, to share resources, to develop cross-institutional staff education models,
or to simply converse as we would in a supportive writing center consultation.

TWO STORYLINES CONVERGE TO FORM A PARTNERSHIP

    The initial 2011 connection that kicked off our partnership involved the
convergence of two storylines: Marie's individual quest to create the Burnsville
High School (BHS) Writing Center in 2008 and Kirsten and Katie's efforts to
support the development of high school writing centers in Minnesota, which
solidified when they participated in a workshop on high school-university WAC
partnerships at a 2010 conference. These stories came together in 2011 during
the Minnesota Writing Project Invitational Summer Institute.

    In 2008, fresh out of college, Marie began her education career teaching En-
glish at BHS, a large public high school in a suburb of Minneapolis. From the
beginning she faced frustration. No matter how many times she talked about
thesis statements or academic voice in front of the classroom, her students just
didn't "get it." Their essays fell short of her expectations, and she could not figure
out why she wasn't reaching them. Drawing on her college experience as a writing
tutor at Bethel University in St. Paul, Minnesota for two-and-a-half years, she
began encouraging her students to come in for after-school conferences before
major essays were due.1 Something wonderful happened when she had one-to-
one conversations with her students. Even though she used the exact same words
to explain thesis statements, for example, these individual conferences produced
the "lightbulb" moments she had been missing in class. She began to see a real
change in her students' writing. Despite her sense of success, Marie knew that
after-school teacher conferences would not be feasible with 150 students; she
couldn't possibly meet with all of them. What if her students could receive writ-
ing support similar to what she and her colleagues had given at Bethel?

132
                                                                          "So Much More Than Just an `A'"

    Marie began researching high school writing centers and found only one
in Minnesota: the Minnetonka High School Writing Center (http://www.min-
netonka.k12.mn.us/writingcenter), which at that time involved tutoring done
by two professional teachers and several parent volunteers.2 As a first-year teach-
er, Marie knew she could not ask her administration to pay for something so
expensive. But what if she set up a center staffed with peer tutors? As a young
teacher, Marie vividly remembered the struggle high school seniors often face
as they try to demonstrate community service and extracurricular activities on
their college applications. Could she use this need to attract volunteer tutors?
She connected with several colleagues who directed the National Honor Society
and Youth Service programs at BHS, and they agreed to accept tutoring hours
for credit. Motivated by a desire to improve student writing and relying on the
competitive nature of college-bound seniors, an idea was born. As Childers, Fels,
and Jordan remind us, "All one really needs to start a writing center is an idea of
what that writing center will be" (7).

    In retrospect, the rest of the process of setting up the BHS Writing Center
was simple and refreshingly free of red tape. It involved first talking to depart-
mental colleagues, and then running the idea past the principal in a thirty-sec-
ond hallway conversation. The principal asked for a brief proposal (¾ page) and
meeting (fifteen minutes), after which Marie was officially the proud director of
the new BHS Writing Center, opening in fall of 2009.3 Reflecting back, Marie
recognizes that if she had gone into a formal meeting asking for a stipend, mon-
ey for paying tutors, a paid period to work at the center during the school day,
or a fancy space decked out with extra computers and other resources, she would
have been turned down. Rather, she took the approach of minimal commitment
and maximum student benefit, agreeing that the center would not cost BHS
any money, at least not for the first year. After that, she thought, she would be
in a better position to ask for resources. Marie also wisely tapped into BHS's
strong focus on college readiness for all students, language she heard in every
staff meeting and school communication. She had easily sold her administration
on the idea of a student-staffed writing center that benefited both high achieving
student leaders and struggling students. With invaluable advice about logistics
from her friend and former supervisor April Schmidt, director of the Writing
Center at Bethel University, Marie recruited tutors for the following school year
from the strong writers in her eleventh-grade English classes, put up posters,
developed sign-in and record-keeping systems, and organized tutor training.

    Even though starting the BHS Writing Center in fall 2009 was easier than
she imagined, keeping it stable and helping it to thrive was trickier. By 2011,
building and sustaining the BHS Writing Center felt practically impossible to
Marie. Drawing on what she remembered from college, Marie and her writing

                                                                                                 133
Hansen et al.

coaches advertised in English classes; begged teachers to send in their students,
even if it took bribing them with extra credit; offered to tutor before school, after
school, and during tutors' study halls; and simplified every aspect of signing up
for a writing consultation. After two years, however, the BHS Writing Center
was helping fewer than one hundred students per semester (in a large suburban
high school with more than two thousand students), and those clients were al-
most always coming from Marie's classes. With this writing center functioning
more as an extension of Marie's classroom rather than a school-wide opportu-
nity, the coaches were becoming discouraged. Their sessions rarely lasted longer
than fifteen minutes, and they began skipping their volunteer shifts.

    Enter the Minnesota Writing Project (MWP), the local site of the National
Writing Project, housed in the UMN Center for Writing.4 At UMN, the Center
for Writing is a locus of what Robert W. Barnett and Lois M. Rosen call a "cam-
pus-wide writing environment" (1): this comprehensive center offers one-to-one
writing consultations for students, writing-across-the-curriculum workshops
and consultations for instructors, support for research into the ways in which
writing can foster learning in and across the disciplines, and a writing-enriched
curriculum program that guides academic departments through a process of
infusing writing and writing instruction into their undergraduate curricula.5

    With three years of teaching under her belt, in 2011 Marie was ready for
new ideas to improve her teaching and build a professional network beyond
her school. Four of Marie's BHS colleagues were teacher consultants through
the MWP, and MWP director Muriel Thompson had taught at BHS for many
years before retiring and working at UMN. Because of their encouragement and
support, Marie participated in the MWP Invitational Summer Institute in June
and July of 2011. Here she met teachers from across grade levels and disciplines,
and was first introduced to Kirsten and Debra, who help lead the MWP Sum-
mer Institute each year. Marie remembers that she had to build up her courage
to ask for writing tutor training support from Kirsten and really didn't expect
her to say yes.6

    For Kirsten, saying yes was easy. Even before she and Debra had spent the
summer with Marie writing, reading, and participating in teaching demonstra-
tions together during the MWP Summer Institute, Kirsten and many of her
colleagues in the Center for Writing had been learning more about high school
writing centers, talking with Maggie Shea as she established the Minnetonka
High School Writing Center, and thinking about how to support the growth of
writing centers in primary and secondary schools in Minnesota. Those thoughts
began to take actionable form when Kirsten and Katie participated in Pamela
Childers and Jacob Blumner's workshop on High School-University WAC Part-
nerships at the 2010 International Writing Across the Curriculum conference in

134
                                                                          "So Much More Than Just an `A'"

Bloomington, Indiana.
    When they were asked to reflect on partnerships in the workshop, Katie and

Kirsten recognized how much they had gained from their active participation
in professional organizations like the Midwest Writing Centers Association, the
International Writing Centers Association, the Conference on College Compo-
sition and Communication, and the National Council of Teachers of English.
Indeed, at Indiana University that week, they had just participated in a meeting
of Big Ten writing center directors and would return home for the next meet-
ing of the Writing Center Professionals of Minnesota (WCPM), an informal
mini-regional group of writing and learning center administrators from a wide
variety of institutions of higher education across Minnesota. Although WCPM
had already proven to be a resource for high school writing centers (with Maggie
Shea from Minnetonka High School now attending meetings and, unknown to
Katie and Kirsten, WCPM-er April Schmidt supporting Marie's development of
the BHS Writing Center), the size of the group (over 100 members) would limit
the opportunity for secondary school teachers' voices to be heard. To facilitate a
focus on writing centers in secondary and primary schools, the idea for the E12
(Early education through twelfth grade) Writing Centers Collective was born:
an informal, grassroots network for anyone leading, starting, or just dreaming
about a writing center in a preschool, elementary, or secondary school context.7
Like WCPM, from which it was an offshoot, the E12 Collective would share
the motto "Anyone who comes belongs," encourage information sharing and
support among members, and meet regularly at different writing centers. In
September 2010, Maggie Shea hosted the first meeting at the Minnetonka High
School Writing Center, and since that time this group has met eight times, at
six different secondary school writing centers and twice at UMN. Many of the
teachers in the E12 Collective are also active MWP teacher consultants, who
have helped expand and strengthen the network by inviting colleagues into the
group and serving as resources for one another.

    Marie's 2011 request for help brought these two separate storylines together
and began the process of shaping a collaboration based on shared values, mutual
respect, and the desire to create a partnership of benefit to both writing centers.
On the surface, the partnership between UMN and BHS may seem improbable.
Located at the state's flagship university, the UMN Center for Writing is visible
and long-established, drawing on a history of writing tutoring since the early
1970s, of formal programs for writing across the curriculum since 1987, and of
National Writing Project site leadership since 1990. Its Student Writing Support
(SWS) program has multiple locations, both physical and online; offers com-
puters for student use; provides hundreds of resources and texts; conducts over
10,000 writing consultations each year; and hires undergraduate and graduate

                                                                                                 135
Hansen et al.

students and professionals to work as writing consultants (currently maintaining
a staff of forty consultants). At BHS, the writing center is in a corner of Marie's
classroom, sign-ups are written on a calendar on the hallway wall outside, stu-
dent attendance can be inconsistent, and the coaches are high school students.
The BHS Writing Center finally secured a computer after four years of existence,
but still lacks an internet connection. Despite our vastly different centers, how-
ever, we share many of the same beliefs about what writers need and how best to
tutor writers, and these shared values allow our partnership to thrive.

A CROSS-INSTITUTIONAL MODEL OF CONSULTANT PRO-
FESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT IS BORN

    Shortly after Marie posed her question to Kirsten, we arranged a face-to-face
meeting at the UMN Center for Writing to talk about possibilities. Although
Marie was meeting Katie and graduate writing consultant Kristen Nichols-Besel
(who had been interested in high school writing centers since she first learned
about them at the 2008 International Writing Centers Association conference)
for the first time, introductions and small talk quickly became action. Kristen
volunteered to lead Marie and her BHS coaches on a tour of SWS's two physical
locations and demonstrate SWS.online, and together we came up with the idea
of having the BHS coaches experience college writing consultations with SWS
consultants after SWS closed for the day. This "field trip to the U" would both
introduce the BHS coaches to an established university writing center that em-
ploys consultants and serves writers from across the disciplines, and give them
the experience of sharing their own writing with a writing consultant--some-
thing none of them had done before.8

    The plan became a reality in March 2012, when Marie secured funding from
her principal for a bus and brought fifteen coaches to campus for a five-hour
visit, which also included lunch at the student union with former BHS coaches
who were now UMN students, and a chance to tour campus before meeting
with Kristen. As the BHS coaches watched college students meeting face-to-face
with SWS consultants in two locations and saw a brief presentation about SWS.
online consultations, Kristen and Marie encouraged these high school seniors
to use and consider applying for work at the writing centers of the colleges they
would attend the following year. Then, the doors of SWS were closed to UMN
students, and the cross-institutional activity began.

    We formed groups of three--one SWS consultant and two BHS writing
coaches--for two rounds of thirty-minute consultations. The BHS students
brought their own writing, including personal essays for college applications
that had already been submitted, and essays for their challenging College in the

136
                                                                          "So Much More Than Just an `A'"

Schools writing and economics courses. While each SWS consultant worked
with a BHS coach on her/his writing, the other coach observed and took notes,
using a set of guiding questions (see Appendix 1). Then, the consultee and ob-
server switched roles and rotated to work with a different SWS consultant for
a second round of thirty-minute consultations and observations. Finally, we all
met in a forty-minute, large-group debriefing discussion, sharing what coaches
experienced as consultees and recorded while observing, and using the debriefing
questions to focus our discussion. The BHS coaches were eager to talk during
the debrief, noting that they were surprised by how much the SWS consultants
negotiated agenda-setting with them and put them in the role of expert on the
content of their writing. Many of the BHS coaches were enthusiastic about the
experience of interacting with the SWS consultants, who were interested in and
respectful of their ideas, as well as encouraging about ways the writers could
improve and revise their papers. As Kevin (a pseudonym) noted, this interaction
with a consultant made him realize how talking about how to improve a paper
and grow as a writer was about "so much more than just an `A.'" Similarly,
the SWS consultants shared how much they enjoyed working with writers who
brought strong, polished drafts and were motivated to be there and learn more
about expectations for college-level writing.

    Upon returning to BHS, Marie noticed a powerful change in how her coach-
es worked with writers. Before, their sessions were very short, averaging just
fifteen minutes. Indeed, in her initial training, she had put so much empha-
sis on prioritizing global over local concerns (in other words, tackling thesis
and organization before grammar and word choice) that her coaches seemed
to think that the only way they could cover all those issues in a session was to
rush through their suggestions quickly. After working with SWS consultants,
her coaches began conducting thirty-minute consultations using the specific
strategies employed by the SWS consultants, such as reading an essay slowly out
loud or mirroring back what they heard in the student's draft ("What I hear you
saying is ... Is that correct?"). Instead of telling student writers what to do to get
a better grade, they began asking questions that could encourage writers to take
ownership over their papers and draw out their own ideas for revision: "What
is the purpose of this paragraph?" "How do you think this idea fits in with your
thesis?" and "How did you realize this claim was true when you were reading
the book?" From working with the SWS consultants, the BHS coaches realized
that their role was not to tell the students what was wrong with their essays and
send them out the door; rather, they could ask students about their own goals
and purposes, encourage them to help guide the session, and use questions and
conversation to facilitate the student writers' own thinking and writing. As they
developed these skills, the BHS coaches realized that they did not need to have

                                                                                                 137
Hansen et al.

taken a class to help a student writing for that class; instead, they could, like
SWS consultants, rely on the student writers for content expertise, no matter
what the discipline.

    With such marked improvement in the work of her coaches (all of whom
graduated in June 2012), Marie was eager to bring her next cohort of coaches to
UMN sooner, when they were first learning how to consult. In October 2012,
Marie brought nineteen new BHS coaches, and we followed the same field trip
schedule and three-person consultation and debrief protocol.9 These new coach-
es were very engaged in their consultations, but during the debriefing were more
reluctant to share their impressions of what happened; in retrospect, this reluc-
tance was not surprising, because most had not yet seen any student clients in
their center and were therefore at a loss when we asked them to draw compari-
sons between the two centers. Nonetheless, Marie noticed again that her coaches
began to mimic the strategies they observed as they began consulting in their
center. Because the BHS coaches were so engaged in their SWS consultations,
they returned to BHS with high expectations for engagement in consultations
with their fellow BHS students. We learned later that they were disappointed
when BHS student writers requested quick corrections rather than engaging in
more substantive conversations about their work and their process.

    To give SWS consultants a chance to hear about what the coaches had been
doing since their visit and to challenge the hierarchy we had created of high school
coaches learning how to tutor from university consultants, a small number of
the SWS consultants who participated in the October collaboration visited the
BHS Writing Center in May 2013. We hoped this role reversal would help the
BHS coaches gain confidence in their ability to help experienced writers with
unfamiliar assignments and begin to see themselves as part of and contributing
to a larger writing center community. During the first part of the visit, the BHS
coaches explained how their sessions had worked during the year and described
sessions that they enjoyed or struggled with--noting that they enjoyed sessions
where the writer had ideas to discuss, but they disliked the sessions in which it
was difficult to get the writer to talk. The BHS coaches (all seniors) also admitted
that they were often most comfortable working with papers from classes they
had taken and assignments they were familiar with, leading to a discussion about
working with students writing in different subject areas, expertise, authority,
and the triangulated relationship between tutors, teachers, and students. When
the seven SWS consultants shared their writing with the Burnsville coaches, we
connected each university writer with at least two BHS coaches. Many of the
coaches seemed uncomfortable giving feedback on the university consultants'
writing, although they were very eager to find out more about the expectations
of college-level writing and talk about their own college plans--not surprising

138
                                                                          "So Much More Than Just an `A'"

for graduating seniors. After the visit, some shared with Marie that they felt a
significant barrier between themselves and "expert" university-level consultants,
something the next phase of our partnership will try to address more explicitly.

    Despite the complexities of coordinating field trips between our centers,
we all agree that this partnership has been a positive and affirming experience.
Both writing centers believe in the value of peer tutoring, a minimum of hi-
erarchy, and respect for all writers. Although many high schools use college
students, pre-service teachers, parent volunteers, or their own school staff as
writing consultants, Marie has always believed in her students' capabilities to
ask thoughtful, probing questions and engage in intelligent conversations with
their peers. UMN's writing consultants affirmed her faith in the competency
of the BHS coaches. During these practice consultations and discussions, the
SWS consultants and high school coaches developed camaraderie and a mutual
respect. Their interactions also demonstrated the power of conversation between
a careful questioner/listener and a writer in an unfamiliar course or discipline.
With guidance from experienced consultants at UMN, BHS coaches are gaining
confidence and developing their tutoring repertoire.

    Similarly, the directors of both centers appreciate the benefits of flexibility.
Rather than becoming stonewalled by bureaucracy and red tape, we all believe in
finding a way to work around restrictions. When confronted with low funding,
for example, we are all willing to find creative solutions. Marie has been leading
her writing center as extra service without a stipend, her student coaches work
without pay, and her principal funds her bus for field trips to UMN out of a
special account. UMN consultants participate in these collaborations as part of
their paid professional development time. UMN consultants pay for their own
travel to Burnsville when we meet there. Maintaining this flexible and generous
attitude, rather than assuming that things must work a certain way, has allowed
us to accomplish much more together.10

    In addition to providing valuable professional development for coaches and
consultants in both centers, this partnership has had a positive effect on the
growth of E12 writing centers in our area. One of the most powerful moments
in the partnership was when in May 2012, a few months after our first collab-
oration, Marie and her coaches hosted a meeting of the E12 Writing Centers
Collective. In this meeting, attended by teachers involved in teacher- and par-
ent-led writing centers in their schools as well as those getting ready to launch
new centers, a panel of Marie's coaches reflected on the experience of coming to
UMN two months earlier, shared how and why they volunteer their time in the
center, and responded to many questions about what they would recommend
for establishing writing centers and supporting peer coaches. The teachers in the
E12 Collective still talk about how impressed they were by Marie's coaches, and

                                                                                                 139
Hansen et al.

the writing center directors at both a large public urban high school and small
private suburban school later shared how much that conversation influenced
their own thinking about what their centers could be.

    As we hope our story reveals, the values of this cross-institutional writing
center partnership are also WAC values. In making a case for the natural connec-
tion between WAC and writing centers, Steven Corbett and Michelle LaFrance
articulate the shared WAC/writing center beliefs that "students come to under-
stand writing conventions as the products of disciplinary communities when
they can compare writing tasks and conventions across disciplinary contexts";
that "writers at all levels of proficiency benefit from thinking about the often
unspoken assumptions of `effective' writing within particular contexts"; and that
"the writing center [is] a cross-curricular way of learning" (2, 6). We believe that
our collaboration is, to paraphrase Corbett and LaFrance, a cross-institutional
way of learning. The same kinds of conversation, listening, collaborative prob-
lem-solving, and co-learning across disciplines that take place in a WAC writing
center undergird many of our shared professional networks and are at the heart
of our BHS-UMN partnership. We are excited that our partnership has be-
gun to encourage and nurture other cross-institutional collaborations, as we've
shared our learning-in-progress with members of Writing Center Professionals
of Minnesota and the E12 Writing Centers Collective.

    From our partnership, we have seen evidence of many dimensions of cross-in-
stitutional learning--for all parties involved.

1. The high school coaches developed a collaborative, conversational philos-
ophy of tutoring, which made them more confident in their ability to help
others, and gave them specific consulting approaches to enact this philoso-
phy.

    The story of one BHS writing coach reveals the powerful effect of partici-
pating in university writing consultations. Marie was nervous at the beginning
of the year because one of her coaches, Callie (a pseudonym), was extremely
shy. Callie panicked every time she had to speak in public and told Marie she
felt uncomfortable telling students how to write an essay. Conscientious and
thoughtful, Callie was afraid she would offend writers with blunt directions,
creating a big challenge for her as a coach. Callie did not speak much during her
visit to UMN, but Marie noticed her approach to tutoring immediately changed
after that visit. Callie became one of Marie's most successful coaches because
she asked so many thoughtful questions. Marie believes that Callie realized by
participating in and observing conferences in SWS that she didn't need to tell
students what to do or have the "right" answers; she just needed to have a con-
versation. Callie felt confident initiating a conversation because it didn't require

140
                                                                          "So Much More Than Just an `A'"

as much directiveness as she first assumed, and she found herself able to help
her peers much more. As they become comfortable with asking questions and
drawing out student knowledge in the consultations, BHS coaches are better
prepared to work with students writing across the disciplines.

    After both visits to UMN, Marie noticed all of her consultants trying the
very strategies they observed SWS consultants using with them: asking writers
to share their goals and concerns, negotiating an agenda together, asking prob-
ing questions, mirroring back what they heard in a text, encouraging a writer's
ownership and self-assessment of their writing, and talking about one's writing
process beyond the text in front of them. Even the English teachers at BHS
took notice, commenting to Marie about the coaches' use of questioning and
conversation in the writing center and during in-class peer review sessions. BHS
student clients have also noted that the coaches ask the same kinds of questions
their teachers do.

2. As the BHS Writing Center began using a collaborative, conversational
approach that talked about writing as more than just "English papers," both
consultants and student writers began to consider how this work involves
negotiations around disciplinary knowledge, previous writing experiences,
and levels of expertise and authority.

    During their visits, BHS coaches observed and worked with both undergrad-
uate and graduate SWS consultants from a wide range of majors, such as Amer-
ican studies, biology, education, history, political science, and theatre. The fact
that SWS consultants shared their perspectives on writing in different fields and
at different levels--and did not know anything about the BHS English teachers
who encourage much of the BHS Writing Center activity--opened up the high
school coaches to talking about writing across the curriculum and for different
audiences and purposes.

    In fact, it was the BHS writing coaches and students in her class who alerted
Marie to the buzz around school about a particularly challenging historiogra-
phy assignment, opening the door for the writing center to work more closely
with AP United States History teachers and their students. When Marie emailed
the history teachers to chat, they were open to sharing what they were looking
for in these essays--sending her their rubric, a checklist of important things
to remember, and a relevant PowerPoint presentation.11 Although only a small
number of students are using the writing center for their historiography essays
so far, Marie and the history teachers are eager to continue working together in
future semesters by publicizing their partnership to students early in the process.

    This expanded view of writing also encouraged student clients to see the
value in a conversation between peers and that they too could become writing

                                                                                                 141
Hansen et al.

coaches. For example, when honors student Keisha (a pseudonym) began visit-
ing the BHS Writing Center several times without receiving extra credit as most
students did, Marie became curious and pulled her aside after class to ask if she
was struggling with the assignment or had any questions. Keisha explained that
it helped to talk about her ideas with someone else while she was writing her col-
lege application essays. Despite her anxiety with this high-stakes writing, when
Keisha went home each night with a new question from her coach to answer, she
was able to write a little bit more, return the next day for more help, and repeat
the process. Keisha's continued writing center usage would never have happened
if her coach, Austin (a pseudonym), who both visited UMN in October 2012
and participated in the May 2013 discussion at BHS, had not focused on asking
so many questions about Keisha's experiences, probing her for more information
about what she had learned. Austin's approach to these meetings as an informal
conversation between two writers chatting about ideas and word choice signifi-
cantly reduced Keisha's stress. Her final essay was excellent, and she applied to
be a coach for 2013-14, largely because of this experience.

3. High school writing coaches and their student clients gained support in
preparing for college, while, at the same time, university writing consultants
gained valuable insight into the high school-to-college transition from work-
ing with high school writers.

    The initial connection between the BHS Writing Center and college read-
iness appealed to the BHS administration, in part because of the center's con-
tribution to what Luce identifies as "bridging the gap between high school and
college ... ensuring the continuity of excellence throughout the system" (129).
Similarly, in their survey of secondary school and university WAC partnerships,
Blumner and Childers note the common desire of high schools to "create seam-
less transitions between high school and college" (92). Students who visit the
BHS Writing Center benefit from learning that asking for help is okay, and have
become more aware of writing centers and other academic support resources in
college. Senior coaches appreciate the opportunity to be in college during their
field trips, are eager to share what they experienced with their peers, and begin
to see opportunities for student leadership that they can take advantage of when
they leave high school in just one year.

    For example, at the first UMN field trip, BHS senior Allie Waters connected
with Kristen about the University of Northern Iowa (UNI), which Kristen had
attended as an undergraduate and which Allie planned to attend in the fall.
Once at UNI, Allie started visiting the writing center with her own essays, and
then she was hired as a tutor at the end of her freshman year. She tells us no one
at UNI can figure out how an accounting major ended up becoming a writing

142
                                                                          "So Much More Than Just an `A'"

center tutor and even publishing a short story in the campus literary magazine.
Allie acknowledges that she probably wouldn't have considered the possibility
without having the background as a high school writing coach and visiting the
UMN Center for Writing. In addition, several graduated BHS coaches have
told Marie how quickly they began using their university writing centers, and
we are eager for those attending UMN to apply to be undergraduate writing
consultants. Clearly, college students are more likely to visit a center if they have
already observed its value, rather than entering college believing there is a stigma
associated with asking for help with writing.

    We have also learned that the word "college" bears so much weight for high
schoolers because they see it as a place where people are intelligent, capable, and
have the "right" answers. When they worked with the UMN consultants on
campus, the BHS coaches were very receptive to the consultants' ideas because
they arrived ready to learn. In addition, when Marie and her graduating coaches
passed out applications for next year's coaches, only a few students were interest-
ed. After Marie reminded the coaches, "Tell them about the U!" and her coaches
described the training at UMN, many more hands went up. These prospective
coaches believe that they will be effective writing coaches next year, not because
they see themselves as strong writers, but because they assume working with
consultants at the UMN can get them there, as both writers and coaches.

    Building off this strong interest in college readiness, the BHS Writing Center
has marketed itself as the place to prepare for college, offering a semi-annual
"Grammar Crammer" before the eleventh grade grammar final exam each se-
mester. In this popular event, which attracted over 100 students in 2012-13,
BHS Writing Center coaches help students correct extra practice questions,
which are similar to those in the high-stakes ACT verbal section. Similarly, the
BHS Writing Center sponsors a panel of local college admissions directors who
share their insights into college application essays, and then follows that panel
with a week of additional tutoring hours to help application essay writers.

    As the BHS coaches asked about college more generally during their con-
sultations, the UMN writing consultants found themselves in the role of guides
and insiders. Many consultants enjoyed sharing stories about their own tran-
sitions from high school to college and their suggestions for making the most
out of college and being successful as a student. For the youngest and newest
UMN undergraduate consultants, this partnership provided a rare opportunity
for them to feel a sense of expertise among their more experienced colleagues,
many of whom are graduate students and professionals.

    The UMN consultants also expanded their understanding of the transition
from high school to college-level writing and how they can best help first-year
students--affirming Cox and Gimbel's argument, in Chapter 2 of this book,

                                                                                                 143
Hansen et al.

that those in high schools and colleges have much to learn from each other about
how writing is used in each other's context. Though many consultants com-
mented that working with these high school seniors was similar in many ways
to working with college freshmen, they were able to have conversations with the
students about high school writing and the students' concerns about the upcom-
ing transition from high school to college. They appreciated the opportunity to
expand their understanding of this transition and to talk with highly motivated
high school writers about their strong, very polished drafts.

4. Directors at both the high school and university writing centers found
support, connection, and inspiration through this partnership, which became
a touchstone for their larger community of writing center professionals.

    The learning arising from this partnership was not limited to coaches and
consultants, as the directors of both centers gained significantly from the proj-
ect. During her first two years running the BHS Writing Center, Marie felt a bit
like she was living on a deserted island. If she had not met the Center for Writing
staff in 2011, she questions whether she would have continued the BHS Writing
Center. She likely would have become discouraged and run out of new ideas
to try to bring students in, as both coaches and clients. Buoyed by the positive
energy of this partnership and the enthusiasm her coaches have for our collab-
oration, Marie has greater confidence and belief in the value of her efforts. Not
surprisingly, her center has become more visible, her student usage has tripled,
and more students apply to be coaches each year.

    Kirsten, Debra, and Katie have long been supportive of local secondary writ-
ing centers through hosting meetings of the E12 Writing Centers Collective
and meeting individually with secondary teachers starting their own centers. Yet
those conversations have often felt one-way, sharing UMN practices without
deep knowledge of what is really possible in a high school writing center. The
collaborative nature of the BHS-UMN partnership opened our eyes to the reali-
ties of writing consultancy in a high school setting: where and when it happens,
the kinds of assignments and audiences high school writers face, and--most im-
portantly-- who the high school coaches are and what motivates them as writers
and consultants. The fact we have pulled off regular field trips and meetings has
strengthened and inspired the larger E12 Writing Centers Collective as well,
building our grassroots network to be one where we visit each others' centers and
share our practices together.

5. University directors were able to use the partnership as a key component
of their staff professional development efforts, providing them and their con-
sultants a fresh perspective on their own practice, questioning their assump-

144
                                                                          "So Much More Than Just an `A'"

tions, seeing alternatives, and wrestling with challenging questions raised by
our different writing center contexts.

    As the lively full-group discussion in our March 2012 meeting revealed,
all participants were intrigued by the differences between our writing center
contexts and how our pedagogies adapt to and push against those contexts.
Faced with curious young coaches who wanted to learn how to tutor, university
consultants had the opportunity to articulate the strategies and beliefs behind
their practices. Although the UMN Center for Writing consultants participate
in professional development on a regular basis, rarely do the consultants have
the chance to have such in-depth conversations about their practices with eager
learners who are curious and appreciative. As UMN undergraduate consultant
Damian Johansson describes:

         I love working with the Burnsville tutors. It is always exciting
         to work with people that are purely interested in the topic of
         work, and these kids were so ready to talk and learn about
         tutoring, making for a fun, informative, and truly productive
         day. I would have described it as relaxed, but the sessions were
         so charged with interested participants that it wasn't exactly
         relaxed, but still enjoyable.

         During spring semester last year we visited the tutors at the
         Burnsville campus, bringing our work for their consideration.
         I decided to push this unique experience further by bringing
         a creative piece with me for consultation. The tutor I worked
         with was both flabbergasted and excited to review a creative
         piece. He was a creative writer himself, and although slightly
         daunted, he volunteered to work with me. We talked about
         creative writing in general, and after he confided his love of
         creative writing to me, I asked if he had any of his writing
         with him. As all writers should, he had hardcopy with him.
         I asked if, while he read my piece, I could read some of his.
         This broke down the barrier of perceived authority/old dude-
         ness that he was shackled with, and he dove into his back-
         pack. We read, side by side, both making noises of enjoyment
         or interest as we read. Afterwards, we first talked about my
         piece, as this was my session for help, and then I generally
         talked about my perceptions of his piece, mostly responding
         to his direct questions about it.

    Not only did the university and high school tutors make connections and

                                                                                                 145
Hansen et al.

develop a sense of "peerness," as Damian describes, but the experience of step-
ping into another writing center helped them explore such controversial issues
as consultant expertise and the triangulated relationship between consultants,
teachers, and students. As UMN undergraduate writing consultant Alysha Bo-
hanon reflected recently:

         Even if you've taken the same class as the student [at UMN],
         the chance of you taking that class with the same professor is
         slim. High school is very different, and I wonder how these
         coaches would go about separating their personal experi-
         ence in a class from their position as a tutor. Shielding your
         expertise wouldn't work when the student already knows you
         had to have taken the class, since you are in the same school.
         It was especially interesting to me that one of the reasons
         Burnsville teachers referred students to the writing center was
         because the coaches had already taken the class and knew
         what was expected in the assignment--I'm not sure how the
         high school coaches could possibly escape their expertise in
         this scenario.

         Despite the different atmospheres of high school and college
         writing, I think a version of this pressure to "make it do what
         the professor wants" creeps into our center sometimes, par-
         ticularly with undergraduate writers. It's still so much about
         grades and pleasing your professor at that level, even if there is
         more creativity involved. I've seen too many written com-
         ments from professors telling students to come to the center
         to figure out what is expected in an assignment, as though we
         are not only experts in every discipline, but also mind readers
         for confusing assignment sheets.

    Seeing the constraints of the high school writing center made visible to UMN
consultants the often invisible constraints in our university context, opening us
all up to deeper conversations about working with writers across the curriculum
and negotiating expertise that have continued in our ongoing staff development.

LOOKING TO THE FUTURE

    The UMN consultants who have participated in the consultations and con-
versations with BHS coaches are helping to keep our collaboration going by reg-
ularly asking, "When are we going to see the high schoolers again?" and "How's

146
                                                                          "So Much More Than Just an `A'"

the Burnsville High School Writing Center doing?" As we move into our third
year of the partnership, once-per-semester BHS visits have begun to feel like
another regular form of staff development in the Center for Writing, alongside
regularly scheduled Friday staff meetings and discussions.

    Drawing on the flexibility and risk-taking that marked the start of our part-
nership, we continue to experiment with new strategies for our centers and our
collaboration. For example, Marie has begun to call her tutors "coaches," rather
than tutors. Although writing center literature has used the "coach" metaphor
since as early as 1986 (see, for example, Muriel Harris's Teaching One-to-One),
this particular decision stems from a conversation during the May 2013 UMN
visit to BHS, where we talked together about the parallels between athletic
coaching and coaching writers. We believe that for high-schoolers, who are often
familiar with a coaching philosophy from their experiences with youth athletics,
this name change may promote a new style of tutoring, as well as confidence.
In addition, as part of their staff development, Marie's coaches are now reading
excerpts from Dawn Fels and Jennifer Wells's The Successful High School Writing
Center (including Alexandra Elchinoff and Caroline Kowalski's chapter, "The
Tutors Speak," to bring in perspectives from yet another school). They will also
write a literacy narrative essay, the same one that new UMN undergraduate writ-
ing consultants write in Kirsten's Theory and Practice of Writing Consultancy
class, before visiting UMN (Appendix 2). We hope this shared assignment will
create more of a common ground between the high school coaches and UMN
writing consultants who have written it themselves in Kirsten's class or are famil-
iar with this annual assignment. We hope that by responding to the assignment
prompts about personal reading and writing history, BHS coaches may real-
ize that they all have the background necessary to contribute to a conversation
about literacy.

    In future years, Marie will hire new coaches sooner than the last few weeks
of school, creating more continuity from year to year in our partnership. During
April, there is usually a lull in the BHS center, and senior coaches begin to
lose focus at the end of the year. Marie plans to sign up new junior coaches
and organize training sessions throughout the spring with both incoming and
experienced coaches, including the spring visit from UMN tutors. Therefore,
three types of tutors will be able to participate in mock consultations and ob-
servations--SWS consultants, BHS senior coaches, and BHS junior prospective
coaches--fostering a feeling of expertise and continued commitment from both
incoming and experienced coaches.

    Recognizing that the heart of our collaboration is the interaction happening
between the high school coaches and university consultants, we will continue
to work on breaking down the barriers to open sharing and discussion, experi-

                                                                                                 147
Hansen et al.

menting with small group discussions to debrief the practice consultations be-
fore moving to large group conversations. Inspired by the work of Rebecca L.
Damon and Melody Denny at the Oklahoma State University Writing Center
and Writing Project, we are considering using a structured, shared blog, where
SWS consultants and BHS coaches can talk about their experiences and offer
each other support.

    The success of our partnership has also helped generate enthusiasm across
our E12 Writing Centers Collective for more cross-institutional learning among
our growing number of secondary writing centers. At the last E12 meeting,
Marie and Kelly Langdon, who directs the Farmington High School Writing
Center, began talking about an August mini-conference for student coaches,
which would help meet the training needs of novice coaches, provide a valuable
form of leadership and professional development for experienced coaches, and
expand our network to include more student voices and ideas.

    Those student voices are essential for the BHS Writing Center to be seen as a
resource for students and teachers across the curriculum. Marie continues to ask
her coaches and students in her classes to tell her about their challenging essays
in other courses so she can reach out to the teachers, and so that the writing
center can set up help sessions, much like the after-school and evening "writing
parties" around common assignments that take place in the Minnetonka High
School Writing Center. Based on the positive interest she has already received
from the advanced placement U.S. History teachers, Marie sees much potential
in explicit WAC outreach to social studies and AVID (Advancement Via Indi-
vidual Determination) teachers.

    After more than four years since the BHS Writing Center's beginning and
two years into our partnership, we are all proud that the BHS Writing Center
has become a more visible and ingrained part of school culture. BHS students
and teachers know what the center is, and Marie's coaches hosted approximate-
ly three hundred separate student visits during 2012-13 in various formats.
BHS English teachers have committed to encouraging students to come in after
school, sometimes by offering extra credit and other incentives and setting up
sessions where coaches visit their classes. In addition, many of the new coaches
for 2013-2014 have used the center multiple times as sophomore and junior
students. In fact, several of them have taken a college preparatory class for capa-
ble students who need a bit of extra guidance to reach college readiness, which
includes a requirement to visit the BHS Writing Center once a semester. These
future coaches already understand the value of a thoughtful conversation about
their essays, so we are excited to see how they challenge the past divide between
BHS Writing Center coaches (typically honors students who had not used the
center) and clients (typically underclassmen needing extra help). With increased

148
                                                                          "So Much More Than Just an `A'"

visibility and a growing understanding among coaches of the value of one-to-
one consultations for all writers, the BHS Writing Center has the potential to
be seen as a resource for students and teachers at all levels and across the curric-
ulum.

    Looking to the future, we are striving for small increments of growth in our
partnership over time, and we are patient enough to develop cross-curricular
models that fit our local context. We will continue to incorporate all three of
the basic components of collaboration described by Blumner and Childers in
their study of successful university-secondary school WAC partnerships: we will
engage in "information exchange," "involve students," and continue to "provide
support" through human and financial resources (95-97). With the UMN part-
nership, BHS coaches are more effectively trained and feel more confident work-
ing with students' writing across the curriculum, and Marie no longer feels as if
she is alone on an island. Conversations with Kirsten, Katie, Debra, and Kristen
have inspired Marie more than any other resource, and the feeling of mutual
benefit for all members of the partnership--and our surrounding networks--is
palpable. Marie will share her story and start-up strategies at the Minnesota
Council of Teachers of English Conference in April 2014--with, not surprising-
ly, her coaches presenting alongside her.

NOTES

1. It is such positive past experiences with writing centers that Trixie Smith identi-
fies in Chapter 10 as motivators of successful high school-college collaborations.

2. For more information about the Minnetonka High School Writing Center,
see Childers and Lowry. Minnetonka now has a large staff of volunteer student
coaches in addition to teachers and parents and is actively involved in supporting
teachers using writing across the curriculum.

3. This teacher-driven process contrasts with McMullen's experience, described in
Chapter 6, in which the academic dean decided his school needed a writing center.

4. See http://www.nwp.org/cs/public/print/resource_topic/writing_centers for
evidence of the many ways NWP supports secondary school writing centers.

5. See http://writing.umn.edu.

6. This experience is an illustration of Trixie Smith's point in Chapter 10 that col-
laborations often originate through personal connections.

7. See http://writing.umn.edu/sws/e12wcc/index.html.

8. For another model of shared professional development among high school and
college writing consultants, see Henry Luce's description of the collaboration be-
tween Red Bank Regional High School and Monmouth College (134).

                                                                                                 149
Hansen et al.

9. See our video about this visit at http://mediamill.cla.umn.edu/mediamill/dis-
play/174825.

10. In Chapter 10, Trixie Smith describes many other ways that writing centers
can interact with schools and community organizations that do not require a lot of
time and money.

11. This openness from content area teachers in response to Marie's outreach is a
step towards the kinds of "faculty risk taking" Pamela Childers describes in her col-
laborations with science and math teachers at McCallie School in "Writing Center
or Experimental Center for Faculty Research, Discovery, and Risk Taking?"

WORKS CITED

Barnett, Robert W., and Lois M. Rosen. "The WAC/Writing Center Partner-
   ship: Creating a Campus-wide Writing Environment." Writing Centers and
   Writing Across the Curriculum Programs: Building Interdisciplinary Partner-
   ships. Eds. Robert W. Barnett and Jacob S. Blumner. Westport: Greenwood
   P, 1999. 1-12. Print.

Blumner, Jacob and Pamela Childers: "Building Better Bridges: What Makes
   High School-College WAC Collaborations Work?" WAC Journal 22 (2011):
   91-101. Web.

Childers, Pamela B. "Writing Center or Experimental Center for Faculty Re-
   search, Discovery, and Risk Taking?" Writing Centers and Writing Across the
   Curriculum Programs: Building Interdisciplinary Partnerships. Eds. Robert W.
   Barnett and Jacob S. Blumner. Westport: Greenwood P, 1999. 178-86. Print.

Childers, Pamela B., Dawn Fels, and Jeannette Jordan. "The Secondary School
   Writing Center: A Place to Build Confident, Competent Writers." Praxis: A
   Writing Center Journal 2.1 (2001): n. pag. Web. 26 July 2008.

Childers, Pamela B., and Michael J. Lowry. "Introduction to Writing Across the
   Curriculum in Secondary Schools." Across the Disciplines 9.3 (8 Dec 2012):
   n. pag. Web. 25 July 2013.

Corbett, Steven, and Michelle LaFrance. "From Grammatical to Global: The
   WAC/Writing Center Connection." Praxis: A Writing Center Journal 6.2
   (2009): n. pag. Web. 6 June 2013.

Damron, Rebecca L., and Melody Denny. "Creating Community Partnerships
   Through Peer Tutoring." Presentation at IWCA Collaborative @ CCCC 2012,
   St. Louis, 21 March 2012.

Fels, Dawn, and Jennifer Wells. The Successful High School Writing Center. New
   York: Teachers College P, 2011. Print.

Harris, Muriel. Teaching One-to-One: The Writing Conference. Urbana, IL:

150
                                                                          "So Much More Than Just an `A'"

   NCTE, 1986. Print.
Luce, Henry A. "High School-College Collaboration." The High School Writing

   Center: Establishing and Maintaining One. Ed. Pamela Childers. WAC Clear-
   inghouse Landmark Publications in Writing Studies: <http://wac.colostate.
   edu/books/hswc/>. Web. 1 Aug 2013. [Originally Published in Print, 1989,
   by Urbana: National Council of Teachers of English, Urbana. 1989. 127-35.]

Appendix 1: Handout used during visits to the U of MN's Center for
Writing

    Consulting Across the High School--College Transition:
    Burnsville High School Writing Coaches meet University of Minnesota
Writing Consultants
    Friday 9 March 2012, 2:15-4:15pm, 15 Nicholson Hall
    When you are observing a consultation, please take some notes on the
following:
    What did you notice?
    Who held the pen/pencil/typed on the keyboard?
    Where was the paper?
    How would you characterize the nonverbal communication?
    How would you characterize the talk in the consultation?
    What surprised you?
    What might you try doing in your own coaching from watching the con-
sultant?
    During our debrief after the consultations, we'll discuss the above ques-
tions as well as the following:
    How did it feel when you were the student writer?
    What did the writing consultants do to make writers feel comfortable? En-
gaged? Motivated to write/revise?
    What did the coaches learn about college writing from the consultations?
    What did the consultants learn about working with CIS students from the
consultations?
    How do the consultations at Burnsville compare to the consultations we did
today (length of time, type of conversations, etc.)?
    What roles do we play as consultants?

Appendix 2: Assignment used in Jamsen's Theory and Practice of
Writing Consultancy course at the university each fall; BHS writing
coaches will draft their own literacy autobiographies as part of their

                                                                                                 151
Hansen et al.

fall 2013 training and bring them for consultations at the university

    Literacy Autobiography

    Draft Due: Tue 18 Sept
    Bring two copies of your complete draft (must have a beginning, a middle,
and an end) this day for our in-class consultations
    Final Version Due: Thur 27 Sept
    As with all three of major papers in this course, you will submit the final
version as a portfolio, which is the culmination of your entire process of devel-
oping, writing, sharing, and revising this paper. Even if you tend to do most
of your revision work on the computer, be sure to print out the various notes,
outlines, and versions to show me evidence of that process. And, as you revise,
please attend to the grading criteria for this assignment listed below.
    Length: 3-5 pages
    Genre: The literacy autobiography is both personal and analytical. This as-
signment asks you to reflect upon and analyze your own experiences learning
to read and write, ultimately focusing around a central idea about your literacy
development that you want to share with our classroom community.
     As you saw in the model papers, a successful autobiography must be fo-
cused, vivid and descriptive. As readers, we want to see, hear, and feel your
experience. But, this assignment also asks you to analyze your experiences. You
will make crucial decisions about what experiences to discuss and how to con-
nect those key experiences into a central argument about your own development
as a literate person or about your attitude towards your literacy. After reading
your autobiography, we should come away with an understanding of both what
you experienced and how and why those experiences were significant in your
development.
     I encourage you to approach this essay creatively, giving yourself plenty of
time to reflect and brainstorm before attempting to bring your argument togeth-
er. Here are several questions to help you get started. You definitely won't want
to tackle all of them in a 3-5 page paper, so once you've brainstormed fully, you'll
want to narrow and focus your paper. As you think about your experiences, you
may also find an angle that is different than any I've suggested here.

    Brainstorming questions:

    Looking around your home, your backpack, your vehicle, etc., what are the
artifacts of your literacy practices? (consider not just the obvious things like
books and newspapers, but also the little things like scraps of paper, Post-Its,
visual texts, etc.)

    What were the artifacts of literacy in your childhood?

152
                                                                          "So Much More Than Just an `A'"

    When and how did you first learn to read? To write?
    What were your parents' or other family members' attitudes about literacy?
    What was your experience of reading and writing in school? Was it different
than outside of school?
    Were there any specific moments when your attitude towards reading/writ-
ing changed?
    Were there any times when you were challenged to read and write in a new
discourse (say, for your major or for a job)?
    What was (and is) pleasurable about reading/writing? What was (and is)
challenging?
    How do you see yourself as a reader/writer now?
    Are there ways that your own literacy helps or hinders you?
    Grading Criteria:
    Process
   1. Evidence of significant drafting and revising processes.
   2. Awareness of audience and reader feedback.
    Focus, Evidence, and Analysis
   3. Focus on an appropriate story/argument about your own literacy.
   4. Development of a compelling personal narrative with vivid details as ev-

       idence ("showing").
   5. Rigorous analysis of personal experience, drawing logical conclusions

       ("telling").
    Product
   6. Clear, coherent, engaging style.
   7. Professional presentation (format, technical details, attention to correct-

       ness at the sentence level).

                                                                                                 153
CHAPTER 9

"OH, I GET BY WITH A LITTLE
HELP FROM MY FRIENDS":
SHORT-TERM WRITING CENTER/
COMMUNITY COLLABORATIONS

      Trixie G. Smith

    Throughout this collection you have read about long-term WAC partner-
ships between universities, community colleges, high schools, and other institu-
tions that have been successful over many years, and others that have been learn-
ing moments for those involved. When I first became a writing center director,
these kinds of long-term partnerships sounded exciting, but they also felt a bit
overwhelming and possibly even impossible to achieve with my present writing
center and resources. What I found, however, was that I could start small and
build (see Chapters 2 and 8 for examples of such progressions). Over the years,
I have come to value the affordances and returns of short-term collaborations
between my WAC-based university writing center and local schools and com-
munity groups, as well as more distant partners who can collaborate electroni-
cally. All of these collaborations have shown that sometimes partners just need
a jumpstart, a little help in conceiving of and planning for the possibilities, to
get started with new programming. It doesn't mean that the university or our
writing center isn't willing to partner on a more long-term basis; in fact, know-
ing that we're in the background and willing to help may be the best support
for new programs and their participants. Connecting local schools to state and
regional writing networks can be ideal, giving them a variety of partnership
choices and opportunities. Short-term partnerships also have the advantage of
low costs, small upfront commitments (which may be an advantage to a public
school or non-profit with an uncertain future), and fewer logistical problems.
Despite these low-stakes investments, the payoff can be rich and rewarding for
area teachers, students, and community members, as well as the writing center,
the WAC program, writing center and WAC staff, and the university.

    In this chapter, therefore, I'd like to briefly outline why short-term partner-
ships are worth your time and energy (and perhaps, your money), then give
some examples of various short-term WAC partnerships that have occurred in

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2015.0735.2.09  155
Smith

or through our writing center, which also serves as our de facto writing across
and in the disciplines program. Then I would like to close with a case study of a
program at our institution, Grandparents University--a program that illustrates
how short-term collaborations can not only be rewarding on their own, but can
also grow into larger more long-term partnerships--and a set of recommenda-
tions for building your own short-term partnerships.

WHY SHORT-TERM PARTNERSHIPS

    Schools, community groups, and individuals all seek collaborations for a
variety of different reasons. Their motivations may come from within their own
programs or schools, or may grow from outside pressures and expectations.
Some of the reasons I've encountered include the following:

   1. Lack of knowledge or experience: The English teacher asked to start a
       writing center when she has no writing center experience. The committee
       asked to plan a writing-across-the-curriculum program for its school. The
       non-profit director with volunteers asking for additional training.

   2. The ever-increasing strains of federal and state testing and the consequent
       drive to "improve writing."

   3. Grant demands to develop partnerships.
   4. Teacher or program desires to write in new and different ways.
   5. Requests from community members, patrons, students, or parents.
   6. Past positive experiences with writing centers, as students perhaps or even

       as former consultants (often with (y)our writing center specifically).
   7. Personal connections with the center, director, or staff of a writing or

       WAC program.

    The motivations of potential partners may not directly match our own ob-
jectives, but in my experience, as long as potential partners have complementary
goals, the collaborations can be beneficial for both parties--for the day, the
week, or the year.

    At most colleges and universities, there are a number of different vision and
goal statements that blanket the work that we do; you can usually turn to these
statements when seeking justification for investments with partners, whether it
be for the time you and your staff will donate to the project or the materials,
space, or finances needed to make the project successful. At Michigan State
University, for example, there are at least three different goal statements that
call for investment in the community, for giving students hands-on experiences
in the world, and for developing and supporting research: our Boldness By De-
sign campaign (http://boldnessbydesign.msu.edu/), the more recent Bolder By

156
                                                     "Oh, I Get By with a Little Help from My Friends"

Design campaign, which adds to the original plan (http://bolderbydesign.msu.
edu/), and our Liberal Learning Goals (http://learninggoals.undergrad.msu.
edu/goals). In addition, the writing center has its own articulation of these uni-
versity goals and its own mission guiding the work of the center. As these various
statements and goals overlap, four particular goals have risen to the surface for
guiding the work in our writing center:

   1. The call from our president to move from a land-grant to a world-grant
       university;

   2. The mission of both our university and our writing center to serve the
       greater community;

   3. The culture of family and long-term commitment we strive to develop
       with our writing center staff and across the university as a whole (Spartans
       for Life); and

   4. The ethos of research in and about writing across the curriculum that we
       promote through our center.

    These four goals consequently guide the collaborations we seek and the part-
nerships to which we say yes.

    These goals do not require long-term commitments, nor do they hinder
them; consequently, the opportunity for growth is always present and the re-
wards of short-term projects are present as well. Many of the potential partners
who come to us are exploring their options, so we do not want to scare them
away by requiring long-term commitments, or by suggesting ambitious plans
that may overwhelm them. Starting small allows both of us to invest relatively
small amounts of staff time, energy, and even money as we figure out what
works, what doesn't, what the perceived needs are, what the real needs are, and
how we can both benefit from working together. Starting small usually means
we can test the possibilities and weigh the options in a more timely fashion as
well. Large projects must be written into budgets that are planned a year or more
in advance, and often require a greater level of commitment and approval out-
side of the center or program. Often, small projects can be worked in more easily
and may then provide useful data if we both decide to pursue a larger project
down the road, with each other or with other interested partners.

A SAMPLING OF SHORT-TERM PARTNERSHIPS

    To illustrate what I am promoting, I would like to start by describing a series
of brief collaborations between our WAC-based university writing center and
partners in local and alumni high schools, as well as with community organiza-
tions. I hope these descriptions of real collaborations will showcase the possibil-

                                                                                                 157
Smith

ities and help illuminate the value of such investments.

Working with High Schools

    One common area of collaboration has been with new high school writing
centers at both the planning stages and the start-up or fledgling stages. These
collaborations may be as easy as an email conversation. Former students, writing
center alumni, even university alumni who know we have a writing center at
MSU often email and ask for help. They need resources, they want advice, they
want to be able to say they can get support, even if it's just consultations, from
the university. I have a folder of materials I share with them: proposals used for
other high school centers, letters to principals, teachers, and parents, sample
surveys, bibliographies, and course syllabi (see Chapter 6, McMullen-Light, for
more about such sharing of materials). I also get them hooked into the network
of other secondary writing centers and/or WCenter; if working with an alum
who isn't local, I try to put this new director in contact with a writing center
director in the area where the new center will be. Sometimes these materials
and email conversations are all they need or want. If they are somewhat local,
however, a visit is often the next step. A conversation in their space helps show
our investment and usually prompts more specific questions about logistics
and local context. Sometimes this investment leads to other collaborations, and
sometimes it ends with the visit, and you have to be okay with it ending at this
nebulous spot. You may not ever see the new writing center; you just know that
you have done your best to help a new center or director get started and have
served your colleagues and community.

    Another type of short-term investment may be a bit more hands-on. Recent-
ly, for example, two local high schools started writing centers. They had a class
and a center in operation before they fully figured out what they wanted to do or
how they wanted to do it, so they called our center for help. A number of writing
consultants on my staff were happy to go out to the schools and meet with the
writing center consultants there. We were able to talk about some basic writing
center concepts, such as the difference between revising and editing, helping
students understand assignment sheets, working with writers from across the
curriculum, when to say no to clients, and how to ask generative questions. We
then hosted an open question and answer session that was successful for both of
us. The high school students were able to voice some concerns, many of which
they hadn't felt free to share with their advisor, while my consultants, many of
whom hope to work with or start high school writing centers, learned some
important caveats about operating in different types of spaces and contexts. We
also invited these consultants to come visit our center at any time--to observe,

158
                                                     "Oh, I Get By with a Little Help from My Friends"

to be a part of an event, and to have their own consultations. After the first
visit, we tentatively planned to return to these schools in the next year and to
host sessions for the staff at our center as a way to model consultations and to
maintain this small collaboration. We have already had our first applicant from
one of these students who is headed to our university for her freshman year.
The authors of Chapter 8 describe such a mutually beneficial exchange, demon-
strating the usefulness of understanding the contexts, roles, and experiences on
either side of the partnership, and of making both partners responsible for the
collaboration. We have returned to the schools and have had the same kinds of
discussions and question/answer sessions with the new staff, but we have not
been able to work out visits to campus or our writing center--yet, but we're still
hopeful (and patient).

    Patience can be important if your hope is to turn a short-term partnership
into something more substantial, or into other short-term events. A few years
ago, for example, Laurel, one of my former graduate student administrators
from another writing center, contacted me. Laurel is now teaching high school
outside of Washington, DC, and her school was starting a writing center. She
stumbled upon a meeting one summer before the center was set to open and
overheard some plans for the new center. Based on her writing center experience
and study, Laurel was doubtful that their plan would work. After she interrupted
the meeting and spoke up, she found herself the new co-director of the center
with a colleague who had no writing center experience, but who was very excit-
ed about the prospects. Laurel called me to chat about their revised plans and
to brainstorm some possibilities. Over the next year or so, we had a series of
conversations about their new center and how the tutors and the program were
progressing. When I found myself headed to an IWCA conference just an hour
down the road from Laurel, she invited me to come visit her center and meet
with her students. I was able to see her center in action, host a robust question
and answer session with her tutors, and visit with some of her English classes.
I continue to receive updates from Laurel, and I make sure I send relevant re-
sources her way. I've also introduced her to some of the new high school writing
center directors in my area (and on one occasion, an alum in her area), and she
has continued to send me updates on their progress.

    However, high school writing centers aren't the only way to serve area
schools. We have also had short-term partnerships with a variety of college prep
and student enrichment programs in the area. One summer, we worked specif-
ically with the high school students in the Upward Bound program. Through
collaboration with their language arts teacher, we offered a series of workshops
on academic writing and research, peer review, and creative writing. Writing
consultants then worked with a small team of students who had volunteered to

                                                                                                 159
Smith

be the editors of an anthology they were creating from the participants' work.
Consultants guided them through the selection and editing processes, as well
as the layout processes. With some financial help from our college dean, we
then printed the anthologies for them--enough for students, parents, and rep-
resentatives from their home schools and school system. The anthologies were
distributed at a special celebratory event that included an open mic reading of
some of the pieces, congratulations from a handful of local school officials, and
a reception.

    Spending an afternoon or two visiting a school or consulting with students
at a local library is another way of investing with local students and schools that
requires minimal preparation and commitment on either end. The main task is
setting up a mutually viable date and recruiting volunteers to travel to the loca-
tion in need (note, that you may also need to help student volunteers arrange
carpools or figure out how a bus will get them to where they need to go). For
example, over the past few years, we have been invited by a variety of teachers
and programs to visit their schools and classrooms to consult with students on
resumes and personal statements for college applications. Conversations about
their writing also lead to discussions about college choices, choosing majors,
what to expect when one gets to college, and other worries high school students
have. These interactions help alleviate fears and make the high school-college
transition easier. A similar endeavor included joining an existing collaboration
between our professional writing program and a local elementary school to help
them produce videos of stories they had written. The elementary students creat-
ed the props needed for putting the story on film, shot the video, then worked
with the college students to edit the film, including adding sound effects and
voiceovers. When the film was complete, we were able to host a showcase night
for the video's premiere and a display of the artwork/props used in this science
fiction movie. On another day, we joined students from the MSU Poetry Cen-
ter to consult with local students on poetry writing. These various short-term
partnerships take our students into the schools, and also bring students and their
families to the university, building good will on both sides and contributing to
the overall community.

Working with/in the Community

    Certainly our schools are a part of our community, but it is also possible to
partner with the community in other ways. For example, we have sponsored
music literacy retreats for several years. These retreats happen once or twice a
year as the members of a local women's community chorus utilize our space to
dissect the music they are singing that season. They use the technology of our

160
                                                     "Oh, I Get By with a Little Help from My Friends"

center to have multimedia presentations on the composers and lyricists of the
music being sung, as well as historical or cultural information relevant to the
piece or genre. They brainstorm, write, discuss, and share as their way of under-
standing the music, so they can put those interpretations into what they sing. It
began as a one-time event, because they needed an accessible space with the right
equipment, but it has continued for several years. What has come from this is a
growing archive of chorus materials and my own personal oral history research
project, Voices of Sistrum, about the more than twenty-five year history of this
organization and its role in the local gay and lesbian and women's communities.

    A similar investment has our center going into the local public library once a
week to sponsor a community creative writing group. Here, local writers gather
each week--with a lot of variation in attendance--to write, to read, and to give
feedback. Participants write poetry, short stories, creative non-fiction, and mem-
oir. A couple of members are even working on novels that they share in pieces
week to week. A couple of our consultants attend each week as facilitators and
members, and serve as liaisons between our center and the library. Numerous
events are growing from this small investment. The members of this group be-
came the core of a writing marathon we hosted this past year, and they plan to
host it again next year. They are also producing an anthology of the work written
by participants, and twice a year, they come to campus to share their work with
a wider audience at our open mic nights, which are scheduled once a semes-
ter. Also as a result of this small partnership, the library has begun discussions
about us facilitating other workshops for library patrons: resume and cover letter
writing, college application help, public speaking--all are topics community
members have requested. Similarly, a couple of other libraries in the area have
also asked to set up writing groups. Our next group will meet once a week after
school at a different library, where area middle and high school students will
receive writing consultations with their homework assignments from across the
curriculum, as well as language help as needed for the many non-native speakers
of English who frequent this library.

    Our center also has an entire committee that has grown out of requests from
community organizations for workshops on grant writing. Both groups and indi-
viduals have asked for help in researching and writing grants and for training their
members to help with the grant writing process. Our first response was to create a
grant writing workshop that was then given for the first group who asked for this
help. When the workshop was requested again, consultants began revising the ex-
isting workshop and seeking help from experts across campus. From this endeavor,
the grant writing committee grew, which is a popular committee for consultants
who want to put to use the knowledge they gained in a departmental grant writing
course, for those who want to learn more about grant writing, and for those who

                                                                                                 161
Smith

think grant writing skills are important for their career goals. This committee is
now creating a series of videocasts about various aspects of grant writing through
interviews with experts in our area both on and off campus. These videocasts will
be available to the community and will more than likely spark additional requests
for workshops and partnerships (both large and small).

Working across Electronic Spaces

    As was mentioned previously, some short-term collaborations are about email
support and discussions. Online chat features, blogs, and discussion boards can
also be used to facilitate more in-depth conversations with groups of students,
consultants, and community members. One semester, for example, we hosted a
communal blog that was created to facilitate dialogue between our consultants
in training, and new consultants, who were still in training at a writing center
in Sweden. The two groups read some of the same assigned readings and were
then able to respond to the readings and to each other online--broadening the
discussion and allowing the two groups to see the different contexts that were
influencing how students read the advice of writing center professionals. This
partnership required a series of email conversations before both of our semesters
started, agreement on a few mutual readings to assign students, and organization
of the electronic platform for the exchange. Likewise, when a colleague from
across the country asked for consultants to mentor her new high school writ-
ing consultants, I recruited several members of my staff to serve as their online
buddies. A simple call for volunteers on our staff listserv yielded more partners
than we actually needed. Those who were assigned buddies reported email con-
versations about readings, sharing consulting stories, answering questions about
sessions as well as college in general, and making new friends.

    Whether it's an online conversation, a revision workshop in the local library,
or a training session at the high school down the road, these short-term col-
laborations have been important to those involved. My consultants enjoy the
opportunities to have experiences with writers outside of our center; they also
feel encouraged by the investment they see from other readers and writers in the
community and in the schools. Students we have worked with have emailed to
say thanks, and to suggest further programming. At orientation just this sum-
mer, a student who was not a tutor but who saw us on her campus, stopped
by our information table to say, "You came to our school. I'll come check you
out this fall." As a bonus, our college likes to brag about our partnerships, and
counts our ventures into the schools and communities in their annual outreach
figures. These low-risk, short-term collaborations have built a great deal of good
will, and have certainly been worth our center's time and attention.

162
                                                     "Oh, I Get By with a Little Help from My Friends"

FROM SHORT-TERM TO LONG-TERM PARTNERSHIPS: A
CASE STUDY

    One partnership that started out small and has continued to grow is a hybrid
of many of the forms discussed above: Grandparents University. I'd like to use
Grandparents University as a case study to further illustrate how short-term col-
laborations can help you meet your institutional goals, enrich your consultants'
experiences, and evolve into something bigger and more permanent.

    Grandparents University is a program sponsored by a collaborative of alumni
organizations from across our university. For three days, pairs of grandparents
and grandchildren live on campus, stay in the dorms, eat in the cafeterias, and
attend workshops designed specifically for them. These workshops are intended
to highlight all of the various areas of interest across campus and to be hands-on
for the participants. During registration, participants indicate their top pref-
erences and then attend approximately four classes as a pair (out of more than
fifty offerings from across the curriculum), as well as evening activities for the
whole cohort. When the program began in 2006, the writing center offered one
workshop on digital storytelling. The participant pairs came in, discussed story-
telling and video making, created a storyboard for the brief story they wanted to
tell, then filmed or took pictures in order to tell their story. They then worked
on our center computers in iMovie to create and edit their videos; consultants
were around to help at every stage, but most importantly at the last drafting and
editing stage. After Grandparents University was over, consultants completed
some final editing of these projects, then participants were mailed copies of their
movie on DVD.

    The success of this first small partnership then began to grow in both scope
and size, and has increased in some way each of the past seven years. As a whole,
the Grandparents University program has been successful and has expanded
each year, and we have done our part to support and add to this growth. The
digital storytelling workshop, for example, has grown into a two-part work-
shop that happens on two different days, with extended time for each part. This
format gives the participants more time to plan and get consultant help with
brainstorming and storyboard drafting, then time away from us and across the
university to take still and video pictures for their movies. On the second day,
they have more time for drafting and editing, including their voice-overs and
music; they can then leave with their movie burned to DVD or a jump drive
that day--no waiting for a DVD in the mail. In addition, the writing center has
added two more workshops to this partnership--one that asks participants to
think about the genre of the comic book, and then teaches them how to make
their own in the program Comic Life. They then create their own comic stories

                                                                                                 163
Smith

or scrapbooks during a two-part workshop. In addition, we offer a memoir writ-
ing workshop that gets participants started in drafting a life narrative or creative
non-fiction piece, and also encourages them to keep a journal of ideas for future
writing projects. All of our workshops are well attended and receive positive
feedback. But the partnership hasn't stopped there.

    Grandparents University reaches a wide number of MSU alumni and com-
munity members. As a result, we have had area teachers contact us about doing
some of these same workshops for their students. For example, one teacher has
brought in two different fifth-grade classes for the Comic Life workshop. Work-
ing with composers at different educational and developmental levels has been
good for our consultants, helping them stay sharp and truly focused on the
needs of their clients in a specific moment. In addition, a number of research
projects have grown from our work with Grandparents University. It was a re-
search project that led to the initial expansion of the workshop, for example.
Another round of assessment conducted by our facilitators, as they prepared
for a conference presentation and utilized participant surveys, led to using two
different days for the program, and made sure our participants could leave with
their final products. Also, a consultant was interested in how participants' atti-
tudes about technology might change as they went through the workshop, espe-
cially the attitudes of the grandparents, who often demonstrated some fear of the
technology. A series of pre- and post-attitudinal surveys were used to investigate
this research question, and the participants were happy to be involved in such a
research project. Because the project is short-term at only three days each year,
but is also ongoing with a variety of different participants, it has become a per-
fect venue for consultants to develop and hone their skills in the areas of research
and assessment, making them better students, researchers, and consultants.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR BUILDING YOUR OWN SHORT-
TERM WAC COLLABORATIONS

      · Be open and listen. Possibilities for partnerships can arise in a wide
         variety of ways: A conversation at a committee meeting, over lunch,
         or in the grocery store; a request through our center email or my own
         personal email account; or a suggestion from a client or consultant.
         My strategy is to listen specifically for ways our center can intervene or
         serve. Can we provide a space? Do you need some volunteers? Do you
         need a workshop that we can provide? More often than not, I try to
         find a way to say yes that doesn't overly commit us in terms of person-
         nel, time, or money at the beginning of the partnership, because we
         can always extend and expand at a later date.

164
                                             "Oh, I Get By with a Little Help from My Friends"

· Do your research. What are the needs in your community? Attend
   community events and find out. Attend workshops and commit-
   tee meetings that are about partnerships, especially events that may
   feature potential community partners. Invite community members to
   your events so they can see what you're doing and think about how
   they could be part of it. Our community creative writing groups grew
   from a focus group we sponsored with area literacy leaders as we inves-
   tigated ways to be more involved with our immediate geographic area.

· Talk about what you're doing. Word of mouth is one of the best ways
   to develop new partners. Talking about a partnership with one group
   may spark ideas with another group. Letting your colleagues across
   campus and in the community know the breadth and variety of your
   work will help them think about you when they need the kinds of
   expertise your center or program has to offer. We are often called upon
   by other units on campus to provide one event, one workshop, or one
   day of services as part of a lengthier program that is occurring over
   time on campus.

· Advertise what you're doing. If you have a website, a Facebook page, a
   Twitter account, or other social media accounts, use them to advertise
   your partnerships and programming. This again will spark ideas for
   others, and may prompt potential partners to contact you. It will also
   prompt volunteers to get involved.

· Record or count what you're doing. Count the people you reach with
   your short-term collaborations, list these outreach contacts in your an-
   nual reports, and show how they benefit those involved, including the
   larger school community(ies). Most directors, whether tenured faculty,
   administrative staff, or some other label/title, have a charge for service
   work and possibly outreach or engagement. Count all of the times you
   consult with area teachers or visit local schools; those you report to
   will be happy to pass these positive statistics along the administrative
   line.

· Play matchmaker. Don't be afraid to say "no" or "not now." Some-
   times, you aren't the best fit or the solution to a problem. However, if
   you know which program or person would be a better fit, make intro-
   ductions and help them get started. The favor will more than likely be
   returned down the road.

· Have fun. Enjoyable, interesting partnerships and collaborations can
   be contagious and become a point of pride. They get people excited
   and usually lead to more projects (often bigger projects if that's what
   you desire); and on a pragmatic note, they can lead to more funding.

                                                                                          165
Smith

    My argument here is simple: value the possibilities of short-term partner-
ships and collaborations. One-time events may be repeated and expand into
larger events. Helping one high school may lead to discussions that send other
high schools your way. A successful workshop with a community group may
open up doors for other workshops and/or other groups. You never know where
your short-term WAC collaborations may lead. However, don't be disappointed
if the partnership stops with just the one workshop, the single event, or the
isolated visit. These singular occasions have their value as well, and should be
celebrated in their own right, acknowledging that you and your program are
team players invested in your school and community.

166
CHAPTER 10

WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED ABOUT
WAC PARTNERSHIPS AND THEIR
FUTURES

      Jacob S. Blumner and Pamela B. Childers

    In 1992, Pam wrote an article for Writing Lab Newsletter on writing center
collaborations entitled "College/High School Connections" in which she de-
scribed both the problems and advantages of high school-college writing center
collaborations. She saw the problems as a "lack of mutual understanding of
roles as educators, time restraints, pre-established roles of participants, pecking
order hierarchy, and why get involved with another institution" (Farrell 1). The
advantages of partnerships were seen as "interactive training of tutors, exchange
of ideas to survive the politics of education, focus on clear goals, shared expens-
es, and intellectual development" (Farrell 5). Over two decades later, little has
changed.

    After years of work with WAC partnerships, including the individual data
gathered by our colleagues in their chapters of this book, we have learned more
than we had imagined. First, there are many commonalities described in these
chapters that reinforce the results of our original survey for our 2011 article in
the WAC Journal. They include:

      · Respectful, collaborative nature of partnership
      · Jointly initiated collaborations
      · Involvement of many stakeholders in development to benefit all
      · Integration of programs into the fabric of all institutions involved
      · Importance of information sharing (transparency)
      · All or part of funding provided by both institutions
      · Partnerships formed around local contexts
      · Involvement of teacher preparation and faculty development
      · Involvement of students through variations of a writing center or

         writing fellows program

    These responses are unsurprising, yet they provide more evidence for the
kinds of conditions required for successful partnerships, no matter the context,
size, number of partners, or resources. These are not rules, but they do repeatedly

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2015.0735.2.10  167
Blumner and Childers

resurface in our research. When asked about his research of dual credit courses
for his dissertation, James Uhlenkamp, Director of Field Experience, Gleazer
School of Education at Graceland University, responded:

         The success largely depends on the college offering a predict-
         able set of classes at a time when the HS schedule can accom-
         modate them; on the HS providing a teacher willing and able
         to deliver a class at the college level, including at the college
         pace, which tends to be much more intense than the HS class-
         es; and on the two entities having a solid and understandable
         contract governing the expenses, expectations, responsibilities,
         and opportunities the partnership affords.

    In contrast, we also see what most of our authors, as well as respondents
to surveys and interviews, describe as the "uniqueness of every partnership."
Therefore, many of the commonalities have been listed in more general terms to
fit those individual partnerships, while each collaboration has some little quirks
that make it different from any other one. For instance, many of Trixie Smith's
short-term partnerships have specific qualities that are dependent upon the in-
stitutions or community groups involved. And, even though we hate to admit
it, most of the partnerships we have located involve English/writing teachers and
some science or history partnerships. In the undercurrent of these partnerships
are hidden ones involving mathematics, art, music, physical education and for-
eign language classes. They may begin when two educators meet at a conference
and decide to try an online exchange involving secondary education majors and
a high school music, art, mathematics or foreign language class. Deborah Snid-
er of Southern Utah University is editing a special issue of The Clearing House
(2016) called "Drawing from Within: The Arts & Animated Learning" that will
include secondary-college partnerships on writing in art. And, we are hearing
about more projects in future articles on a social science-mathematics partner-
ship that involves WAC, another based on research into the value of using En-
glish-speaking music (especially lyrics) to teach English to students in China,
and yet another discussing the value of teaching writing across disciplines in
high school for successful writing in college history classes. So, the importance
of WAC continues to go beyond our limited work here.

    In the spring of 2014 we wanted to gather more perspectives on WAC part-
nerships, so we invited international educators from California to Germany in
secondary, community college, and university writing programs to respond to
another survey. Based on their anonymous responses, we noticed similar pat-
terns to those mentioned above. However, we learned more specific information
from their responses to the following questions:

168
                                                                                    What We Have Learned

   1. If you have had experience with WAC partnerships through professional
       organizations or with colleagues or individuals at other institutions, de-
       scribe a successful one. What made it work?

   2. If you have had experience with a partnership that was less successful,
       what would you have done differently to improve the partnership?

   3. As a professional educator, what do you predict about WAC partnerships
       in the future? What might/should they look like? Will they be needed?

   4. What words of encouragement can you offer to present and future col-
       laborators?

    Responses to each of these questions brought similar ideas of what made the
collaborations successful. Common responses to Question 1 included mutual
respect, common goals, need for a clear plan with goals, faculty development and
common scholarship, flexibility in communication, and dedication of teachers
and administrators. A secondary educator appreciated "encouragement to pair
up with a faculty member from another discipline and create an autonomous
lesson that drew upon the expertise of the instructors to showcase another way
of approaching their discipline." Respondents also mentioned attendance at con-
ferences, such as CCCC and discipline-specific ones to bring back ideas for col-
leagues to implement, and use of the WAC Clearinghouse website (wac.colostate.
edu) that offers many professional open-access books and journals as resources.
One university respondent mentioned co-consulting with a secondary WAC spe-
cialist as an important part of a successful collaboration that impacted changes in
curriculum and staff development, as well as collaborative presentations at con-
ferences. Another respondent noted that mutual respect meant "going into the
relationship knowing that you have a lot to learn from each other. It also means
remembering that you are all concerned about the same thing: the students' suc-
cess." One university respondent described her successful partnership as follows:

         While in the college setting, email is the expected means
         of communication for pretty much everything, my WAC
         partnership with secondary school teachers requires a lot
         of texting. It also requires that I occasionally just show up,
         in person, in the high school classroom (even if that means
         dropping in unexpectedly). Sometimes it means sending mes-
         sages through liaisons, such as a college student who happens
         to be interning at the high school. All these "back channel"
         means of communication are necessary to make sure we're on
         the same page. Also necessary is getting to know one another
         outside of the school environment--by meeting for brunch,
         going out for drinks, hosting a cookout, etc.

                                                                                                 169
Blumner and Childers

    But what problems did respondents encounter that they would handle dif-
ferently? Mainly administrative issues, such as constant changes at the top in
schools struggling to find stability, while new people come in "with goals of pro-
ductivity not learning," overworking teachers. One respondent described how
leaders of the partnership "insisted on a very formulaic way of writing the expe-
rience up that many found off-putting, and the project was paired (needlessly)
with another effort to map the skills involved in particular courses." They speak
of consultants brought in "to conduct a workshop but not build a relationship."
In handling the situation differently, they mentioned that the WAC partnership
should be "on the books" as a course or real project, and faculty in-house train-
ing enables all partners to have the same terminology and understanding for
better communication.

    In considering the future of WAC partnerships, most respondents had very
clear individual concerns, so we will try to offer the most common suggestions.
One university respondent emphasized that WAC at universities has "to grow
organically, within departments and from individuals within departments.... we
need to stop the one size fits all models that still prevail. WAC needs to tran-
sition to CxC or another name and engage in the five languages (visual, oral,
alphabetical, mathematical, physical)." The majority of respondents clearly felt
that the need for WAC partnerships would increase in the future because of revi-
sions in the SAT and CCSS that include writing across disciplines, a resurgence
in popularity of WAC due to an emphasis on literacy, the need for writing in
job readiness, and advancements in writing in higher education and professional
training that we cannot even predict. Several respondents offered valuable com-
ments on this question. For instance, one respondent said:

         The testing agenda that drives many high school curricula
         (currently at least) does not have a clear analog at the college
         level, so it's hard for educators in the different contexts to
         truly see where each other is coming from. At the same time,
         that's exactly WHY we need these partnerships: because, if we
         want students to enter colleges with the habits of mind that
         colleges value, high school and college teachers (and adminis-
         trators) need to be talking with one another. In addition, true
         partnerships between high school and college instructors help
         remind the college-level faculty that they can learn a lot from
         their K-12 counterparts.

While another respondent added, "I think that they [WAC partnerships] will
become more numerous and necessary, if for no other reason than job readiness
is becoming the coin of the realm. I think that the stand-alone English depart-

170
                                                                                    What We Have Learned

ment that focuses primarily on literature is fading and that kind of `English' will
be folded into other programs while writing will become more distributed."

    So, what do WAC educators say to current and future WAC collaborators?
More than anything else, they emphasize that it should be a reciprocal relation-
ship in which all involved are learners as well as teachers who are passionate
about the partnership. They also suggest strong communication among mem-
bers of the partnership--teachers, administrators, students--to eliminate mis-
understandings. Also, they remind others that change takes time, so patience is
required through the stressful times of beginning the partnership. Again, they
mentioned the need for a contract or concrete document that outlines the goals
of the partnership. In valuing one's colleagues in a partnership, a respondent not-
ed, "there is a core of literacy-focused, imaginative teachers in our state whom
we have been able to tap as inspiring speakers and workshop leaders." As one
high school respondent said, "Working with a colleague from another discipline
liberates me from the chains of my own ignorance. I became an educator, in
part, because I loved to learn--not just English--and such partnerships create a
natural bridge to new knowledge and experiences."

    Finally, partnerships exist beyond the university with individual connections
that begin in high school. For instance, Austin Lin, a high school student inter-
ested in writing across the disciplines through the writing center, changed his
major from English to chemical engineering while at Johns Hopkins University.
However, he continues to value writing in his current field by writing a blog
for StayWithIt.org, a group started by the White House Council on Jobs and
Competitiveness to reduce attrition from engineering programs for undergrads
(http://staywithit.org/blog-entry/tennysons-daydream-what-engineering-ma-
jors-and-poets-have-common). In Austin's words, "I write about the importance
that writing had in making me a better engineer--in my case, writing across the
curriculum literally made me a better engineer" (Lin). Brandall Jones, recent
college graduate, commented on his high school experiences that he now uses;
"I agree that the collaboration between college professors and secondary school
teachers is imperative, in order to adequately prepare students for college writ-
ing.... I find myself helping friends here with writing challenges that are a breeze
for me" (Jones).

    Perhaps the most prominent example of lifelong influence on partnerships
may be Tommy Tobin, who worked with Pam and Trixie Smith through the
Tennessee Writing Center Collaborative when he was in high school. While he
attended Stanford, Tommy wrote an article for publication about the importance
of high school preparation for college writing (Tobin) that he revised with assis-
tance from Stanford's Andrea Lunsford (writing program director) and Clyde
Moneyhun (writing center director), then he presented with high school students

                                                                                                 171
Blumner and Childers

and Dilek Tokay of Sabanci University in Turkey at the 2007 WAC conference
in Austin, Texas. Now, while completing a law degree at Georgetown and work-
ing on a Master's degree in public policy at Harvard's Kennedy School, Tommy
presented on WAC partnerships at the 2014 European Writing Center Confer-
ence in Germany with authors Luise Beaumont (Chapter 7) and Kirsten Jam-
sen (Chapter 8). And, how many individual examples continue throughout the
world? These are the hidden future of WAC partnerships; however, we can also
make some more visible predictions based on what we have learned from others.

    We see two ways in the short term that these partnerships will advance; the
first is legislative and societal. More and more federal, state, and local govern-
ments are involving themselves in student success and education, and demands
are increasing to prepare students for life after school. Part of that pressure is
from stakeholders (students, parents, employers) questioning the bifurcation of
K-12 to higher education. The legislative and societal pressure will demand in-
creased accountability, and writing will be a key component of that because of
its civic and professional importance. Arguably, as with many other educational
movements that have arisen from legislative mandate, the vision may be limiting
and highly focused on accountability.

    Danielle Lilge in "Illuminating Possibilities: Secondary Writing Across the
Curriculum as a Resource for Navigating Common Core State Standards" de-
scribes ways in which secondary school teachers can apply writing in classrooms
across disciplines with the help of WAC advocates (college and university col-
leagues in all disciplines). She concludes, "WAC suggests the possibility for re-
conceptualizing CCSS-driven writing instruction in secondary classrooms not
as addendum but rather as central to content area learning--a necessary sup-
port in meaning making and understanding." Lilge argues that the connection
between WAC and the CCSS movement is an obvious one where these WAC
advocates can make a difference at the secondary level.

    The second way we see WAC partnerships advancing is through educators
seeing the value of the work for students, producing results and scholarship
about the work, and convincing school administrations that this work should
be valued and supported. With the heavy push toward civic engagement of our
colleges and universities and the growing need for support of our secondary
schools, WAC partnerships provide an avenue to benefit all involved. Profession-
al organizations, such as the Coalition of Urban and Metropolitan Universities,
see civic engagement by higher education as a moral imperative, and literacy
partnerships are often a central component of that engagement. As more part-
nerships are formed and shared, others will be able to replicate and improve on
the models. Then, ideally, this informed work will be used to educate commu-
nities and legislative bodies, which can in turn further promote and support this

172
                                                                                    What We Have Learned

important work.
    If one were to think like a futurist, one might imagine an educational system

that completely breaks down the barriers of moving from the K-12 system to
higher education. Sometimes we hear the term K-16 education, a nod to see-
ing education as a continuum without a vast chasm between twelfth grade and
college. Some form of higher education is becoming essential for professional
success, and the benefits to personal growth are also well documented. WAC
partnerships can lead the way to a seamless education that moves beyond the
nineteenth century model of education to something that better serves our stu-
dents in the twenty-first century.

    Although robots are already writing for humans (Thompson 2014), we also
predict that the collaborative efforts of educators will be necessary to prepare
others to record research and advancements across disciplines. Today, much of
what we do is not read by the masses, but it will still be necessary to advance
society globally. Though nefarious, programmers have developed computer pro-
grams to create "gobblygook" academic conference proposals and academic pa-
pers (Thompson), pushing us closer to computer-generated content. According
to the New York Times, computer-generated newspaper articles are gaining trac-
tion in the newsroom (Lohr 2011). What will be the role of writers in the future?
Educators can and should play a role in that future, and that role can be stronger
if educators are in partnership across the borders of K-12 and higher education.

    From individual short-term partnerships, as Trixie Smith describes in Chap-
ter 9, to cross-institutional collaborations, communication across disciplines
will continue to support cultural advancements and service to others. Because
university and secondary schools may become something totally different from
what they are today, we will also see new ways that we can partner globally.
Skype, Apple's Siri, and other technologies are just the beginning of what we
may expect and learn from the advancements of WAC collaborators in other
countries. As long as there is the need for shared information across disciplines,
there will be a need for WAC partnerships.

    Based on the survey responses and the valuable insights our authors have
brought to this book, we truly believe that WAC partnerships, no matter what
we call them, will become even more important to us as educators and to our
students at all academic levels in preparing them for the next phases of their lives.

WORKS CITED

Blumner, Jacob, and Pamela Childers. "Building Better Bridges: What Makes
   High School-College WAC Collaborations Work?" The WAC Journal 22
   (2011): 91-101. Web. 1 Nov. 2014.

                                                                                                 173
Blumner and Childers

Farrell, Pamela. "College/High School Connections." Writing Lab Newsletter
   16.1 (May-June 1992): 1+. Web.

Jones, Brandall. "Poetry and Readings." Message to Pamela Childers. 13 January
   2013. Email.

Lilge, Danielle. "Illuminating Possibilities: Secondary Writing Across the Cur-
   riculum as a Resource for Navigating Common Core State Standards." Across
   the Disciplines 9.3 (2012): n. pag. Web. 25 July 2013.

Lin, Austin. "Poetry, Chemical Engineering and Career Advancement." Message
   to Pamela Childers. 1 April 2014. Email.

Lohr, Steve. "In Case You Wondered, a Real Human Wrote This Column." New
   York Times. 11 Sept. 2011. Web. 3 Nov. 2014.

Thompson, Clive. "How to Tell When a Robot Has Written You a Letter: The
   Next Turing Test? Handwriting." The Message. 23 Sept. 2014. Web. 24 Sept.
   2014.<https://medium.com/message/how-to-tell-when-a-robot-has-written-
   you-a-letter-701562705d59>.

Tobin, Tommy. "The Writing Center as a Key Actor in Secondary School Prepa-
   ration." The Clearing House 83.6 (2010): 230-34.

Uhlenkamp, James. "RE: Thanks." Message to Pamela Childers. 21 June 2014.
   Email.

Uhlenkamp, J. J. (2012). "Do credit-based transfer programs have an impact on
   intellectual development from secondary education to post-secondary educa-
   tion?" Diss. The University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 2012. Web.

174
CONTRIBUTORS

    Luise Beaumont is a Writing Program and Writing Center enthusiast. She is
coordinator of the Writing Center at New York University Abu Dhabi where she
is planning on conducting research for her PhD. Luise is particularly interested
in tutor training, multilingualism in the Writing Center and integrating creative
writing methods in tutoring undergraduate students. She has co-authored mul-
tiple articles and chapters as well as presented on WAC, Writing Center practices
and creative writing strategies.

    Jacob S. Blumner is Director of the Marian E. Wright Writing Center and
Associate Professor of English at the University of Michigan-Flint. He has co-ed-
ited two books, and his work has appeared in The WAC Journal, Across the Disci-
plines, and Praxis: A Writing Center Journal. He lives at home with his wife, three
sons, and an overweight orange cat.

    Malcolm Graeme Childers is a former college art professor who chose to
devote his time to creating visual art, music and creative writing. Besides pro-
ducing a collection of relief etchings that are part of his multi-media book, Road-
songs: A Journey into the Life and Mindscape of an American Artist, he has also
produced the Rocky Mountain PBS documentary Roadsongs: A Journey into the
Rocky Mountain West. His interest in Writing Across the Curriculum includes
giving workshops and presentations at major professional conferences on writ-
ing, writing centers, and English.

    Pamela B. Childers, Caldwell Chair of Composition Emerita at McCallie
School, is Executive Editor of The Clearing House. Recipient of the IWCA Out-
standing Service Award, she serves on WAC and writing center boards and has
written numerous articles, chapters, The High School Writing Center, Programs
and Practices: Writing Across the Secondary School (with Gere and Young), and
ARTiculating: Teaching Writing in a Visual World (with Hobson and Mullin).
Pam consults on writing with all academic levels.

   Michelle Cox, founding director of Bridgewater State University's WAC
program, is Director of the English Language Support Office at Cornell
University, which provides support for international graduate students. She
serves on Across the Disciplines and WAC Clearinghouse editorial boards, and
on the International WAC Board of Consultants. She recently published
(with co-editor Terry Myers Zawacki) WAC and Second Language Writers:
Research toward Linguistically and Culturally Inclusive Programs and Practic-
es (WAC Clearinghouse/Parlor Press, 2014).

                                                                                                 175
Contributors

    Phyllis Gimbel is Associate Professor, Educational Leadership at Bridgewater
State University, where she served as the Assistant Coordinator of Writing Across
the Curriculum and Faculty Fellow in the Office of Teaching and Learning. Phyl-
lis has published and presented on school leadership and on faculty develop-
ment. Her second book, Healthy Schools: The Hidden Component of Teaching and
Learning, was published in October 2013. Phyllis received the V. James DiNardo
Alumni Award for Excellence in Teaching at Bridgewater State University.

    Marie Hansen is an English Language Arts teacher at Burnsville High
School, where she teaches eleventh-grade English, leads their writing center,
and directs student theater productions. Marie is also a teacher consultant for
the Minnesota Writing Project, an active member of the E12 Writing Cen-
ters Collective, and a graduate student at the University of St. Thomas in the
masters in literature program. In 2011, she received the Minnesota Council of
Teachers of English Developing Leadership Award for her passion and enthu-
siasm in the field.

    Debra Hartley is a co-director and webmaster of the Center for Writing at
the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, co-coordinator of Student Writing
Support, and technology liaison for the Minnesota Writing Project. She belongs
to Writing Center Professionals of Minnesota and the E12 Writing Centers Col-
lective. Her professional interests include the use of technology in writing cen-
ters and classrooms and digital storytelling.

    Kirsten Jamsen is the director of the Center for Writing at the University of
Minnesota-Twin Cities and co-director of the Minnesota Writing Project. She is
active in many national and regional professional organizations, and co-founded
the Writing Center Professionals of Minnesota and the E12 Writing Centers
Collective. With her colleagues, she studies writing consultancy, writing across
the curriculum, teacher professional development, and the role of technology in
writing centers and classrooms.

    Katie Levin is a co-directorof the Center for Writing at the University of
Minnesota-Twin Cities, where she co-coordinates Student Writing Support and
leads the Center's Interdisciplinary Studies of Writing program. A member of
many national and regional professional associations, she is new to high school
writing centers and is grateful for her E12 Writing Centers Collective colleagues'
knowledge and experience. She focuses on the push-and-pull of power, dis-
course, identity, and resistance in and through writing centers.

    Michael J. Lowry is a science teacher at the McCallie School in Chatta-
nooga, TN. A member of the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA),
he most recently served as its High School Division Director. He is Nationally
Board Certified (physics) and a Presidential Awardee for Excellence in Science
Teaching, and frequently leads workshops and writes about how writing may

176
                                                                                                 Contributors

be used to enhance teaching and learning in science. Michael has also received
NEH, NOAA and NASA fellowships.

    Michael McClellan holds a bachelor of science in chemistry from UW-La-
Crosse, plus a master in teaching and a master in education administration from
National-Louis University. He currently teaches at Forreston High School in Il-
linois. He became a chemistry/physical science teacher at Jefferson High School
in Rockford, IL in 2005-2006 where he taught for seven years. He has coached
varsity baseball and basketball for twenty years. He also has taught graduate com-
munications and leadership courses at National-Louis University for four years.

    Mary McMullen-Light directed the WAC Program at MCC-Longview for
over twenty years, collaborating with faculty in general education, career and
technical programs. She serves on the Board of Consultants for the International
WAC Network and contributed to the Statement of WAC Principles and Prac-
tices. She has presented at the International WAC Conference and CCCC. Mary
has worked at an alternative high school and is Research Coordinator for Out-
comes Assessment at Johnson County Community College.

    Dawn Myelle-Watson teaches sections of biology and physical science for
honors, "mainstream," and at-risk students in Jefferson High School in Rock-
ford, IL, where she also serves as the Freshman Academy Coordinator.

    Federico Navarro is a professor and researcher at Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Universidad Nacional de General Sarmiento and CONICET (Argenti-
na). He is the Colegio de la Ciudad Writing Program coordinator. His research
interests include genre pedagogy and professional communication. He has co-
authored "Escribir para aprender" (2013), edited "Manual de escritura para car-
reras de humanidades" (in press) and published in Boletín de Filología, RMIE,
Bellaterra, Nebrija, Páginas de Guarda and Texturas.

    Kristen Nichols-Besel recently completed her PhD in the Department of
Curriculum and Instruction at the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, where
she consulted with undergraduate and graduate writers at the University's Cen-
ter for Writing. Prior to graduate school, she taught high school English lan-
guage arts in Iowa. Currently, she teaches pre-service teachers at the College of
St. Scholastica and works in the writing center at Bethel University. Her research
interests include young adult literature and engagement of adolescents.

    Brad Peters is Professor of English, coordinator of WAC, and director of
undergraduate studies in English at Northern Illinois University. He prepares
teacher-licensure candidates in writing instruction and teaches graduate courses
in rhetoric. With Joonna Trapp, he co-edits the Journal of the Assembly for Ad-
vanced Perspective in Learning (JAEPL).

    Mandy Pydde completed training as Peer Tutor in Writing while doing her
studies in intercultural communication (M.A.). She worked as peer tutor in writ-

                                                                                                 177
Contributors

ing for two years at the Writing Center of the European University (Frankfurt
Oder/Germany). Mandy Pydde was part of a team that aimed at establishing
WAC and peer tutoring in writing at German high schools. She also held numer-
ous writing workshops for university students, high school students and teachers.

    Andrea Revel Chion is a teacher of biology and health at secondary schools
and a lecturer of biology didactics at teacher training colleges. She is also a pro-
fessor and researcher at the University of Buenos Aires. Her publications include
textbooks and several papers in educational journals. She is the co-author of
"Escribir para aprender" (2013). Her research focuses on school scientific argu-
mentation in relation to health and on narratives as a learning tool.

    Trixie G. Smith is director of The Writing Center at Michigan State Univer-
sity. Her memberships include IWAC, IWCA, ECWCA, CCCC, MiWCA, and
NWSA; she presently serves on the boards of both IWCA and ECWCA. Her
publications include textbooks on WAC/WID and FYW and articles/chapters
on writing centers, mentoring, and gender. Trixie's current research focuses on
working with graduate and faculty writers; queer mentoring and pedagogy; and
an oral history project about Sistrum, Lansing Women's Chorus.

    Debora Spears is Literacy Leader at Jefferson High School. She has a master's de-
gree in special education from the University of Illinois, a master in curriculum
instruction from National Louis University, and a master in reading from Rock-
ford University. Seven of her twenty-one years in teaching were spent working
with disabled pre-schoolers. She has co-taught professional development courses
in writing across the curriculum for six years.

    Simone Tschirpke is part of academic staff at the Writing Center of the
Europa Universität Viadrina, Frankfurt (Oder) Germany. She is involved in ev-
eryday writing center work and in peer tutor education. Together with colleg-
ues Simone founded the journal JoSch--Journal der Schreibberatung which is
especially supporting peer tutors to publish their perspectives and experiences.

    David Wellen of Jefferson High School teaches the full range of honors,
mainstream, and at-risk students in his biology classes. He specializes in working
with students who struggle to complete their required course credits in biology.
He has also coached football and wrestling for many years.

    Art Young is Robert S. Campbell Chair and Professor of English Emeritus at
Clemson University, where he founded and coordinated Clemson's award-win-
ning communication-across-the-curriculum program (1990-2009). In March
2002, Art received the Exemplar Award from the Conference on College Com-
position and Communication for outstanding achievement in teaching, research,
and service. He has published extensively on Writing Across the Curriculum and
in other areas connected to the theory and teaching of writing.

178
WAC PARTNERSHIPS

Working with educators at all academic levels involved in WAC partnerships,
the authors and editors of this collection demonstrate successful models of
collaboration between schools and institutions so others can emulate and
promote this type of collaboration. The chapters in this collection describe
and reflect on collaborative partnerships among middle schools, high schools,
colleges, and universities that are designed to prepare students for the kinds
of work and civic engagement required to succeed in and contribute to soci-
ety. The WAC partnerships celebrated in this collection include frameworks
to build connectivity between institutions while addressing Common Core
State Standards, academic and non-academic collaborations around science
education, WAC partnerships in Argentina and Germany, and both long- and
short-term collaborations.

Jacob S. Blumner is Director of the Marian E. Wright Writing Center
and Associate Professor of English at the University of Michigan-Flint. He
has co-edited two books, and his work has appeared in The WAC Journal,
Across the Disciplines, and Praxis: A Writing Center Journal.

Pamela B. Childers is Caldwell Chair of Composition Emerita at McCallie
School and Executive Editor of The Clearing House. She has written numerous ar-
ticles and chapters on WAC. Her books include The High School Writing Center,
Programs and Practices: Writing Across the Secondary School (with Anne Ruggles
Gere and Art Young) and ARTiculating: Teaching Writing in a Visual World (with
Eric H. Hobson, and Joan A. Mullin).

Perspectives on Writing
Series Editors, Susan H. McLeod and Rich Rice

The WAC Clearinghouse     W

Fort Collins, CO 80523

http://wac.colostate.edu

Parlor Press

Anderson, SC 29621

w w w.parlorpress.com

ISBN 978-1-64215-073-5
