    WAC AND SECOND
LANGUAGE WRITERS

             RESEARCH TOWARDS
            LINGUISTICALLY AND
       CULTURALLY INCLUSIVE
  PROGRAMS AND PRACTICES

                                                       Edited by
                                 Terry Myers Zawacki and

                                                  Michelle Cox
WAC AND SECOND LANGUAGE
       WRITERS: RESEARCH

  TOWARDS LINGUISTICALLY
AND CULTURALLY INCLUSIVE
 PROGRAMS AND PRACTICES
PERSPECTIVES ON WRITING
Series Editor, Susan H. McLeod

The Perspectives on Writing series addresses writing studies in a broad sense.
Consistent with the wide ranging approaches characteristic of teaching and
scholarship in writing across the curriculum, the series presents works that take
divergent perspectives on working as a writer, teaching writing, administering
writing programs, and studying writing in its various forms.

INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGES ON THE STUDY OF WRITING
Series Editors: Terry Myers Zawacki, Magnus Gustafsson,
and Joan Mullin

The International Exchanges on the Study of Writing Series publishes book-
length manuscripts that address worldwide perspectives on writing, writers,
teaching with writing, and scholarly writing practices, specifically those that
draw on scholarship across national and disciplinary borders to challenge pa-
rochial understandings of all of the above. The series aims to examine writ-
ing activities in 21st-century contexts, particularly how they are informed by
globalization, national identity, social networking, and increased cross-cultural
communication and awareness. As such, the series strives to investigate how
both the local and the international inform writing research and the facilitation
of writing development.

The WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press are collaborating so that these books
will be widely available through free digital distribution and low-cost print edi-
tions. The publishers and the series editors are teachers and researchers of writ-
ing, committed to the principle that knowledge should freely circulate. We see
the opportunities that new technologies have for further democratizing knowl-
edge. And we see that to share the power of writing is to share the means for
all to articulate their needs, interest, and learning into the great experiment of
literacy.
WAC AND SECOND LANGUAGE
       WRITERS: RESEARCH

  TOWARDS LINGUISTICALLY
AND CULTURALLY INCLUSIVE
 PROGRAMS AND PRACTICES

                Edited by Terry Myers Zawacki and Michelle Cox

                             The WAC Clearinghouse
                                  wac.colostate.edu

                               Fort Collins, Colorado
                                     Parlor Press

                               www.parlorpress.com
                             Anderson, South Carolina
The WAC Clearinghouse, Fort Collins, Colorado 80523
Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson, South Carolina 29621
 2014 by Terry Myers Zawacki and Michelle Cox. This work is released under a Creative Com-
mons Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 United States License.
ISBN 978-1-64215-055-1 (pdf ) | 978-1-64215-056-8 (epub) | 978-1-60235-503-3 (pbk.)
DOI 10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551
Produced in the United States of America

                         Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
WAC and Second language writers : research towards linguistically and culturally inclusive

  programs and practices / Edited by Terry Myers Zawacki and Michelle Cox.
pages cm. -- (Perspectives on writing)
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-1-60235-503-3 (pbk. : alk. paper) -- ISBN 978-1-60235-504-0 (hardcover : alk.

  paper) -- ISBN 978-1-64215-055-1 (pdf ) -- ISBN 978-1-64215-056-8 (epub)
1. English language--Rhetoric--Study and teaching--Foreign speakers. 2. Report writing--Study

  and teaching (Higher) 3. Second language acquisition--Study and teaching (Higher) 4.
  Interdisciplinary approach in education. 5. Writing centers--Administration. I. Zawacki, Terry
  Myers, editor of compilation. II. Cox, Michelle, 1971- editor of compilation.
PE1128.A2W123 2014
418.0071--dc23

                                                2014015318

Copyeditor: Don Donahue
Designer: Mike Palmquist
Perspectives on Writing Series Editor: Susan H. McLeod
International Exchanges Series Editors: Terry Myers Zawacki, Magnus Gustafsson, and Joan
Mullin

The WAC Clearinghouse supports teachers of writing across the disciplines. Hosted by Colo-
rado State University, it brings together scholarly journals and book series as well as resources
for teachers who use writing in their courses. This book is available in digital format for free
download at wac.colostate.edu.

Parlor Press, LLC is an independent publisher of scholarly and trade titles in print and mul-
timedia formats. This book is available in paperback, cloth, and Adobe eBook formats from Par-
lor Press at www.parlorpress.com. For submission information or to find out about Parlor Press
publications, write to Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson, South Carolina 29621,
or e-mail editor@parlorpress.com.
CONTENTS

A Note to Readers .3
       Michelle Cox and Terry Myers Zawacki

Foreword: Multilinguality Across the Curriculum  .5
       Jonathan Hall

Introduction .15
       Michelle Cox and Terry Myers Zawacki

Section I. Learning from/with L2 Students: Student Strengths, Coping
Strategies, and Experiences as They Write Across the Curriculum41

Chapter 1. Adaptive Transfer, Writing Across the Curriculum, and
Second Language Writing: Implications for Research and Teaching  .43

       Michael-John DePalma and Jeffrey M. Ringer

Chapter 2. Developing Resources for Success: A Case Study of a
Multilingual Graduate Writer  .69

       Talinn Phillips

Chapter 3. "Hey, Did You Get That?": L2 Student Reading Across the
Curriculum .93

       Carole Center and Michelle Niestepski

Chapter 4. Bridging the Gap between ESL Composition Programs
and Disciplinary Writing: The Teaching and Learning of Summarization
Skill .113

       Qian Du

Chapter 5. On Class, Race, and Dynamics of Privilege: Supporting
Generation 1.5 Writers Across the Curriculum .129

       Kathryn Nielsen

Chapter 6. Writing Intensively: An Examination of the Performance of
L2 Writers Across the Curriculum at an Urban Community College  .151

       Linda Hirsch

                                                                                                    v
Contents

Section II. Faculty Concerns and Expectations for L2 Writers181

Chapter 7. Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing: Faculty Dispositions and
Language Difference .183

       Terry Myers Zawacki and Anna Sophia Habib

Chapter 8. "I don't know if that was the right thing to do": Cross-
Disciplinary/Cross-Institutional Faculty Respond to L2 Writing .211

       Lindsey Ives, Elizabeth Leahy, Anni Leming, Tom Pierce,
       and Michael Schwartz

Chapter 9. Let's See Where Your Chinese Students Come From: A
Qualitative Descriptive Study of Writing in the Disciplines in China .233

       Wu Dan

Chapter 10. English is Not a Spectator Sport: Privileged Second Language
Learners and the For-Profit ESOL Classroom .257

       Marino Fernandes

Chapter 11. Making Stance Explicit for Second Language Writers in the
Disciplines: What Faculty Need to Know about the Language of Stance-
taking  .269

       Zak Lancaster

Chapter 12. In Response to Today's "Felt Need": WAC, Faculty
Development, and Second Language Writers  .299

       Michelle Cox

Section III. WAC Practices and Pedagogies Transformed 327

Chapter 13. Developing Writing-Intensive Courses for a Globalized
Curriculum through WAC-TESOL Collaborations  .329

       Megan Siczek and Shawna Shapiro

Chapter 14. Graduate Writing Workshops: Crossing Languages and
Disciplines  .347

       Elaine Fredericksen and Kate Mangelsdorf

    vi
                                                                                                      Contents

Chapter 15. Teaching Writing in a Globally Networked Learning
Environment (GNLE): Diverse Students at a Distance .369

       Jennifer Lynn Craig
Chapter 16. Campus Internationalization: A Center-based Model for ESL-
ready Programs .387

       Karyn E. Mallett and Ghania Zgheib
Chapter 17. Reconstructing Teacher Roles through a Transnational Lens:
Learning with/in the American University of Beirut .415

       Amy Zenger, Joan Mullin, and Carol Peterson Haviland
Chapter 18. Writing Histories: Lingua Franca English in a Swedish
Graduate Program  .439

       Thomas Lavelle and Alan Shima
Afterword: Writing Globally, Right Here, Right Now .465

       Chris Thaiss
Notes on Editors and Contributors  .477

                                                                                                  vii
WAC AND SECOND LANGUAGE
       WRITERS: RESEARCH

  TOWARDS LINGUISTICALLY
AND CULTURALLY INCLUSIVE
 PROGRAMS AND PRACTICES
A NOTE TO READERS

      Michelle Cox
      Dartmouth College

      Terry Myers Zawacki
      George Mason University

   We hope you find this collection as compelling and thought-provoking as we
have during our process of reading, thinking with, and editing these chapters.
Before you begin reading, we'd like to note two points.

   First, you may notice that we've listed Terry's name as first editor of the
collection and Michelle's name as first author of the introduction, and we
want to explain this choice. Throughout this project and our previous project,
editing a special issue of Across the Disciplines, "WAC and Second Language
Writing: Cross-field Research, Theory, and Program Development" (2011,
December), our collaboration has been rich, productive, and even joyful. We
have discovered that we make wonderful partners, matched in our work ethics
and complementary in our strengths. In order to equally share credit for our
collaborative work on both publications, in the ATD issue, we listed Michelle as
first editor of the collection and Terry as first author of the introduction. With
this project, we did the reverse.

   Second, terminology related to the students highlighted in this collection is
a complicated matter. In our introduction, we've chosen to use the designator
"L2." While we understand that this term is problematic, in that English may
be the third, fourth, etc., language of the students we're referring to, we have
chosen to use this designation to connect the work in this collection to the
wider scholarship of second language writing studies (for a further rationale for
using this designation, see Matsuda, 2012). As editors, however, we did not ask
our authors to use the term L2. Some used multilingual learner (MLL), some
used non-native English speaker (NNES), and some used English language
learner (ELL). Each term has its advantages and drawbacks, and each suggests
disciplinary affiliations and/or implies a certain political stance. We invite our
readers to engage in the conversation about terminology that is represented in
this collection as well as in the wider scholarship of second language writing and
composition-rhetoric/WAC.

                                                                                                    3
A Note for Readers

REFERENCE
Matsuda, P. K. (2012). Teaching composition in the multilingual world: Second

   language writing in composition studies. In K. Ritter & P. K. Matsuda
   (Eds.), Exploring Composition Studies: Sites, Issues, and Perspectives (pp. 36-
   51). Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.

    4
FOREWORD: MULTILINGUALITY
ACROSS THE CURRICULUM

Jonathan Hall
York College, City University of New York

   Writing Across the Curriculum (WAC) research was rather a latecomer
to the project of investigating the impact of linguistic diversity among our
students on our pedagogy, outcomes, and procedures. At the risk of grossly
oversimplifying, one might almost say that research on second language (L2)
writing issues followed something of a developmental curve, with the earliest
work emerging from K-12 studies on bilingual education and Generation 1.5,
then spreading to basic writing and the first-year composition level. The relation
between WAC and multilingual issues was forcefully raised in the 1990s to early
2000s by scholars such as Paul Kei Matsuda, Ann Johns, and Ilona Leki. In
recent years, WAC has been making a concerted effort to explore its own patch
of L2 ground. Most recently, a special issue of Across the Disciplines (hereafter
ATD) addressed the theme of "WAC and Second Language Writing: Crossfield
Research, Theory, and Program Development." The call for that issue advocated
a heightened attention to the presence of L2 writers in WAC and Writing in
the Disciplines (WID) courses and called for "research that would contribute
to the growing understanding of the complexities of writing across languages,
cultures, and disciplines." Contributors to the issue applied a variety of
theoretical perspectives, research methodologies, and institutional contexts to
questions raised on multilingual writers and WAC/WID. Subsequently, a panel
at the 2012 IWAC conference brought together several contributors for a live
exchange on topics raised in the issue and directions for future research and
WAC/WID practice.

   The panel, like the ATD issue itself, advanced the argument that the
concerns of multilingual writers are not in any way peripheral to or unusual
in the way that our profession will evolve, but rather are rapidly assuming a
central position in discussions of the future of WAC. The present volume, with
the same editors as the special issue, continues that argument, applying it to the
specific audiences and administrative functions of a twenty-first century WAC
program. In this preface, I draw examples from that ATD issue and the present
collection to identify and discuss three axes in WAC/WID research and practice
on L1/L2 issues, polarities that may be in tension, but are not incommensurable:

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.1.2  5
Hall

local and global, student experience and faculty expectations, and traditional
WAC pedagogy for all students and differentiated instruction for multilingual
learners. These are, in many ways, the same conflicts and uncertainties that have
been inherent in the WAC/WID project from the very beginning, yet all of
them take on new meaning and new dimensions in the age of the multilingual
majority.

LOCAL AND GLOBAL

   Historically WAC has been both an international movement and an intensely
local phenomenon. No two WAC programs are exactly the same, though, and
there has always been a tension between, on the one hand, an almost evangelical
fervor, a feeling of WAC as a universal and transformational pedagogy, and,
on the other, an insistence on the local--this campus, this faculty, this student
population, this course, this writer, this paper. But in today's interconnected
world, the relation between the global and the local takes on added complexity
as well as urgency.

   The very names of the institutions from which Amy Zenger, Joan Mullin, and
Carol Peterson Haviland (this volume) and Lynn Ronesi (ATD special issue) file
their reports pose the global/local issue in all its contradictory complexity: the
American University of Beirut (AUB) and the American University of Sharjah
(AUS). The latter, with a faculty largely imported from abroad (not all from
the US) and a student body representing 82 different nationalities, is a good
example of an English as an International Language (EIL) context: an institution
where English is the medium of academic instruction but not the dominant local
language. As Ronesi details her efforts to adapt a US-style writing fellows model
to the needs of local students and faculty, she delineates the need to re-think even
well-known and successful models in new contexts. Even more fundamentally, as
Zenger, Mullin, and Haviland suggest in their description of AUB, such projects
raise the question of what exactly we might we mean by "English" in this context.
How, for example, are the various "Englishes" present on a particular campus
related to other languages that students might use both outside and inside the
classroom? To what degree does the emphasis on "English" --especially within
an "American" university with US accreditation but outside of the US --carry
with it an inherent US/Western cultural imperialism in its very structure, and to
what extent are students able to strip out these cultural associations, regarding
English as a pragmatic, straightforward language to be used in business and
other transnational transactions? Can they, as some of them desire, simply speak
English without having English unconsciously speak them as well?

6
                                                                                                    Foreword

   Martha Patton's contribution to the ATD special issue focuses on what the
editors call "globalism at home": international students in a US context. These
students come to the US with some literacy in their L1, but often not much
familiarity with US academic procedures and little experience with writing in
English. Patton's article is particularly timely given the current trend, both at
cash-strapped public institutions still reeling from large cuts in state funding and
at financially struggling private colleges, of importing full-paying international
students to boost enrollments. But these students cannot ethically be educated
on the cheap: they often require support services of various kinds, as Patton
details while arguing for the value of conducting a systematic needs analysis at
one's own institution.

   On English as an International Language campuses, the need to accommodate
WAC practices to local culture is easily evident, while in domestic US cases,
the imperative for adjusting to local conditions is likely to be more subtle,
but nonetheless urgent. Most campuses are now aware that examinations of
linguistic diversity need to go beyond international students to consider the
complex language backgrounds of US-resident multilingual students. The
particular conglomeration of students (immigrants, "Generation 1.5," "heritage
learners," etc.) in particular classrooms, with their various multilingualities
and multicompetencies, requires our attention. In the US context, what are
the cultural consequences of the decline of the subtractive model of language
acquisition, i.e. the expectation that a student's second language will eventually
replace the first (Hall, 2009, pp. 36-37)? How will students who maintain
multicompetence in a variety of languages which they use for particular
purposes, which they mix and match casually and skillfully in their everyday
lives, bring a different sensibility to their academic studies? How will they read
differently and write differently, between multiple languages and across diverse
cultures, moving among and synthesizing genres and ideas in ways that we
cannot predict in advance, but will have to respond to day after day in the
present moment of the classroom?

   The relation between the "global" and the "local" becomes yet more complex
when interactions between instructor and student--or between student and
academic support staff--take place neither on a US campus nor on a campus
in another country but rather on a little bit of both and quite a lot in the
vast nowhere/everywhere of cyberspace. In the particular Globally Networked
Learning Environment (GNLE) described by Jennifer Craig in this volume,
students work toward a master's degree in engineering at MIT in a program
which includes 1) a one semester residency on the US campus, 2) continued
coursework over synchronous video connecting MIT faculty with students
residing in Singapore, 3) a research internship in Singapore, and 4) academic

                                                                                                   7
Hall

support provided online by staff in the US during the thesis-writing process.
Who is "at home" and who is in the "international" position in such a scenario?

   The comprehensive description by Dana Ferris and Chris Thaiss in the
ATD special issue of the various forms that L2 work takes on the University of
California at Davis campus emphasizes the complexity of the changes required,
showing how serious attention to these issues goes well beyond the occasional
faculty development workshop to impact nearly everything that we do on
campus, from placement to first-year composition, to writing intensive courses,
to curriculum within particular majors, to assessment, to writing centers and
other academic support services. If we are truly to situate ourselves both critically
and consciously in a global context and at the same time attend to the intensely
local characteristics of a unique campus population, and of the various needs
of the individuals within that population, a consciousness of linguistic diversity
has to be a factor in all of WAC's administrative and pedagogical decisions; it
must be explicitly included, because otherwise we may easily fall back on our
unspoken assumptions of monolingualism.

STUDENT EXPERIENCE AND FACULTY EXPECTATIONS

   Students and faculty, though they intersect in the same physical space
on campus, often seem to be speaking different languages. Once this was a
metaphor, but nowadays it is often literal. Faculty may find themselves not
fully understanding, especially on an experiential basis, either the challenges
faced or the resources brought to the table by their multilingual students, while
students, both L2 and L1, often regard faculty expectations as a guessing game,
a process of figuring out what the idiosyncratic instructor wants, rather than as
an example of discipline-specific rhetorical expectations.

   Faculty expectations for student writing are often complex and conflicted.
The studies by Ives, Leahy, Leming, Pierce, & Schwartz, and Zawacki and
Habib in this volume discuss this faculty ambivalence, finding that faculty
"want to be fair and ethical in working with linguistically diverse students, but
don't know how to do so while still sticking to the commonly held standards
for writing in their disciplines and institutions" (Ives et al.) Peggy Lindsey
and Deborah Crusan (ATD) show how assessments of student writing may be
affected by knowledge that faculty have about students' nationality and language
background, but that this effect may be in either direction, dependent, in part,
on the method of assessment. Thus issues of L2 literacy become entangled
with broader debates about how best to assess student writing, not only at the
college level but also K-12. Would it be fairer, as Lindsey and Crusan ask, to

8
                                                                                                    Foreword

assess writing based on a reading of a student paper in which the instructor is
unaware of the identity of the student, and therefore unaware of the students'
language background, nationality, and other factors that might impact their
writing? Many writing instructors want to know more rather than less about
their student writers, integrating literacy narratives and language background
information into their pedagogy and their assessment of student writing.
Or should we, as some suggest, adopt a distinction between "content" and
"writing," exactly the sort of dubious dichotomy that much of composition
research has laboriously debunked? The faculty in the Ives et al. study sometimes
characterized their assessment procedures as a no-win situation: feeling guilty
if they applied the same standards to monolingual and multilingual students--
and also feeling guilty if they did not do so. There are no easy answers to these
assessment questions, which are made more urgent by the frequent demands,
often coming from outside the classroom, for a universal standard of writing
proficiency, which all too often becomes defined reductively. How can we insist
on complexity, critical thinking, and subtle attention to the nuances of language
while also opening ourselves up to new insights that may arise from translingual
processes in student writing? How can we find ways for students to access what
they know--and what they are able to do in terms of writing skills--in their
other languages, and apply these knowledges and abilities to the new rhetorical
situations they encounter in their writing tasks in US academic contexts?

   While we have become more aware of the multilinguality of our students,
we have tended to overlook the equally complex--and potentially relevant--
multilinguality of some of our faculty. Anne Ellen Geller's survey (ATD) focused
on respondents who were teaching writing courses across the disciplines, and
who also identified themselves as multilingual. If multilingual students are often
invisible, multilingual faculty may be even more so, as they have adapted, in
order to survive in US academia, to a norm of English-only in their professional
publications and communications, and, often, as well, in their interactions
with students, even those with whom they may share a non-English language.
Yet, as Geller suggests, such faculty potentially constitute an under-utilized
resource as we seek to re-invent WAC/WID in the era of global Englishes and
translingual practices. But these faculty sometimes need encouragement to step
forward and bring their expertise to the WAC/WID classroom, to participate in
a program which they might otherwise perceive as dominated by unarticulated
monolingualist assumptions. In addition, multilingual faculty are potentially a
vital resource as we research the relationship between the process of entering a
discourse community--often described as analogous to learning a new language
(what Matsuda and Jablonski call "the L2 metaphor") --and the process of
learning to write in a completely new language code. These faculty have done

                                                                                                   9
Hall

both, and often have complex insights to share about both processes and the
relation between them, but we will only learn about these insights if we actively
seek these faculty out and ask them.

TRADITIONAL WAC PEDAGOGY FOR ALL
STUDENTS AND DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION
FOR MULTILINGUAL LEARNERS

   Thus far, WAC/WID approaches to L2 issues have focused primarily--
and appropriately--on changing faculty attitudes about multilinguality, and
here I think we have been somewhat successful. The next step, though, is
more difficult: persuading faculty to experiment with alternate pedagogical
practices. In order to do this we need to be able to answer, with a high degree of
specificity, the perenial question: "What can I do differently in class on Tuesday
morning?" L2 students, like their L1 peers, need rigorous training and practice
in academic writing, but some of our core WAC practices, such as in-class
spontaneous freewriting, may prove particularly difficult, and even potentially
counter-productive, for students who usually produce English text slowly and
only as part of a complex translingual process which involves their L1 as well.
Vivian Zamel (1995) suggests that ESL students need:

         multiple opportunities to use language and writetolearn,
         course work which draws on and values what students
         already know, classroom exchanges and assignments that
         promote the acquisition of unfamiliar language, concepts,
         and approaches to inquiry, evaluation that allows students to
         demonstrate genuine understanding--is good pedagogy for
         everyone. (pp. 518519)

   From the point of view of WAC administrators, Zamel's view sounds like good
news, for it is essentially an affirmation of the basic principles of WAC pedagogy.
The suggestion is that we are doing the right things, as we advocate for better
implementation of these principles in courses across the disciplines, but we just
need to make sure that faculty apply them in an even-handed way to L1/L2
students. An opposing view, one first posed by Ilona Leki in reference to first-year
composition, and extended to WAC/WID by Michelle Cox in the ATD issue, asks:

         Is it possible that WAC administrators and scholars, like our
         colleagues in L2 writing studies and first year composition,

10
                                                                                                    Foreword

         place the same overemphasis on writing? Have we paid more
         attention to the potential benefits of integrating writing into
         curricula than the possible costs to some students? (n.p.)

   In other words, is Zamel right that WAC is part of the pedagogical solution for
L1/L2? Or is Leki right that our insistence on writing to learn may inadvertently
be part of the problem? One midpoint between these positions would be to
find ways of incorporating theoretical insights, research methodologies, and
pedagogical techniques from other disciplines into our WAC/WID classroom
practices. Zak Lancaster's article (ATD) provides an illustration of both the
potential benefits and the particular difficulties of this approach. Drawing on
the concept of stance from Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL), Lancaster
analyzes student writing from a particular course, and suggests potential
pedagogical interventions. The course instructor found these techniques useful,
but he clearly would never have come across the SFL-based analysis on his
own; the breakthrough was only possible after a rather labor-intensive study of
a sample of student papers on the part of Lancaster. Thus Lancaster's project
highlights both the potential gains of a situated interdisciplinary approach--
which examines the texts and practices of a particular pedagogical context using
research-based tools--and also the difficulties inherent in exporting the hard-
won findings of such a time-invested study in ways that ensure they will actually
be used to help students in an upper-level disciplinary writing classroom.
How can we present our findings to faculty in a way that is both useful and
nonthreatening, and that is likely to filter through to the students? Michelle
Cox's contribution to this volume addresses this question of professional
development head on, describing specific workshop strategies for moving
faculty gradually from a difference-as-deficit model to an interim difference-
accommodation procedure and ultimately toward a difference-as-resource
consciousness which even advanced theoretical work in the area is only now in
the process of fully articulating.

   Sound WAC pedagogy remains an indispensable prerequisite to the type
of targeted differentiated instruction that a linguistically diverse student
body demands. But we also need to incorporate new methods, models,
and technologies which potentially offer previously unavailable means of
implementing strategies tailored to L2 students while also serving the needs
of L1 student writers. We are still in the relatively early stages of developing
WAC-based multilingual-friendly instructional techniques that are suitable for
a mixed population of students with a wide variety of linguistic backgrounds
in the same classroom. Given the extensive variety of instructional situations
that fall under the umbrella of WAC/WID, we will require a broad palette of

                                                                                                 11
Hall

approaches, some developed through painstaking situated studies in individual
courses and classrooms, others incorporating more general principles of course
and assignment design developed through interdisciplinary cooperation.
Traversing this pedagogical frontier is one of the most important challenges
that we face as WAC instructors, administrators, and researchers.

THE FUTURE

   The future of WAC/WID in pedagogy, administration, and research will
be determined by how well we negotiate the polarities represented by these
axes. It would be easy to do more of the same in administration, without using
local assessments to drive adaptations to the needs of specific populations,
cultures, and conditions. It would be easy to repeat our traditional faculty
development workshops on teaching effectively with writing in the discipline
without adapting them for our new student populations, and without exploring
ways of reaching these students directly using both emerging technology and
new adaptations of traditional resources such as writing centers. WAC/WID
can only maintain its viability as a twenty-first century pedagogical movement
and academic discipline if it recognizes the ways that linguistic diversity is
transforming our institutions. Multilinguality across the curriculum is not a
matter of adapting multilingual students to a monolingual English norm, but
rather of helping faculty adapt to the reality that multilingual students are not
going to check their other languages at the door; rather, the academy has to
open up the door and listen to what is being said in the hallway, and bring
that conversation inside, where it can be continued. We need to find ways, in
other words, for students to use their other languages in academic contexts--
doing archival research in their home language(s), for example, as happens
in the program Thomas Lavelle and Alan Shima describe in this volume, or
providing linguistic or cultural commentary on assigned readings that are in
English translation.

   Our classroom practice, our pedagogical theory, and our research all
need to change and develop in order to meet the challenges of the new
mainstream. By building our pedagogy on a solid research base which
combines global awareness with local specificity, we can adjust our college
writing pedagogy in order to reach multilingual learners and help them to
succeed at the highest academic levels. That is: Think globally. Research
locally. Teach consciously.

   The articles in this volume are a good place to continue that process and
that journey.

12
                                                                                                    Foreword

REFERENCES

Cox, M. (2011). WAC: Closing doors or opening doors for second language
   writers? Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
   atd/ell/cox.cfm

Ferris, D., & Thaiss, C. (2011). Writing at UC Davis: Addressing the needs of
   second language writers. Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://
   wac.colostate.edu/atd/ell/ferris-thaiss.cfm

Geller, A. E. (2011). Teaching and learning with multilingual faculty. Across the
   Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/ell/geller.cfm

Hall J., Lancaster, Z., Lindsey, P., & Ronesi, L. (2012, June). Multilingual writ-
   ers and the future of WAC. Panel presented at the International Writing Across
   the Curriculum Conference, Savannah Georgia.

Hall, J. (2009). WAC/WID in the next America: Re-thinking professional
   identity in the age of the multilingual majority. The WAC Journal, 20, 33-47.

Hall, J., & Navarro, N. (2011). Lessons for WAC/WID from language learn-
   ing research: Multicompetence, register acquisition, and the college writing
   student. Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
   atd/ell/hall-navarro.cfm

Horner, B., Lu, M., Trimbur, J. & Royster, J. (2011). Language difference in
   writing: Toward a translingual approach. College English, 73(3), 299-317.

Johns, A. M. (2001). ESL students and WAC programs: Varied populations
   and diverse needs. In S. H. McLeod, E. Miraglia, M. Soven, & C. Thaiss
   (Eds.), WAC for the new millennium: Strategies for continuing writing-across-
   the-curriculum programs (pp. 141-164). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Lancaster, Z. (2011). Interpersonal stance in L1 and L2 students' argumenta-
   tive writing in economics. Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://
   wac.colostate.edu/atd/ell/lancaster.cfm

Leki, I. (2003). A challenge to second language writing professionals: Is writing
   overrated? In B. Kroll (Ed.), Exploring the dynamics of second language writing
   (pp. 315-332). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Leki, I., & Carson, J. G. (1994). Students' perceptions of EAP writing instruc-
   tion and writing needs across the disciplines. TESOL Quarterly, 28(1), 81-101.

Lindsey, P., & Crusan, D. (2011). How faculty attitudes and expectations to-
   ward student nationality affect writing assessment. Across the Disciplines,
   8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/ell/lindsey-crusan.cfm

Matsuda, P. K., & Jablonksi, J. (2000). Beyond the L2 metaphor: Towards a
   mutually transformative model of ESL/WAC collaboration. Academic.Writ-
   ing, 1. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/aw/articles/matsuda_jablon-
   ski2000.htm

                                                                                                 13
Hall

Patton, M. D. (2011). Mapping the gaps in services for L2 Writers. Across the
   Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/ell/patton.cfm

Ronesi, L. (2011). "Striking while the iron is hot." A writing fellows program
   supporting lower-division courses at an American university in the UAE.
   Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/ell/
   ronesi.cfm

Zamel, V. (1995). Strangers in academia: The experiences of faculty and ESL
   students across the curriculum. College Composition and Communication,
   46(4), 506-521.

Zawacki, T. M., & Cox, M. (2011). Introduction to WAC and second language
   writing. Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
   atd/ell/zawacki-cox.cfm

14
INTRODUCTION

      Michelle Cox
      Dartmouth College

      Terry Myers Zawacki
      George Mason University

         ESL students can become very fluent writers of English,
         but they may never become indistinguishable from a
         native speaker, and it is unclear why they should. A current
         movement among ESL writing teachers is to argue that,
         beyond a certain level of proficiency in English writing, it
         is not the students' texts that need to change; rather it is
         the native-speaking readers and evaluators (particularly in
         educational institutions) that need to learn to read more
         broadly, with a more cosmopolitan, less parochial eye. The
         infusion of life brought by these ESL students' different
         perspectives on the world can only benefit a pluralistic society
         which is courageous enough truly to embrace its definition of
         itself.

                                 --Ilona Leki, Understanding ESL Writers:
                                         A Guide for Teachers (pp. 132-133)

   Ilona Leki made the observation that begins our introduction in 1992.1
While much attention has been paid by composition and second language (L2)
writing scholars in the intervening years to the "movement" to read the writing
of our English second language (L2)2 students with a "less parochial eye," we
still see significant gaps in the WAC/WID literature on how L2 students expe-
rience writing in the disciplines, how teachers across the curriculum read the
writing of their L2 students, and what constitutes an effective and linguistically
and culturally inclusive pedagogy. With our co-edited special issue of Across
the Disciplines--"Writing across the Curriculum and Second Language Writers:
Cross-Field Research, Theory, and Program Development"--we brought atten-
tion to these gaps and the need for WAC theory and research that addresses the
realities of what Jonathan Hall (2009) has called "the multilingual majority" at
our institutions. In this collection, we extend that conversation, by including

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.1.3  15
Cox and Zawacki

chapters that investigate more widely and deeply the experiences of L2 writ-
ers across the undergraduate and graduate curriculum, faculty expectations for
these students, and courses and programs that have been developed to support
both students and faculty.

   While the chapters we've brought together here are primarily oriented towards
research, our goal in assembling the collection was also to provide a wealth of
pedagogical, curricular, and programmatic practices, a goal realized in each of
the chapters. We've also been interested in presenting a range of perspectives
and institutional locations and so the chapters here offer perspectives from
students and faculty at large public universities, community colleges, smaller
liberal arts colleges, a for-profit English language school, and locations outside
of the US, including China, Sweden, Lebanon, and, virtually, Singapore. And,
because L2 writing at the graduate level is increasingly becoming a focus for
WAC programmatic efforts, we've included a number of chapters addressing
this exciting and relatively new area of research and practice. Finally, the
extensive lists of references provided at the end of each of the chapters offer an
abundance of resources for further research and practice.

   The overarching goal that drives this collection is this: that WAC theory,
research, and practice must be expanded to include and "embrace," to echo
Leki, the differing perspectives, educational experiences, and written voices of
second language writers. As we noted at the outset, this is not a new argument,
and, for that reason, we think it's important to review the second language
writing (SLW) scholarship that has elaborated on this valuing-difference stance,
a stance also endorsed by the authors in this collection. Organizing the eighteen
chapters that make up the book into three discrete sections was no easy task,
given that the themes and foci, not surprisingly, often overlapped in the authors'
discussion of their research findings and the resulting programs and practices.
To highlight these overlapping themes and findings, we took the liberty as
editors--with the authors' consent--of embedding connections among these
as relevant in each of the chapters.

   Before turning to our review of the SLW literature and a description of
our sections and chapters, we want to lay out three guiding principles that
are integral to the work we do as WAC/WID professionals but that also, we
believe, need to be interrogated and expanded in light of the diverse linguistic,
educational, and cultural backgrounds of the L2 writers who are more and more
the majority at our institutions. Derived from the WAC/WID literature, three
key principles we see underlying WAC/WID work are:

    Writing is a powerful mode of learning and communication, with writ-
       ers' and teachers' goals for the writing calling for varied writing processes
       and teaching approaches.

16
                                                                                                 Introduction

    Writing is situated, with structural, rhetorical, epistemological, and dis-
       coursal features varying according to the context of the writing (disci-
       pline, profession, activity system). These differences need to be taught
       and respected (i.e. writing across the curriculum is not writing-as-an-
       English-major across the curriculum).

    By promoting a paradigm shift in how writing is valued, understood, and
       taught, WAC programs can have transformative and widespread effects
       on pedagogy and wider campus cultures around teaching and learning.

   When we consider these principles with an awareness of our students' mul-
tilinguality, we ask, as many L2 writing practitioners have asked, whether the
same writing-to-learn approaches are equally beneficial to students who use
English as a first language (L1) and L2 students. How might the writing and
revision processes of L1 and L2 students differ and how can these differences be
supported pedagogically? How might learned and culturally different rhetorical
approaches be reflected in the academic writing L2 students produce? How do
we WAC professionals and WID practitioners need to adjust our practices to
make them more accessible to and inclusive of L2 writers? What language ac-
quisition theories and research do we need to emphasize in our faculty develop-
ment work? What information do faculty, even those versed in WAC practices,
need to be given to help them understand their L2 writers and work with their
writing more effectively? Regarding the latter, for example, Terry and Michelle
have both worked with well-meaning faculty who focus predominantly on ed-
iting when giving feedback to L2 students, something they do not do when
responding to the same kinds of writing activities by L1 students. We suggest,
then, that each of the principles we've set out above need to be expanded to
include the following awarenesses and practices (which is by no means an ex-
haustive list and which also reiterates principles articulated in the CCCC State-
ment on Second Language Writing and Writers [2009] and much of the SLW
literature):

    Differences in Englishes should be respected. These Englishes include
       interlanguage (the language a language learner develops while learning
       a language), World Englishes, dialects of English, and the varieties of
       English students develop through code-meshing.

    Writing programs, courses, assignments, activities, and assessments
       should be constructed in such a way that linguistically and culturally
       diverse students have the potential to be as successful as L1 students
       and that allow them to draw on their cross-cultural and cross-linguistic
       resources.

    By promoting a difference-as-resource academic writing culture rather
       than programs and pedagogical practices aimed at assimilating L2 stu-

                                                                                                 17
Cox and Zawacki

       dents to Western culture and standard written English (SWE) norms,
       WAC programs can have a transformative and widespread effect on the
       ways faculty teach with writing across the disciplines and respond to the
       writing of all multilingual writers, whether students or colleagues.
   As we noted, these principles are not original to us, but, in fact, have a
long history in SLW scholarship, to which we now turn with our review of the
literature organized according to the bulleted list above.

DIFFERENCES IN ENGLISHES SHOULD BE RESPECTED

   In SLW scholarship, it has long been recognized that L2 writing differs in
salient ways from L1 writing (for a succinct review of literature that examines
these differences, see Silva, 1993). Second language acquisition is a long
process, and, as the writer acquires the second language, their writing will reflect
their "interlanguage" (Selinker, 1977) --a continuum that reflects the writer's
developing understanding of the language as s/he "moves successfully toward
closer and closer approximations of the target language" (Silva, Leki, & Carson,
1997, p. 405). How close these approximations ultimately become depends on a
number of factors, but very few adult learners of second languages--researchers
estimate only 5%--will develop a proficiency in the language that matches
that of a native speaker, though "many if not most will attain the ability to
communicate relative to their needs" (Silva, Leki, & Carson, 1997, p. 413).

   As Leki suggests in our opening quote, SLW scholars have questioned the
goal of L2 students writing like native speakers of the language. In 1979, Del
Hymes proposed the goal of "communicative competence" for English Language
Teaching (ELT), a pedagogical theory that focused on communication in the
target language appropriate for a particular use and rhetorical situation. While
this theory shifted the emphasis away from perfection in form to effectiveness
of the language used for communicating within a particular situation, it was
critiqued for leading to pedagogies focused too narrowly on particular tasks and
on the rules and conventions for communicating within particular domains.
Bronwyn Norton Peirce (1989), for example, critiqued communicative
competence pedagogies for seeking to assimilate students to the norms in
particular arenas (such as academic writing) without giving them the means
to query those norms, and for limiting students to narrow arenas of writing
without giving them the means to write in other arenas (such as civic writing).
He acknowledges, however, that those who teach from a communicative
competence stance do so with students' best interests in mind. To illustrate this
stance, he quotes Braj Kachru (1986) who writes: "Knowing English is like

18
                                                                                                 Introduction

possessing the fabled Aladdin's lamp, which permits one to open, as it were,
the linguistic gates of international business, technology, science, and travel.
In short, English provides linguistic power" (as quoted in Peirce, 1989, p.
402). But, he argues, English can be seen as a "Trojan horse" because, quoting
David Cooke (1988), it is a language of "cultural intrusion ... [I]n a very real
way, English is the property of elites, expressing the interests of the dominant
classes" (as quoted in Peirce, 1989, p. 402). In light of Kachru and Cooke's
positions, Peirce elaborates on the moral dilemma that faces English language
teachers: "Are we contributing to the demise of certain languages or linguistic
communities? Does the teaching of ESL or EFL (English as a Foreign Language)
serve to entrench the power of an elite, privileged group of people who may
have little interest in the welfare of the majority of the people in the country?
Do teachers of ESL sometimes participate in [this] process?" (1989, p. 402).

   It is this recognition of English language teaching as political, as endorsing a
particular stance toward English and a particular variety of English, that has led
to critical approaches to ELT. Echoing Cooke and Peirce, A. Suresh Canagarajah
(1993) states that, "In practicing academic writing, students are acquiring not
only a skill, certain cognitive processes, or communicative competence, but also
the set of preferred values, discourses, and knowledge content of the academic
community" (p. 303) and that, for L2 writers, the attempt to join the academic
community may have detrimental consequences:

         Apart from the identity crisis or rootlessness this encounter
         will create, the community allegiances of students will also
         be affected as they face the danger of being ostracized by
         either their native or the academic community. That is, if
         they insist on membership in their native community (and
         maintain the identities and values associated with it) they will
         be judged unfit for the academic community, or vice versa.
         Even if they gain membership in the academic community,
         at whatever psychological or social costs, the chances are
         that they will be provided only negative subject positions by
         its discourse, such as being cognitively deficient, deviant, or
         even pathological. (p. 303)

   Canagarajah (1993) argues for ELT pedagogies that "enable students
to employ their local knowledge and counter-discourses to resist ideological
domination, forge positive subject positions, and engage in emancipatory
interests" (p. 303), goals he further elaborates in his later publications
(Canagarajah, 1999; 2002; 2004; 2006a; 2006b).

                                                                                                 19
Cox and Zawacki

   SLW scholars have also questioned the focus on Standard Written English
(SWE), a variety of English rooted in the US in Anglo-American English,
arguing that this focus devalues the many other varieties of Englishes that L2
students use. These Englishes include varieties that have developed in other
nations, such as Nepali English (Daniloff-Merrill, 2010), and Englishes created
by L2 writers as they "code-mesh" (Canagarajah, 2011), drawing from their
many linguistic, cultural, and rhetorical resources. SLW scholars have also
argued that teachers should pay attention to the needs and goals of the students
for learning English. For instance, Tony Silva, Ilona Leki, and Joan Carson
(1997) argue that we should

         acknowledge that those who are learning to write in a second
         language in an institutional setting may be doing so only to
         satisfy the requirements of the institutional setting and may
         never again need to write, or perhaps even to read, a single
         word in their second language in the rest of their lifetimes,
         particularly if these learners return to their native countries.
         (p. 413)

   Placing an emphasis on the formalities of academic American English for
the writing of these students, they say, may lead to an "inappropriate negative
evaluation of those who do not become particularly proficient" (p. 413).

   It's important to note that this insistence on SWE has also been challenged
on many fronts in the literature from composition studies: from process
movement advocates (see, for example, Ken Macrorie's attack on "Engfish"
in Uptaught, 1970), from arguments around valuing black English vernacular
(see, for example, Geneva Smitherman's Talkin and Testifyin: The Language of
Black America, 1977), from "alternate discourse" perspectives (see, for example,
Pat Bizzell, Chris Schroeder, and Helen Fox's collection Alt Dis: Alternative
Discourses in the Academy, 2002), and from "translingual" writing perspectives
(see Horner, Lu, Royster, & Trimbur, 2011; Horner, NeCamp, & Donahue,
2011).

   Indeed, in 1974, a position statement from the Conference of College
Composition and Communication, Students' Right to Their Own Language,
asserted that dialectic variations in student writing should be respected and
honored. Mina Shaughnessy (1979) helped composition scholars and teachers
see differences in the writing of basic writers as windows into the mind of the
writer, by showing the logic behind what would typically be seen only as errors.
And, most recently, Bruce Horner, Min-Zhan Lu, Jackie Royster, and John
Trimbur (2011) have argued that "difference in language" should not be seen

20
                                                                                                 Introduction

as "a barrier to overcome or as a problem to manage, but as a resource for
producing meaning in writing, speaking, reading, and listening" (p. 303-304).
These views are in concert with the stance toward L2 writing that we propose
WAC endorse.

LINGUISTICALLY AND CULTURALLY INCLUSIVE
WRITING PROGRAMS, COURSES, ASSIGNMENTS,
ACTIVITIES, AND ASSESSMENTS

   Related to the second bullet point in our list of expanded WAC/L2 principles,
we turn now to another strand of research in SLW that has focused on the
writing experiences of L2 students as they write in courses and contexts across
the curriculum. Michelle Cox's (2011) review of this longitudinal research
revealed that second language writers often struggle due to writing assignments
that "assume deep cultural and historical knowledge of the US" (para. 9), the
lack of scaffolding of assignments, the lack of time for completing the heavy
reading and writing required by a project, and evaluation methods that focus
too heavily on standard written English. There's also an abundance of SLW
literature on developing linguistically and culturally inclusive assignments and
writing curricula, noting especially the contributions made by Dana Ferris on
teaching L2 writing (2004, 2009) and, in WAC contexts, Leki's pedagogical
recommendations in her extensive body of work on L2 writers across disciplines.
Also related to WAC contexts, Joy Reid and Barbara Kroll (1995) analyze eleven
assignment descriptions from across the curriculum for accessibility and equity
to L2 students, and then make recommendations for creating assignments
that are more conducive for L2 student success. In their scholarship, SLW
practitioners also address other faculty who work with L2 students, including
composition instructors (such examples include work already cited, particularly
Leki, 1992; Silva, Leki, & Carson, 1995) and WAC program administrators
(see Cox, 2011; Hall, 2009; Johns, 2001; Matsuda & Jablonski, 2000; Zamel,
1995; Zamel & Spack, 2004).

   Assessments of L2 writing have also been given a great deal of attention in the
SLW literature considering the range of potentially detrimental effects of these
assessments on L2 writers. Research in this area has focused on how L2 writers
are evaluated in relation to their L1 peers (Lindsey & Crusan, 2011; Rubin
& William-James, 1997; Song & Caruso, 1996), what features of L2 writing
are particularly "irritating" to faculty (Santos, 1988; Vann, Meyer, & Lorenz,
1984), and how the background of the evaluator affects his/her evaluation of
L2 writers (Weigle, Boldt, & Valsecchi, 2003). Another research area focuses on

                                                                                                 21
Cox and Zawacki

the ideological aspects of evaluation. Robert E. Land, Jr. and Catherine Whitley
(1989), for example, argue that to evaluate an L2 student's essay according to
the norms of SWE and Western rhetorical patterns not only disempowers the
student, but ignores the realities of an increasingly pluralistic US culture and
language and the rise of World Englishes. Other SLW scholars have argued that,
given the additional cognitive load of reading and writing in a second language
and the inevitability of what we may see as written accent in L2 writing (Leki,
1992, p. 129), it should be fair to assess L2 students differently in comparison
to their L1 peers, by extending deadlines, adjusting page-length requirements,
and not being as particular about SWE.

TRANSFORMATIVE EFFECT OF MULTILINGUAL
AND MULTICULTURAL STUDENTS ON
INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION

   Our assertion--that multilingual multicultural students have the potential
to transform academic writing and teaching practices across institutions--can
also be traced to L2 writing professionals who have often placed advocacy
for L2 writers at the center of their work by partnering with students in their
efforts to negotiate with "institutions that refuse to accommodate diversity"
(Leki, 2002, p. 59). Why is it that the student is seen as needing to change,
but not the institution? they ask. Sarah Benesch (1994), who is credited with
bringing critical pedagogy to ELT, questioned why it is seen as "unrealistic to
expect the university to adopt itself to the cultures, world views, and languages
of nonnative-speaking students" and "realistic" for L2 students to adopt the
cultures, world views, and language variety of the university (p. 711). To
combat this tendency, L2 writing teachers have proposed pedagogies that invite
L2 students to investigate relationships among language, power, and privilege
(for one particularly innovative example, see Zamel, 2002), so that, as Vivian
Zamel (2002) explains, the institutions themselves "can foster the language and
critical thinking of students" and recognize "the ways in which these students,
with their multicultures and their multivoices, can contribute to and transform
the very institutions they inhabit and thereby enrich the lives of all of us who
work there" (p. 339).

   As will be clear in this collection, we and all of the authors who've contributed
chapters are greatly indebted to this work and transformative vision as we carry
on these vital WAC/L2 writing conversations and collaborations.

                                               

22
                                                                                                 Introduction

   The eighteen chapters in this collection are organized into three sections, each
corresponding to the three WAC/L2 writing-inclusive principles we described
earlier, the first related to students as writers, the second to the contexts in which
students write and faculty teach, and the third to the programmatic practices
that have the potential to transform writing and teaching practices across the
curriculum: Section I. "Learning from/with L2 Students: Student Strengths,
Coping Strategies, and Experiences as They Write Across the Curriculum";
Section II. "Faculty Concerns and Expectations for Multilingual Writers";
and Section III. "WAC Programs and Practices Transformed." Along with the
foreword by Jonathan Hall, the book closes with an afterword by Christopher
Thaiss.

Section I: Learning from/with L2 Students: Student
Strengths, Coping Strategies, and Experiences
as They Write Across the Curriculum

   Each of the chapters in Section I features research that focuses on the
resources multilingual writers bring to US undergraduate and graduate
classrooms: their strengths as writers and rhetoricians, the ways in which they
adapt writing knowledge for new writing situations, and the coping strategies
they develop as they traverse and negotiate the US college and university
curriculum. Framing this section is Michael-John DePalma and Jeffrey Ringer's
investigation of how multilingual writers negotiate the various rhetorical
situations in which they find themselves and how they transfer, apply, adapt or
reshape the writing knowledge they've learned in one context for other different
contexts. In "Adaptive Transfer, Writing Across the Curriculum, and Second
Language Writing: Implications for Research and Teaching," the authors
provide an extensive review of the research on transfer and then go on to show
how instructors can support L2 students' agency as writers by valuing the ways
they may be reshaping and transforming prior writing knowledge for their own
linguistic and cultural purposes. Regarding the latter, their chapter offers a
provocative rereading of Leki's central argument in her landmark study, "Coping
Strategies of ESL Students in Writing Tasks Across the Curriculum" (1995), an
article that is also referenced by other authors in this section. Addressing WAC
researchers who wish to investigate the kinds and processes of adaptive transfer,
DePalma and Ringer provide lists of questions that can be asked of students to
discover the adaptive strategies they use in WID contexts. Such research and
the adaptive transfer framework, they suggest, will help WAC professionals and
WID teachers complicate their expectations for the writing knowledge students
should have transferred from prior courses.

                                                                                                 23
Cox and Zawacki

   The next three chapters all show how students are adapting lessons learned
in other courses, as well as creating new strategies that are self-taught. In
"Resources for Success: A Case Study of a Multilingual Graduate Writer,"
Talinn Phillips presents a longitudinal case study of a multilingual graduate
student to showcase the remarkable initiative he took to manage writing tasks
successfully in his courses. Chozin, the student she follows, is, in many ways,
an example of the kind of adaptative transfer Depalma and Ringer want readers
and teachers to recognize. As with DePalma and Ringer, Phillips uses Leki's
(1995) taxonomy of coping strategies as a pivotal point for her discussion,
but she deepens Leki's categories by showing how Chozin benefitted by both
positive and negative experiences around writing. What is particularly moving
about this chapter, we think, is that Chozin is not a student that Phillips, who
was his writing tutor, or his advisor expected to succeed given that he had "one
of the lowest proficiency levels [she]'d encountered in over five years of tutoring
[the] campus's multilingual graduate students" (p. 73). Due to the strategies
this student developed, however, not only did he graduate successfully from the
program, but he did so on time and with an outstanding thesis prize in hand.

   The next chapter, Carole Center and Michelle Niestepski's "`Hey, Did
You Get That?': L2 Student Reading Across the Curriculum," focuses on the
strategies undergraduate L2 students develop to manage their heavy reading
load, many of which are strikingly similar, as the authors note, to the coping
strategies Leki (1995) reported. In an appendix, the authors provide a valuable
inventory of reading practices useful as a guide for understanding the degree
to which students write informally while reading, such as taking notes and
marking and annotating passages they don't understand. Their chapter also
gives us reasons to be optimistic as it shows faculty across disciplines being
sensitive to their students' different cultural and linguistic backgrounds by
allowing them to draw on their own cultural locations and experiences and
making other accommodations to help them learn the material.

   Qian Du's "Bridging the Gap between ESL Composition Programs and
Disciplinary Writing: The Teaching and Learning of Summarization Skill"
continues the focus on the reading-writing connection and the ability of L2
students to adapt their reading methods to learn the material, this time with
research on one particular writing-to-read strategy: summary writing. In this
chapter, Du describes the benefits, challenges, and complexity of summary
writing, according to the literature and for the students she studied. For L2
students in particular, as she shows, summary writing (in response to test
questions, in reporting on their reading and research, and so on) is a particularly
complex process, requiring an understanding of different levels of information
in a wide range of texts (e.g. oral lectures or multimedia productions in addition

24
                                                                                                 Introduction

to print), along with the ability to represent the original text accurately and
concisely. As such, the process of summary writing is a valuable learning tool;
yet, as she argues, a summary is not a context-free genre and so must be taught
by teachers in disciplines providing guidelines and support for the task.

   With Kathryn Nielsen's chapter "On Class, Race, and the Dynamics of
Privilege: Supporting Generation 1.5 Writers Across the Curriculum," we
turn to a different kind of adaptation among a specific population of L2
writers--resident immigrant students, often termed generation 1.5 students.
Although many of these students may face some of the same language and
writing challenges as international students, they are also acutely aware of
their linguistically and culturally in-between status and how this status might
affect the way they are treated by their teachers and peers, as Nielsen's chapter
shows. Nielsen argues that there are still large L2 writing areas that are not
being sufficiently addressed, specifically how the variables of race, class, and
gender, combined with culture and language, may affect the way the student
writer is respected by peers and evaluated by teachers. With her research
on the perceptions of five underserved generation 1.5 students from the
Dominican Republic enrolled in a predominately white liberal arts college in
the northeast, Nielsen begins to address the areas of class and race as important
variables in how some L2 students experience writing and writing-intensive
(WI) classrooms. She shows how they have adapted to a classroom and campus
climate that they perceive as less than supportive when it came to peer review,
group work and collaborative assignments, teachers' evaluation practices, and,
overall, the classroom dynamic.

   The final chapter of this section, Linda Hirsh's "Writing Intensively: An
Examination of the Performance of L2 Writers Across the Curriculum at an
Urban Community College," compares the success rates of L2 students enrolled
in WI sections (sections L2 students were previously blocked from taking)
and non-WI sections of the same course, examining the impact of WI courses
on L2 students and the pedagogical practices that help them succeed. While
Hirsch is looking at a community college context, the questions she's asking
about the fairness of enrolling students in demanding WI courses are relevant
at all levels, as are her surprising findings that L2 students in WI sections that
provided language-support and scaffolded writing instruction passed the course
at a higher rate than did ESL students enrolled in non-WI sections of the same
course. Her chapter, which analyzes the strategies, techniques, and assignments
that seemed to facilitate student learning, brings together many of the themes
discussed in this section by speaking to both the coping strategies that students
initiate and the faculty's responsibility for creating environments in which L2
students can succeed.

                                                                                                 25
Cox and Zawacki

Section II: Faculty Concerns and Expectations
for Multilingual Writers

   With Section II, we shift the focus from students to faculty with chapters
exploring faculty perceptions of and reactions to L2 writing, their openness to
professional development related to L2 writing, and approaches to WAC faculty
development. In "Negotiating `Errors' in L2 Writing: Faculty Dispositions
and Language Difference," Terry Myers Zawacki and Anna Habib investigate
faculty reactions to perceived error in L2 student writing, particularly "how they
described the errors and why they seemed to be `disturbed' by particular kinds
of errors." While Zawacki and Habib agree with the translingual approach
that values difference in writing, they wanted to see how theory met practice,
particularly the practices of faculty across the curriculum. Their analysis reveals
many of the complexities in the interaction between faculty and L2 writing,
including concerns about students' comprehension of the material and the
fairness of assessing the work of L2 students by a different standard than that for
L1 students. As Zawacki and Habib report, however, they also found that the
faculty who seemed least willing to negotiate meaning in L2 writing were also
often the faculty who were most willing to spend time working with L2 writers
on their writing. Further, they show that, while some faculty exhibited little
tolerance for written accents, the majority expressed uncertainty about how to
respond to and evaluate the writing in ways that would be most beneficial to
the L2 student.

   The chapter "`I Don't Know if That Was the Right Thing to Do': Faculty
Respond to Multilingual Writers in the Disciplines," collectively researched
and authored by graduate students at the University of New Mexico--Lindsey
Ives, Elizabeth Leahy, Anni Leming, Tom Pierce, and Michael Schwartz--also
takes up questions around faculty perceptions of L2 writing and writers. While
Zawacki and Habib's investigation occurred at a research university with a
large international student population in the mid-Atlantic region, Ives et al.'s
research is based in a state university and neighboring community college in
the southwest, an area that is historically bilingual. Like the faculty in Zawacki
and Habib's study, however, the faculty that participated in Ives et al.'s study
expressed conflicted feelings in relation to L2 writing. When presented with
two sample pieces of student writing--one by an L2 student that exhibited
some depth of thought but many surface-level errors and one constructed by
the research team that was error-free but lacked depth--faculty unanimously
rated the passage written by the research team more highly, indicating that
surface errors prevented faculty from appreciating content. However, during
interviews, faculty revealed that they expect that writing from L2 students will

26
                                                                                                 Introduction

be accented and assess accordingly and are open to and interested in faculty
development related to L2 writing.

   Set in a university in China, the next chapter, Wu Dan's "Let's See Where
Your Chinese Students Come From: A Qualitative Descriptive Study of Writing
in the Disciplines in China," shows faculty across the curriculum voicing
concerns about the quality of student writing and their own preparation for
teaching with writing that are strikingly similar to those heard in the previous
chapters in this section. Unlike so many disciplinary faculty in the US, however,
these faculty do not say that students should have learned to write in someone
else's course or earlier on in their student careers. As Wu Dan explains, China
has had a turbulent higher education history with little time or attention given
to teaching and learning processes and no tradition of general education; at
the same time, however, as she points out, there has always been a deep regard
for good writing in Chinese, giving her cause to be optimistic about the WAC
concepts and practices she's introducing to her Chinese colleagues. While the
broader purpose of Wu Dan's study was to examine the perceptions of Chinese
faculty of the role of writing in learning and students' competence as writers
in the disciplines at their Chinese institutions, she is also deeply committed to
helping US faculty understand the educational and writing backgrounds of the
increasingly large numbers of Chinese students who are coming to study at our
institutions.

   In "English Is Not a Spectator Sport: Privileged Second Language Learners
and the For-Profit ESOL Classroom," Marino Fernandes introduces another,
very different, educational context for teaching writing to L2 writers. His article
describes the curriculum and typical student body of for-profit ESOL programs,
which many international students attend in order to boost their TOEFL
scores and English language fluency before either applying to or entering US
colleges and universities. While the for-profit curriculum is tightly regimented
and focused on rote language learning, as Fernandes describes it, he has found
ways to deepen the learning experience of the students in his writing classes by
adapting WAC pedagogies, particularly critical reading and writing approaches
and process pedagogies, to fit the cultural and educational backgrounds of his
students. As an immigrant English-language learner himself, Fernandes learned
firsthand the difference between merely knowing how to speak in English and
using English to achieve one's own educational dreams and aspirations. Now, as
a master's student in language and linguistics, he is passionate about the need
for even those students whom Vandrick (2002) calls "the global elite," who tend
to be the majority population at for-profit language schools, to be engaged and
critical participants in their English language learning. Writing is a means of
acquiring agency, he argues, not just an exercise in learning a language. That this

                                                                                                 27
Cox and Zawacki

is the case for Fernandes is exemplified by his being a recipient of a 2012 CCCC
Scholars of the Dream award. By happy circumstance, we had both gone to
hear the panel on which Fernandes was presenting, and, after his presentation,
we turned to each other to say that we should invite him to submit his paper
to us for a chapter in our collection. This chapter, we are pleased to note, is an
adaptation of the paper he delivered at the conference, his first publication.

   In the remaining two chapters in this section, we shift from a focus on
faculty concerns about student writing to approaches faculty can use to address
these concerns. In "Making Stance Explicit for Second Language Writers in
the Disciplines: What Faculty Need to Know about the Language of Stance-
Taking," Zak Lancaster focuses on one rhetorical move that, when not done
effectively, is often perceived as error--stance taking. L2 writers, in particular,
he shows, are often judged as having problems with "thinking, understanding,
or even effort" when they are unsuccessful in appropriating the stances and
voices expected by their teachers. His analysis of the linguistic intricacies of
appropriate stance-taking draws our attention to the importance for faculty to
be more aware of their discipline-embedded but largely implicit expectations
for the stances student writers should take when they express a position, make
claims, present evidence, or use their "own" voice. While his is one of the
longest chapters in the collection, we think it is also one of the most important
in terms of bringing a systemic functional linguistics perspective to our work
with faculty. Faculty make judgments all the time about which students are
"good" writers at the sentence level and which are not, and yet most lack a
nuanced vocabulary to explain how they arrive at this evaluation. Lancaster
shows us at the sentence and phrase level what makes some writers sound like
they are in control of the language and others sound unsure or unsophisticated.
Although most faculty may not have the time or inclination to do the kind of
close linguistic analysis Lancaster demonstrates, we think there is enormous
value for our readers in understanding how to talk with faculty about the ways
writers position themselves linguistically in their texts, and, by the stance-taking
styles they choose, also position readers in certain ways.

   While Lancaster focuses on a particular aspect of L2 writing and area of
faculty development, Michelle Cox's chapter, "In Response to Today's `Felt
Need': WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers," which
concludes this section, offers a wealth of suggestions for faculty development
related to varied aspects of student writing, including writing processes, writing
to learn activities, writing assignment design, peer review, and responding to
and assessing L2 student writing. Cox argues that, while many faculty will
initially take a "difference-as-deficit" stance in relation to student writing--a
stance we see evidence of in Zawacki and Habib and Ives et al.'s chapters--WAC

28
                                                                                                 Introduction

programs can, through faculty development, move faculty toward a "difference-
accommodated" stance, and, ultimately, to what Canagarajah (2002) calls a
"difference-as-resource" stance. One of the main stumbling blocks to offering
faculty development on L2 writing, however, is that WAC program directors
often don't feel equipped to do so. To address this concern, Cox describes
approaches to collaborating with others on campus who advocate for L2 writers
and where to gather information about these writers. She provides evidence
from a wide range of SLW research for the effectiveness for L2 writers of the
WAC pedagogies she recommends, such as those described in Hirsch's chapter,
while also describing how these can be altered to accommodate L2 students
by drawing explicitly on the linguistic and cultural resources they bring to the
classroom. We intend for this chapter to provide a useful starting point for
WAC program directors interested in transforming a campus to become more
linguistically and culturally inclusive.

Section III: WAC Practices and Pedagogies Transformed

   The chapters in this final section all demonstrate the kinds of transformations
to classrooms and programs that are possible when attention is paid to creating
inclusive and supportive L2 writing and learning environments.

   The two chapters that open the section focus on academic writing courses
the authors developed to support L2 undergraduate and graduate writers
as writers in and across disciplines. Megan Siczek and Shawna Shapiro's
"Developing Writing-Intensive Courses for a Globalized Curriculum through
WAC-TESOL Collaborations" describes a model for a writing-intensive
course designed by TESOL specialists. The authors describe two variations
of the course, one taught at George Washington University in Washington,
D.C. and open only to L2 students and the other taught at Middlebury
College in Vermont and offered to both L1 and L2 students. They discuss
the benefits and drawbacks of each model, describe the types of writing
projects and readings assigned in each, and draw from course evaluations to
share student perspectives of the benefits of the courses. But more than that,
they also describe the obstacles that have prevented TESOL practitioners
from making valuable L2-informed contributions to WAC programs and
pedagogies. As they argue, the "persistent disciplinary segregation between
WAC and TESOL" means that institutions whose missions increasingly
focus on internationalizing their campuses are overlooking the expertise that
TESOL faculty bring to conversations about cultivating global competence
in their students. When TESOL and WAC program administrators and
faculty collaborate, as they show, the resulting actions, such as the globally

                                                                                                 29
Cox and Zawacki

oriented courses they describe, can be educationally meaningful to all
involved, perhaps most importantly to the students. Because they make such
a powerful argument for putting into practice the institutional "buzzword"
of "inclusiveness" when it comes to an institution's globalizing efforts, we've
put their chapter first in this section to provide a frame for the other chapters,
which illustrate, in varied ways, the transformative potential of innovative,
collaborative courses and program curricula designed to support student
writers across disciplines and institutional contexts.

   While Sizcek and Shapiro focus on an undergraduate classroom, with the
next chapter we turn to graduate student writing. As the chapter "Graduate
Writing Workshops: Crossing Languages and Disciplines" by Elaine
Fredericksen and Kate Mangelsdorf suggests, designing courses that support
graduate-level writing is notoriously challenging, given the specialized nature
of graduate study, the fact that graduate students who take such courses are
at different points in their careers, and that such courses are often not credit-
bearing, so attendance and commitment to the course can be issues. In their
chapter, the authors offer a model for such a course that resolves some of
these problems--a cross-disciplinary, linguistically mixed (English L1, L2,
and bilingual) graduate writing workshop designed and taught by English
department faculty at the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP). What is
notable about this course, in addition to the mixed population it serves, is its
flexibility. In the first two weeks of the course, students develop a contract that
determines their writing assignments and goals for the workshop, an approach
to course design that highlights student agency; the course instructors also
collaborate with the students' other teachers to offer instruction at the point
of need. The authors report survey results from 26 graduate students who have
taken the course on their perceptions of the effectiveness of the structural and
pedagogical choices the authors made in designing and teaching the course.

   Jennifer Craig's "Teaching Writing in a Globally Networked Learning
Environment (GNLE): Diverse Students at a Distance" offers another model
of graduate student writing support, but one that differs in salient ways from
the one developed at UTEP. Unlike UTEP's course, the course Craig developed
at MIT was not mixed L1/L2/bilingual, but was created only for international
students; was not multidisciplinary, but was offered only to students enrolled
in the Master of Engineering program created in collaboration with universities
in Singapore; and was held not on campus but in a virtual learning space, a
globally networked learning environment (GNLE) that used synchronous and
asynchronous technologies to interact with students. Language and writing are
central to GNLEs, as Craig points out, because the environment itself requires
high levels of written interaction among the participants. The expectations for

30
                                                                                                 Introduction

that interaction on the part of the students and her assumptions about how
writing and talk about writing would take place in that environment are the
focus of her chapter. As she explains, her analysis was first motivated by the
students' reticence during course meetings and conferences, a reticence that
she had previously been able to counter in her face-to-face interactions with
students through the use of WAC pedagogical approaches. Drawing on her
own critical self-reflection and on a student survey that explored student
backgrounds and which aspects of the course were effective for their learning,
she uncovered the assumptions she had brought to the course, how her goals
and her students' were sometimes at odds, and how the many "distances"
created by the technology affected not only writing instruction but also the
classroom dynamic. Craig's chapter has important implications for graduate
student writing support as well as for teaching in a GNLE, a model that is
increasingly being used by institutions to offer courses to students in classroom
locations around the world.

   The last three chapters of this section broaden the focus from the classroom
to the program level to provide models of cross-disciplinary, cross-cultural
programs whose development and design is informed by research and practice
from linguistics, L2 writing, and WAC/WID and which are coordinated
and/or taught by administrators and faculty from all of these areas to enact a
"difference-as-resource" approach to L2 writers and writing.

   In "Campus Internationalization: A Center-Based Model for ESL-Ready
Programs," Karyn Mallet and Ghania Zgheib describe a language supported,
cross-disciplinary program--ACCESS--that transcends the "persistent
disciplinary segregation" between TESOL and composition/WAC studies that
Siczek and Shapiro critique. Developed collaboratively by WAC, composition,
and ESL/applied linguistics faculty, ACCESS offers heavily recruited
international students who've been provisionally admitted to the university
the opportunity to enroll in a team-taught (by composition and ESL faculty)
first-year writing course and introductory content courses, all of which include
intensive language support and tutoring for students and faculty development
for participating instructors. Drawing on survey and interview data, Mallett and
Zgheib demonstrate that the program has benefitted both faculty and students
involved, with students expressing satisfaction with the collaboration among
writing and disciplinary teachers and faculty reporting an increased awareness of
and sensitivity to the challenges faced by L2 writers, which, many said, carried
over to the other courses they also regularly teach. More than just developing
awareness and sensitivity, however, all of the participating faculty said they
modified their course curriculum and pedagogical approaches throughout the
semester to fit the needs of their L2 students. Because the participating faculty

                                                                                                 31
Cox and Zawacki

had numerous opportunities to talk together, through required workshops
and planning meetings, they also shared their expectations for student writers
with one another, and, in the process, these too were modified, a benefit that
students also reported in focus groups and interviews. While not all institutions
with globalization missions will be able, or even willing, to allocate significant
resources to set up programs like ACCESS, Mallett and Zgheib's chapter
provides a valuable model of an "ESL-ready" program with components that
can be adapted to fit local contexts and available funding.

   In the final two chapters, the context shifts from writing programs in the
US to programs in two different international contexts. In "Reconstructing
Teacher Roles through a Transnational Lens: Learning with/in the American
University of Beirut," Amy Zenger, Joan Mullin, and Carol Peterson Haviland
discuss the challenges of designing a writing program that positively recognizes
students' cultural and linguistic differences. In a setting where administrators
and many faculty have conservative understandings of acceptable academic
writing in English, the authors explain how they worked against this "status-
quo gatekeeping" by actively engaging with institutional language policies in the
revision of an academic writing course for graduate students and the curriculum
of the undergraduate general education program. The authors begin their
chapter by describing the complex language histories and identities the students
bring to AUB, which typically include speaking and writing experiences in two
or more languages and Arabic dialects. While the students come with rich
language backgrounds, the traditional pedagogies employed in the academic
writing course seemed to define them as linguistically "deficient" by focusing on
what the students lacked as writers in English. To better understand the students'
strengths, the authors surveyed students about their language backgrounds
and how they feel when they write in English and their other languages in
their disciplines, among other questions. (The full survey is included in an
appendix to their chapter.) The survey data, along with the translingual theories
and practices they endorse, informed the authors' reconceptualization of the
academic writing course and their approach to infusing more writing into the
general education curriculum, an approach that relies on the varied language
expertise of faculty across the disciplines. The authors' end goal for this WID-
based pedagogical approach, as they write, is for faculty and administrators "to
construct knowledge about writers collaboratively, to conceive of multilingualism
as an asset, and to think transnationally."

   With the final chapter, Thomas Lavelle and Alan Shima's "Writing Histories:
Lingua Franca English in a Swedish Graduate Program," we provide an example
of a program that has managed to embody a translingual ideal in the ways faculty

32
                                                                                                 Introduction

collaborate across cultures and disciplines to read their students' theses with
an appreciation for their scholarly contributions and a "let it pass" approach
to surface errors. This readerly mindset can be at least partly ascribed to the
writing support offered to students and the faculty development and assessment
activities Lavelle and Shima provide as "semi-embedded" academic writing
instructors. The interdisciplinary Roads to Democracy history program the
authors describe is offered through a collaboration among Uppsala University
in Sweden, Coimbra University in Portugal, and Siegen University in Germany.
The fully international program, as they explain, enrolls students from over
twenty different countries (though none from Sweden) and shares some common
on-line courses while requiring students to take at least fifteen credits from
two of the partner institutions although each institution grants its own degree.
Understandably, then, given this enormous linguistic diversity, instruction at all
three institutions occurs in lingua franca English in "contact situations" where
writers employ and readers expect "flexible codes, semantic negotiations, and
tolerance for temporary unintelligibility" How writing instruction occurs in
the program offered at Uppsala and how participating faculty negotiate their
expectations for the required thesis are the focus of their chapter, which draws
on data collected from their multi-method case study of the Roads program.
We have chosen to close this final section with this chapter, as it illustrates
a program that has, to use Lavelle and Shima's words, "successfully created a
context where multilingualism is an asset, not a deficit"--a goal shared by so
many authors in this collection.

                                               

   As we close, we want to recognize the challenges inherent in transforming
writing courses, curricula, and programs to become linguistically and culturally
inclusive. Even modest changes to the pedagogy of a single course require time
and energy on behalf of a faculty member, difficult to find in this period of
increasing faculty workloads without corresponding increases in compensation.
Changes at the curricular and programmatic level require strong administrative
support and the time and energy of writing program administrators, all of which
are in short supply in the face of cutbacks in funding, increasing course caps,
and shortage of tenured positions for both Composition Studies and TESOL
professionals. The comprehensive ACCESS program for international students
at George Mason University, as described by Karyn Mallet and Ghania Zgheib,
for example, requires enormous support from many levels of administration
and faculty. However, given the multilingualism and multiculturalism of

                                                                                                 33
Cox and Zawacki

today's students, we believe that the vision of linguistically and culturally
inclusive writing courses, curricula and programs is a worthy goal, no matter
how incremental the steps are that can be taken in any one classroom, college,
or university at any given time.

   Research into the ways in which L2 writers negotiate academic writing on
US campuses, into US faculty expectations for and experiences with L2 writers
across the curriculum, into approaches for faculty development in creating
linguistically and culturally inclusive pedagogy, into the effects of particular
approaches to structuring writing programs, and into the ways in which WAC
pedagogies and practices get translated into online teaching environments and
in writing programs abroad, such as presented in this collection, help pave
the way for making this goal a reality for more students at more institutions
of higher education. In closing, we return to the words from Ilona Leki
with which we started: "The infusion of life brought by these ESL students'
different perspectives on the world can only benefit a pluralistic society which
is courageous enough truly to embrace its definition of itself " (1992, p. 133).
We believe that WAC is, indeed, courageous enough to be transformed by the
multilingualism and multiculturalism of our students.

FUTURE RESEARCH

   Finally, we want to recommend some avenues for future research based on
the topics and concerns explored by the chapters in this collection as well as by
larger conversations occurring in composition studies, WAC, and L2 writing
around the implications for our fields of increasing populations of US resident
L2 writers (what we've called "globalism at home" [Zawacki & Cox, 2011]);
increasing numbers of international L2 students on US campuses; and increased
globalization of US institutions of higher education through partnerships with
institutions abroad and the establishment of branch campuses outside of the
US. We've organized these according to the section themes.

Section I related to L2 students' experiences:

    How do L2 students write across the curriculum in different institu-
       tional contexts?

    How do the dynamics of race, ethnicity, nationality, gender, and class
       affect L2 students and their writing development?

    How do L2 students use aspects of "multicompetence" to read and write
       about texts, to complete assignments, and to do research. What resources

34
                                                                                                 Introduction

       do they draw on? What strategies are they using? How can we help them
       "activate multicompetence" (Hall & Navarro, 2011, n.p.)?
    How and what writing and rhetorical knowledge are L2 students trans-
       ferring from other sites, contexts, and educational experiences? How are
       they adapting this knowledge? How might they be using this knowl-
       edge to resist US conventions of writing and rhetoric? (See, for example,
       Chris Tardy, 2009, and much of Mark James' work on transfer and L2
       students.)

Section II related to faculty perceptions and
teaching practices around L2 writing:

    How do the presence and contributions of L2 students affect campus
       and classroom climate? With increased populations of L2 students, do
       faculty reexamine their focus on SWE and Western rhetorical norms or
       tighten their grip on them?

    How are faculty reading, responding to, and assessing L2 students' texts
       in diverse locations within and outside of the US?

    What are faculty expectations for L2 students at the graduate level, with-
       in and outside of the US? And, related to this, what are expectations for
       L2 writing in professional contexts, within and outside of academia?

    How do the response and assessment practices of L1 and L2 faculty dif-
       fer, if they do? In comparison with L1 faculty, are L2 faculty more sym-
       pathetic to the challenges that L2 students face or do they push them
       harder? From what perspective--lingua franca English or SWE or oth-
       er--do L2 faculty tend to read?

    What kinds of faculty development work related to L2 writing are need-
       ed? What models and approaches have proven to be effective?

Section III related to a focus on courses,
curriculum, and programs:

    What "ESL-ready" courses and programs are being developed at insti-
       tutions in and outside of the US? Are there models of pedagogies and
       programs that embrace lingua franca English as the norm (rather than,
       for example, SWE) and that draw on L2 writers' resources and strengths?

    What writing pedagogies have L2 students experienced before entering
       US undergraduate and graduate programs and at US secondary schools,
       English language institutes, for-profit English language schools, and sec-
       ondary education outside of the US?

                                                                                                 35
Cox and Zawacki

And, finally, in thinking about the implications
of the collection as a whole:

    What research has been/is being carried out on WID and English L2
       outside of the US? (The newly inaugurated series International Exchanges
       on the Study of Writing, published by the WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor
       Press, is inviting book-length manuscripts that address worldwide per-
       spectives on writing, writers, teaching with writing, and scholarly writ-
       ing practices, specifically those that draw on scholarship across national
       and disciplinary borders to challenge parochial understandings of all of
       the above.)

    What research has been/is being carried out on tutoring writing in the
       disciplines at English-medium institutions outside of the US?

   What collaborations between writing scholars are occurring/should be
occurring and on what topics and across what disciplinary and national borders?
(On the WAC Clearinghouse, see, for example, Bazerman et al.'s International
Advances in Writing Research: Cultures, Places, Measures (2012) with chapters
selected from the more than 500 presentations at the Writing Research Across
Borders II Conference in 2011. Also see Writing Programs Worldwide: Profiles
of Academic Writing in Many Places (2012) with chapters emerging from the
WAC/WID International Mapping Project.)

NOTES

1. Throughout this project and our previous project, the special issue of Across
the Disciplines, our collaboration has been rich, productive, and even joyful. We
have discovered that we make wonderful partners, matched in our work ethics
and complementary in our strengths. In order to equally share credit for our
collaborative work, in the ATD issue, we decided to list Michelle as first editor
of the collection and Terry as first author of the introduction. With this project,
we did the reverse, and listed Terry as first editor of the collection and Michelle
as first author of the introduction.
2. We realize that the designator "English as a Second Language" is problem-
atic, in that English may be the third, fourth, etc, language of the students
we're referring to. We have chosen to use this designation, however, to con-
nect the work in this collection to the wider scholarship of second language
writing studies. For a further rationale for using this designation, see Mat-
suda, 2012.

36
                                                                                                 Introduction

REFERENCES

Bazerman, C., Dean, C., Early, J., Lunsford, K., Null, S., Rogers, P., & Stansell,
   A. (Eds.). (2012). International advances in writing research: Cultures, places,
   measures. Fort Collins, CO: WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press. Retrieved
   from http://wac.colostate.edu/books/wrab2011/

Benesch, S. (1994). ESL, ideology, and the politics of pragmatics. TESOL
   Quarterly, 27, 705-716.

Bizzell, P., Schroeder, C. & Fox, H. (Eds.). (2002). Alt Dis: Alternative discourses
   in the academy. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

Canagarajah, A. S. (1993). Comments on Ann Raimes' "Out of the woods:
   Emerging traditions in the teaching of writing." TESOL Quarterly, 27, 300-
   306.

Canagarajah, A. S. (1999). Resisting linguistic imperialism in English teaching.
   Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). Critical academic writing and multilingual students.
   Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Canagarajah, A. S. (2004). Language rights and postmodern conditions, Jour-
   nal of Language, Identity, and Education, 3(2), pp. 140-145.

Canagarajah, A. S. (2006a). Toward a writing pedagogy of shuttling between lan-
   guages: Learning from multilingual writers, College English, 68(6), 589-604.

Canagarajah, A. S. (2006b). The place of World Englishes in composition: Plu-
   ralization continued, College Composition and Communication, 57(4), 586-
   619.

Canagarajah, A. S. (2011). Codemeshing in academic writing: Identifying
   teachable strategies of translanguaging, The Modern Language Journal, 95,
   401-417.

Conference of College Composition and Communication. (1974). Students'
   right to their own language. Retrieved from http://www.ncte.org/library/NC-
   TEFiles/Groups/CCCC/NewSRTOL.pdf

Conference on College Composition and Communication. (2009). CCCC
   Statement on Second Language Writing and Writers. Retrieved from http://
   www.ncte.org/cccc/resources/positions/secondlangwriting

Cox, M. (2011). WAC: Closing doors or opening doors for second language
   writers? Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
   atd/ell/cox.cfm

Ferris, D. (2004). Teaching ESL composition: Purpose, process, and practice. New
   York: Routledge.

Ferris, D. (2009). Teaching college writing to diverse student populations. Ann
   Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press/ELT.

                                                                                                 37
Cox and Zawacki

Hall, J. (2009). WAC/WID in the next America: Redefining professional iden-
   tity in the age of the multilingual majority. The WAC Journal, 20, 33-49.
   Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/journal/vol20/hall.pdf

Hall, J., & Navarro, N. (2011). Lessons for WAC/WID from language learn-
   ing research: Multicompetence, register acquisition, and the college writing
   student. Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
   atd/ell/hall-navarro.cfm

Horner, B., Lu, M.-Z., Royster, J., & Trumbur, J. (2011). Language difference
   in writing: Toward a translingual approach. College English, 73, 303-321.

Horner, B., NeCamp, S., & Donahue, T. (2011). Toward a multilingual com-
   position scholarship: From English Only to a translingual norm. College
   Composition and Communication, 63(2), 269-300.

Hymes, D. (1979). On communicative competence. In C. Brumfit & K. John-
   son (Eds.), The Communicative Approach to Language Teaching (pp. 183-191).
   Oxford: Oxford University Press.

James, M. (2010). An investigation of learning transfer in English-for-general-
   academic-purposes writing instruction. Journal of Second Language Writing,
   19(4), 183-206.

James, M. (2008). Learning transfer in second language writing education: The
   impact of task similarity/difference. Written Communication, 25, 76-103.

Johns, A. M. (2001). ESL students and WAC programs: Varied populations
   and diverse needs. In S. H. McLeod, E. Miraglia, M. Soven, & C. Thaiss
   (Eds.), WAC for the new millennium: Strategies for continuing writing-across-
   the-curriculum programs (pp. 141-164). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Land, R., & Whitley, C. (1989). Evaluating second-language essays in regular
   composition classes: Toward a pluralistic U. S. rhetoric. In D. Johnson & D.
   Roen (Eds.), Richness in writing: Empowering ESL students (pp. 284-293).
   New York: Longman.

Leki, I. (1992). Understanding ESL writers: A Guide for teachers. Portsmouth,
   NH: Boynton/Cook.

Leki, I. (1995). Coping strategies of ESL students in writing tasks across the
   curriculum. TESOL Quarterly, 29(2), 235-260.

Leki, I. (2002). Not the end of history. In L. Blanton & B. Kroll (Eds.), ESL
   Composition Tales: Reflections on Teaching (pp. 49-62). Ann Arbor, MI: Uni-
   versity of Michigan Press.

Lindsey, P. & Crusan, D. (2011). How faculty attitudes and expectations to-
   ward student nationality affect writing assessment. Across the Disciplines,
   8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/ell/lindsey-crusan.cfm

Macrorie, K. (1970). Uptaught. Rochelle Park, NJ: Hayden.

38
                                                                                                 Introduction

Matsuda, P. K. (2012). Teaching composition in the multilingual world: Sec-
   ond language writing in composition studies. In K. Ritter & P. K. Matsuda
   (Eds.), Exploring composition studies: Sites, issues, and perspectives (pp. 36-51).
   Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.

Matsuda, P. K., & Jablonksi, J. (2000). Beyond the L2 metaphor: Towards a
   mutually transformative model of ESL/WAC collaboration. Academic.Writ-
   ing, 1. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/aw/articles/matsuda_jablon-
   ski2000.pdf

Peirce, B. N. (1989). Toward a pedagogy of possibility in the teaching of Eng-
   lish internationally: People's English in South Africa, TESOL Quarterly,
   23(3), 401-420.

Reid, J. & Kroll, B. (1995). Designing and assessing effective classroom writing
   assignments for NES and ESL students, Journal of Second Language Writing,
   4(1), 17-41.

Rubin, D. L. & William-James, M. (1997). The impact of writer nationality
   on mainstream teachers' judgments of composition quality, Journal of Second
   Language Writing, 6(2), 139-153.

Santos, T. (1988). Professors' reactions to the academic writing of non-native
   speaking students, TESOL Quarterly, 22(1), 69-90.

Selinker, L. (1977). Interlanguage. International Review of Applied Linguistics,
   10, 209-231.

Shaughnessy, M. (1979). Errors and expectations: A guide for the teacher of basic
   writing. New York: Oxford.

Silva, T. (1993). Toward an understanding of the distinct nature of L2 writing:
   The ESL research and its implications. TESOL Quarterly, 27(4), 657-677.

Silva, T., Leki, I., & Carson, J. (1997). Broadening the perspective of main-
   stream composition studies: Some thoughts from the disciplinary margins,
   Written Communication, 14(3), 398-428.

Smitherman, G. (1977). Talkin and testifyin: The language of black America.
   Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Song, B., & Caruso, I. (1996). Do English and ESL faculty differ in evaluating
   the essays of native English-speaking and ESL students? Journal of Second
   Language Writing, 5(2), 163-182.

Tardy, C. (2009). Building genre knowledge: Writing L2. West Lafayette, IN:
   Parlor Press.

Thaiss, C., Bruer, G., Carlino, P., Ganobcsik-Williams, L., & Sinha, A. (Eds.).
   (2012). Writing programs worldwide: Profiles of academic writing in many
   places. Fort Collins, CO: WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press. Retrieved
   from http://wac.colostate.edu/books/wpww/

                                                                                                 39
Cox and Zawacki

Vann, R. J., Meyer, D. E., & Lorenz, F. O. (1984). Error gravity: A study of
   faculty opinion of ESL errors. TESOL Quarterly, 18(3), 427-440.

Weigle, S. C., Boldt, H., & Valsecchi, M. I. (2003). Effects of task and rater
   background on the evaluation of ESL writing: A pilot study. TESOL Quar-
   terly, 37(2), 345-354.

Zamel, V. (1995). Strangers in academia: The experiences of faculty and ESL
   students across the curriculum. College Composition and Communication,
   46(4), 506-521.

Zamel, V. (2002). From the margins to the center. In V. Zamel & R. Spack
   (Eds.), Enriching ESOL pedagogy: Readings and activities for engagement, re-
   flection, and inquiry (pp. 331-340). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Zamel, V., & Spack, R. (Eds.). (2004). Crossing the curriculum: Multilingual
   learners in college classrooms. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Zawacki, T. M., & Cox, M. (2011). Introduction to WAC and second language
   writing, Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
   atd/ell/zawacki-cox.cfm

40
                                 SECTION I

      LEARNING FROM/WITH L2
STUDENTS: STUDENT STRENGTHS,

      COPING STRATEGIES, AND
    EXPERIENCES AS THEY WRITE

     ACROSS THE CURRICULUM

                                                                                               41
CHAPTER 1

ADAPTIVE TRANSFER, WRITING
ACROSS THE CURRICULUM, AND
SECOND LANGUAGE WRITING:
IMPLICATIONS FOR RESEARCH
AND TEACHING

      Michael-John DePalma
      Baylor University

      Jeffrey M. Ringer
      University of Tennessee, Knoxville

       This chapter discusses how the framework of adaptive transfer might
       encourage more culturally and linguistically inclusive Writing Across
       the Curriculum (WAC) theory and practice regarding multilingual
       writers. Drawing upon the shared insights on learning transfer in edu-
       cational psychology, education, and human resource development, we
       define adaptive transfer as the conscious or intuitive process of apply-
       ing or reshaping learned writing knowledge in new and potential-
       ly unfamiliar writing situations. In tracing the implications of this
       framework for WAC research and teaching, this chapter aims to pro-
       vide WAC scholars a means to better understand the complex ways in
       which multilingual writers learn to write across contexts.

        We need to ask ourselves: how can WAC/WID programs
        more effectively encourage Multilingual Learning Across the
        Curriculum? How can we find opportunities [...] to allow
        students to use those multilingual skills in an academic context?

                      --Jonathan Hall, "WAC/WID in the Next America"

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.01                               43
DePalma and Ringer

       [T]ransfer is often difficult to find because we tend to think
       about it from a perspective that blinds us to its presence.
       Prevailing theories and methods of measuring transfer work well
       for studying full blown expertise, but they represent too blunt
       an instrument for smaller changes in learning that lead to the
       development of expertise.

                               --John D. Bradford and Daniel L. Schwartz,
                                                          "Rethinking Transfer"

   In our 2011 Journal of Second Language Writing article, "Toward a Theory of
Adaptive Transfer: Expanding Disciplinary Discussions of `Transfer' in Second-
Language Writing and Composition Studies," we argued that discussions of
transfer in second language (L2) writing studies and composition studies have
focused primarily on the reuse of past learning and thus have not adequately
accounted for the adaptation of learned writing knowledge in unfamiliar
situations. Our goal in that article was to expand disciplinary discussions of
transfer in L2 writing and composition studies by theorizing adaptive transfer,
a construct forged from collective insights on transfer of learning in the fields
of educational psychology, education, and human resource development. In an
effort to extend that work, this chapter discusses how the framework of adaptive
transfer might encourage more culturally and linguistically inclusive research
and teaching practices related to multilingual writers across the curriculum. In
tracing the implications of this framework for Writing Across the Curriculum
(WAC) theory and practice, this chapter aims to provide WAC scholars a means
to better understand the complex ways in which multilingual writers learn to
write across contexts. It does so in response to an exigency that Jonathan Hall
(2009) articulates: "The new reality to which we must adjust in US higher
education is that multilingual learners are part of the mainstream" (p. 37). As
such, it is incumbent upon WAC specialists to account for how multilingual
writers negotiate the various rhetorical situations in which they find themselves.

   Following from the 2009 CCCC Statement on Second Language Writing
and Writers, which calls WAC specialists to account for multilingual writers
in research initiatives and teaching practices, we focus our discussion on the
following questions:

   Research: In what ways might adaptive transfer inform research on
multilingual writers across the curriculum?

   Teaching with Writing in the Disciplines (WID): How might adaptive transfer
inform L2 writing instruction across the curriculum?

44
                                                                                           Adaptive Transfer

   In what follows, we first discuss research on transfer in WAC and L2 writing
scholarship and highlight the narrowly conceptualized notions of transfer that
have informed these disciplinary discussions. We then provide an overview of
adaptive transfer, explaining how it is distinct from traditional transfer. Finally,
we discuss the implications of adaptive transfer for WAC research and teaching
with WID, particularly in relation to multilingual writers.

ADAPTIVE TRANSFER DEFINED

   For more than two decades, research on transfer of learning has been an
area of critical concern for scholars in WAC (Carroll, 2002; Dively & Nelms,
2007; McCarthy, 1987; Russell, 1995, 2001; Walvoord & McCarthy, 1990),
composition (Bergmann & Zepernick, 2007; Brent, 2012; Dias, Freedman,
Medway, & Par, 1999; Downs & Wardle, 2007; Haswell et al., 1999; Petraglia,
1995; Russell, 1995; Smit, 2004; Voss, 1989; Wardle, 2007, 2009), and L2
writing (Currie, 1999; James, 2006a, 2006b, 2009; Johns, 1997; Leki, 1995;
Leki & Carson, 1997; Snow, 1993; Spack, 1997). Attention to transfer among
WAC scholars has occurred primarily in the context of debates surrounding
the efficacy of first-year writing (FYW) courses. In examining whether or not
general writing skills instruction (GWSI) courses sufficiently prepare students
to write in subsequent disciplinary and professional contexts, compositionists
have aimed to determine the kinds of knowledge and skills that transfer
when students transition from one writing context to another. Among L2
writing specialists, discussions of transfer have also been important, especially
to research on contrastive rhetoric (CR) and English for academic purposes
(EAP). For scholars working in CR, transfer of learning is a key area of interest,
because CR researchers have aimed to identify rhetorical patterns that are
unique to each language and culture in order that they might offer multilingual
learners strategies for facilitating the transfer of rhetorical knowledge from
a first language (L1) to a second language (L2) (Connor, 1996; Grabe &
Kaplan, 1989; Hinds, 1983a, 1983b, 1990; Kang, 2005; Kaplan, 1966, 1988;
Kobayashi, 1984; Kubota, 1998; Oi, 1984; Simpson, 2000). In the case of EAP
research, questions about learning transfer have been a primary concern because
they relate in significant ways to arguments concerning the extent to which
EAP courses prepare multilingual writers for coursework in their disciplines
(Belcher, 1995; Belcher & Braine, 1995; Currie, 1999; James, 2006a, 2008,
2009; Johns, 1995, 1997; Leki, 1995, 2007; Leki & Carson, 1997; Riazi, 1997;
Snow, 1993; Spack, 1988, 1997; Swales, 1990).

                                                                                                 45
DePalma and Ringer

   In surveying how transfer has been discussed in WAC, composition, and
L2 writing scholarship, we contend that scholars have focused primarily on the
reuse of past learning and thus have not adequately accounted for the adaptation
of learned writing knowledge in unfamiliar situations (see DePalma & Ringer,
2011 for a full critique of traditional notions of transfer). As we explain in our
2011 article, definitions of transfer have implied that transfer does not occur
unless skills learned in one context are consistently applied in other settings.
Such emphasis on application limits transfer to the reuse of writing skills and
prevents researchers from acknowledging what does happen when students
encounter novel rhetorical situations. Narrow conceptualizations of transfer
also ignore the agency of writers; assume the initial and target writing contexts
are stable; reduce readers to decoders; deflect attention away from the moves
students make to reshape and reform learned writing skills to fit new tasks;
and neglect other important forms of transfer, such as lateral, vertical, near, far,
literal, or figural transfer (see Haskell, 1998 and Royer, Mestre, & Dufresne,
2005 for discussions of various types of transfer).

   As an alternative to traditional notions of transfer, we thus offer the construct
of adaptive transfer. Drawing on the shared insights about learning transfer in
educational psychology, education, and human resource development (Beech,
1999; Bradford & Schwartz, 1999; Broudy, 1977; Dyson, 1999; Greeno, Smith,
& Moore, 1993; Haskell, 1998; Lave, 1988; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Royer, 1979;
Royer, Mestre, & Dufresne, 2005; Wenger, 1998 ), we define adaptive transfer as
a writer's conscious or intuitive process of applying or reshaping learned writing
knowledge in order to negotiate new and potentially unfamiliar writing situations
(DePalma and Ringer, 2011, p. 141). Specifically, adaptive transfer is dynamic,
because it is premised on the notion that writing practices learned in one context
may be reused or reshaped in another, thus allowing space for change and fluidity
(Lobato, 2003; Matsuda, 1997; Parks, 2001). Processes of adaptive transfer are
also idiosyncratic in that they are particular to individual learners and influenced
by factors such as language repertoire, race, class, gender, educational history,
social setting, genre knowledge, and so forth (Lobato, 2003). Adaptive transfer is
also cross-contextual, occurring when learners recognize a resemblance between a
familiar writing situation in which a skill was learned and an unfamiliar writing
situation in which rhetorical production is required (Lobato, 2003; Pierce,
Duncan, Gholson, Ray, & Kamhi, 1993, p. 67). Likewise, adaptive transfer
is rhetorical, meaning that it takes place when a writer understands that the
context, audience, and purpose of a text influence what is suitable; furthermore,
adaptive transfer makes space for the possibility that differences in students' texts
are "matters of design" (Lu, 2004, p. 26) or the result of a "strategic and creative
choice by the author to attain his or her rhetorical objectives" (Canagarajah,

46
                                                                                           Adaptive Transfer

2006b, p. 591). Related to this, adaptive transfer is multilingual in that it views
all language and varieties of language as fluid and in process, and it recognizes the
agency of writers to draw from among a variety of discourses and languages in
order to influence contexts of writing (Canagarajah, 2006a; Horner & Lu, 2007;
Horner & Trimbur, 2002; Lu, 2006; Matsuda, 2002). Finally, adaptive transfer
is transformative. It recognizes that writers shape and are shaped by rhetorical
practice, and, as such, it allows for the possibility that newcomers working with
a genre might act as a brokers who introduce new ways of seeing, doing, or
knowing into writing practice (Beech, 1999; Wenger, 1998).

   Given these characteristics, we argue that adaptive transfer offers WAC
specialists a theoretical construct that will help reveal the complex ways
in which multilingual writers learn to write across disciplines. It does so by
emphasizing the agency of individual writers--"the processes by which learners
form personal relations of similarities across situations, whether or not those
connections are correct or normative" (Lobato, 2003, p. 20). Adaptive transfer
thus provides a terministic screen that names what does happen when students
traverse rhetorical contexts.

   One empirical study that illustrates adaptive transfer is Susan Parks' (2001)
"Moving from School to the Workplace." In her study of eleven francophone
nurses transitioning from their respective French-speaking universities in
Quebec, Canada to an English-speaking hospital in Montreal, Canada, Parks
(2001) describes the ways these nurses adapted their prior writing knowledge
to fit a new context. The locus of adaptive transfer in Parks' (2001) study is a
genre known as care plans. As university students, the nurses viewed care plans
as simply a school-based genre that would be of little use in the workplace.
As these nurses shifted from an academic to a workplace setting, however,
they started to see the significance of the genre to their professional work and
"began to perceive differences between the way they had done care plans while
at university and those which they had begun to do on the units" (p. 415). One
of the key differences the nurses recognized between the genre knowledge they
acquired in school and the writing of care plans in a hospital setting was the
level of detail required and the structure of the care plans.

   In their university coursework, the nurses had been taught to construct a
detailed three-part care plan, outlining a patient's diagnosis, cause of illness,
and symptoms. When writing the care plans, they were also instructed to
steer away from the language of medical diagnosis. Through their interactions
with colleagues and the genre of the care plan in a hospital setting, however,
they recognized that the care plan did not often take the detailed three-part
structure that they had been taught to use in school, and they realized that
the language of medical diagnosis was encouraged in the writing of care plans

                                                                                                 47
DePalma and Ringer

in their professional context. Recognizing these crucial differences led to the
simplification of their care plans--a reshaping which might at first glance
appear to indicate linguistic incompetence or a lack of genre knowledge. As
Parks (2001) explains, however, "the francophone nurses were simplifying
the way they wrote care plans, not because they lacked language per se, but in
response to the influence of peers" (pp. 417-418). In other words, the nurses
were adapting a school-based genre to their socio-rhetorical situation; their use
of "more simplified rhetorical structures emerged as a result of intersubjective
functioning" (p. 417). Moreover, Parks (2001) explains that the ways the
individual nurses engaged with this genre were influenced by their perceptions
of the genre and the motives or purposes they associated with it--dispositions
which were informed by their beliefs and personal histories (p. 408). In sum,
the reshaping of the nurses' prior writing knowledge was not only a response
to the demands of their new context, but was also adapted on the basis of their
socio-rhetorical situation and each nurse's perceptions of and interactions with
the genre. They adapted what they knew to fit a new context.

   Another study that highlights adaptive transfer comes from A. Suresh
Canagarajah (2006b). In his discussion of a Tamil scholar's construction of his
introduction for three different research articles--one in his native language for
a Sri Lankan publication, one in English for a Sri Lankan publication, and one
in English for a European publication--Canagarajah (2006b) details how K.
Sivatamby imports rhetorical patterns from his native culture into his academic
writing for a Western audience. Sivatamby is, in our terms, adapting a rhetorical
form related to his Tamil background for Western academics. In the process,
he creates a "multivocal discourse that merges the strengths of [Sri Lankan]
scholarly discourse with the dominant conventions of mainstream academic
discourse" (Canagarajah, 2006b, p. 598). In the paper written for a Western
academic audience, for instance, Sivatamby adopts the same narrative structure
he uses in the papers written for the Sri Lankan audience. He does so, though,
by couching his narrative analysis in rhetorical moves that would be familiar
to Western readers, namely a statement of academic significance, explicit
identification of the problem he is addressing, and a forecasting statement
regarding his argument. In short, Sivatamby invents what Canagarajah (2006b)
calls a "hybrid text," one wherein he adapts writing knowledge from one
cultural, linguistic context to fit another. In so doing, Canagarajah (2006b)
argues, Sivatamby illustrates the mutability of rhetorical forms and contexts,
which corresponds to adaptive transfer's transformative nature, what we often
refer to in this chapter as "reshaping."

   We recognize that Sivatamby is a scholar and not a student in WAC courses.
(For an example of a multilingual graduate student "reshaping" writing as he

48
                                                                                           Adaptive Transfer

writes across a multidisciplinary MA program, see Phillips in this collection.)
And yet Canagarajah (2006b) uses this example to argue for the need to
recognize that multilingual students' native languages and cultures should be
treated as resources instead of as problems. Adaptive transfer similarly recognizes
multilingual students' diverse backgrounds as resources, though it does not
assume every instance of reshaping will be intentional or appropriate. What it
does do is provide a set of terms for understanding the complexity of learning
to write across contexts, complexity that Canagarajah (2006b) and Parks (2001)
illustrate. Specifically, their examples call attention to the dynamic nature of
writing knowledge, rhetorical contexts, and genres of writing; highlight the
idiosyncratic ways individuals perceive and interact with genres; emphasize
the shift from one context to another; and acknowledge the rhetorical manner
in which individuals envision how to reshape what they know to fit a new
context. Though not about multilingual writers, Lobato's (2003) study of high
school algebra students and Brent's (2012) case studies of undergraduates in
writing co-ops also provide useful examples of the kinds of reshaping that the
framework of adaptive transfer allows writing specialists to identify.

IMPLICATIONS OF ADAPTIVE TRANSFER
FOR WAC RESEARCH AND TEACHING

   In this section, we explore adaptive transfer's implications for WAC
programs, paying particular attention to how it can help such programs adopt
culturally inclusive practices regarding multilingual writers. We suggest how
adaptive transfer can help reframe questions about multilingual writers across
the curriculum by informing WAC research and teaching with WID.

Research

   We see adaptive transfer as a lens through which WAC research can be
problematized and extended, particularly in regard to how multilingual writers
navigate diverse writing demands across the curriculum. Adaptive transfer invites
WAC scholars to reframe the questions they ask when researching multilingual
writers in WAC programs and to adopt multilayered methodological approaches
similar to the ones employed by Parks (2001) and Lobato (2003). Specifically,
the framework of adaptive transfer significantly shapes the kinds of questions
WAC scholars ask about how multilingual and native English speaking (NES)
students learn to write across the disciplines. To demonstrate this, we discuss at
length a study that has bearing on WAC, ESL, and transfer: Ilona Leki's (1995)

                                                                                                 49
DePalma and Ringer

"Coping Strategies of ESL students in Writing Tasks across the Curriculum."
We then discuss two methods that can help researchers identify and understand
the diverse ways in which NES and multilingual students navigate unfamiliar
writing situations--focus groups and classroom-based reflective writing.

   Lamenting the fact that little research existed about ESL experiences in
writing courses across the curriculum, Leki's (1995) purpose in her study was "to
develop insights into the academic literacy experiences across the curriculum"
of multilingual writers. Specifically, she sought to learn "about how ESL
students acquire forms and attitudes specific to various disciplinary discourses
[and] how their experiences in disciplinary courses shape their understandings
of appropriate and inappropriate discourse within those disciplines" (p. 237).
Leki (1995) interviewed five ESL students, three graduate students and two
undergraduates, whose majors included business, political science, speech, and
education. Two of the students were from China and one each was from Taiwan,
France, and Finland. Leki (1995) interviewed each student on a weekly basis,
observed several classes, analyzed the students' writings, and interviewed their
instructors. Based on the data gathered, Leki (1995) identified recurring themes
and developed ten categories as a coding scheme. Of the ten coping strategies
Leki (1995) identified, two speak directly to questions of transfer: "Relying on
past writing experiences" and "Using current or past ESL writing training" (p.
240). (Chapters by Center and Niestepski and Phillips in this collection also
draw from Leki's schema to describe the variety of coping strategies their L2
student informants employed to respond to the reading and writing demands
of their courses.)

   Leki's (1995) overall summary of her findings points toward a key aspect of
adaptive transfer: "Although different students in this study used strategies to
varying degrees, they all also displayed the flexibility necessary to shift among
strategies as needed" (p. 241). While clearly aimed at flexibility in terms of
shifting from one strategy to another, this statement nonetheless points
toward several of the key characteristics of adaptive transfer, namely that it
is idiosyncratic, rhetorical, and cross-contextual. As Leki (1995) shows, such
flexibility results from each student's individual background and particular
rhetorical situation.

   One student Leki (1995) discusses is particularly relevant to adaptive
transfer. Julie, an undergraduate business major from France, is described by
Leki (1995) as "probably the most successful" student of the five (p. 242).
Much of the reason why she was so successful centered on the fact that she
"came equipped with a clear, conscious approach to her work" that involved
"strategies ... for using past writing experiences" (Leki, 1995, p. 242). Julie had
been carefully trained in the French rhetorical style and said that if she felt

50
                                                                                           Adaptive Transfer

disorganized, she could always fall back on the three-part framing strategy for
writing essays, namely thesis/antithesis/synthesis--look at a topic and develop
a position, a counter position, and a synthesizing position. Though Leki (1995)
admits that "the rigidity of the structure hemmed [Julie] in and constrained the
expansive style she preferred" (p. 242), she does not discuss how Julie might
(not) have adapted this strategy in later assignments. She does note, however,
that in a later assignment, Julie resisted her teacher's guidelines and abandoned
the organizational structure that had served her so well. As Leki (1995) puts it,
Julie "rewr[ote] the terms of the assignment to suit what she thought she could
do best" (p. 242).

   Leki's discussion of Julie offers helpful ways to understand the differences
between the kinds of questions traditional transfer would prompt versus the
questions that adaptive transfer would raise. Encountering Julie, traditional
transfer theorists might have asked questions like the following:

    What discursive features of the tripartite French rhetorical style, if any,
       did Julie transfer to her history term paper?

    If she transferred none, then what about the new rhetorical situation
       caused Julie to abandon the thesis/antithesis/synthesis structure?

    Is there a relationship between Julie's decision to resist her professor's
       assignment and her (in)ability to transfer knowledge from prior writing
       experiences? If so, what is that relationship?

   While such questions could lead to productive insights regarding transfer,
they could also limit researchers in terms of identifying a fuller range of the
complexity associated with students learning to write across disciplines, genres,
and contexts.

   Questions derived from the framework of adaptive transfer, on the other
hand, would allow researchers to account for a broader range of phenomena:

    How might Julie's background as a native speaker of French allow her to
       negotiate the novel rhetorical demands of writing the term paper for her
       history course?

    In what ways might Julie have transformed or adapted the tripartite
       French rhetorical structure to help her write her history paper? In other
       words, how might the theory of adaptive transfer reveal ways in which
       Julie didn't fully abandon that structure but rather reshaped and repur-
       posed key elements of it?

    How might Julie's resistance toward her professor's assignment reflect
       what Canagarajah (2006b) has called "a strategic and creative choice by
       the author to attain his or her rhetorical objectives" (p. 591)?

    In resisting her professor's assignment and potentially adapting the tri-
       partite French rhetorical structure, how might Julie have functioned as a

                                                                                                 51
DePalma and Ringer

       broker (Wenger, 1998) and thus introduced new ways of seeing, doing,
       and knowing to her academic community of practice?
   Our purpose here is not to critique Leki (1995) but rather to show how
adaptive transfer could help WAC scholars identify the complex, idiosyncratic
ways in which multilingual writers such as Julie might be reshaping prior
writing knowledge to fit new contexts. Adaptive transfer offers a lens, in other
words, that can help WAC researchers acknowledge the complexity associated
with multilingual writers writing across the curriculum. As Russell (2001)
notes in his review essay of naturalistic studies in WAC/WID, "qualitative
studies point faculty and program directors beyond the research for universal
or autonomous approaches toward much more messy--and human--factors"
(p. 261). Adaptive transfer, we contend, offers researcher a way to "see" this
messiness more fully than traditional notions of transfer allow.
   While Leki's (1995) intention was not to explore transfer or adaptive
transfer, her study does provide insight into how WAC scholars might go about
researching how multilingual writers learn to write across the curriculum. It
also points to the benefit of designing multilayered methodologies that employ
textual analysis, interviews, observations, rhetorical analysis, and genre analysis
to explore adaptive transfer (see also Canagarajah, 2006b; Lobato, 2003;
Parks, 2001). Recent WAC research that reflects this emphasis on multifaceted
methodologies could also provide WAC scholars with a fuller understanding of
how multilingual and native English speakers learn to write across disciplines,
genres, and contexts. One example is Stitt-Bergh and Hilgers's (2009) recent
discussion of WAC assessment at the University of Hawai'i at Manoa (UHM)--
an example that is particularly relevant to our discussion given that Hawai'i
recognizes Hawaiian as an official language.
   In their article, Stitt-Bergh and Hilgers (2009) name a variety of methods
that, if reconceived through the lens of adaptive transfer, could help expand
WAC scholarship in productive ways. Some of the methods they name, such
as interviews and text analysis, parallel those that Leki (1995) employed. But
they also name several additional methodologies that could be useful, including
ethnography, focus groups, and surveys. Given their interactional nature, focus
groups might be ideally suited to helping WAC researchers identify instances
of adaptive transfer, whether with alumni or current students. Focus groups
might be particularly useful to help WAC researchers understand how recent
graduates reshape prior writing knowledge learned in academic contexts to
professional ones. Specifically, focus groups comprised of recent graduates
could provide insight into how students transitioned from course to course in
university writing contexts and from academic writing contexts to professional
writing contexts. As Stitt-Bergh and Hilgers (2009) put it, focus groups could

52
                                                                                           Adaptive Transfer

offer insight into "[a]lumni perceptions of workplace writing tasks and their
level of preparedness to undertake those writing tasks" (Stitt-Bergh & Hilgers,
2009). Because participants in a focus group might be able to name instances
of adaptive transfer more easily when they hear others do so, this approach
could be particularly effective for multilingual writers. That said, focus group
participants would need to be selected carefully. Participants, whether native
English speakers or multilingual students, would need to have an awareness
of and language for talking about how they negotiate the demands of shifting
from one context to another. Our assumption is that advanced students or
recent graduates would have a better-developed awareness and language than
less experienced students.

   To once again demonstrate how the theory of adaptive transfer could inform
such research, we provide sample questions that researchers might ask in such
focus groups. From the vantage of traditional transfer, such questions might
include the following:

    Think about the writing you learned to do in college. How has it (not)
       prepared you to do the writing you're now doing in your profession?

    Think about your background as a native speaker of _____. How did
       that background help or hinder your writing in different classes in col-
       lege? How has it helped or hindered your workplace writing?

    Reflect back on the different classes you took that included significant
       writing. How did the writing that you learned to do in earlier classes
       (not) prepare you to do the writing you did in later classes?

   Again, while such questions would certainly provide valuable data, questions
reframed using the theory of adaptive transfer could lead to even richer insights:

    Think back on the different classes you took that included significant
       writing. Describe your process of working through new or unfamiliar
       writing tasks.

    Think about the writing you do in the workplace. Describe your process
       of working through new or unfamiliar writing tasks.

    Think about the writing you learned to do in college. In what ways have
       you had to reshape what you learned in school to fit what you need to
       do at work?

    Reflect back on the different classes you took that included significant
       writing. How did your background as a native speaker of ______ help
       you complete that writing?

    Think of moments when you were told you had made an error or done
       something wrong. In any of these moments, did you feel like what you
       did was really a different way of writing that you felt was valuable, useful,
       and/or original?

                                                                                                 53
DePalma and Ringer

   Using focus groups as means of studying instances of adaptive transfer has the
potential to highlight the diverse linguistic resources of alumni, particularly in
terms of the rhetorical patterns multilingual writers might draw on to negotiate
unfamiliar writing contexts. Put otherwise, by using the lens of adaptive transfer
to analyze the ways multilingual and NES alumni discuss their processes of
reshaping in a focus group setting, WAC researchers could learn much about
the ways writers adapt writing knowledge learned in one context to suit their
rhetorical purposes in another. To get at these adaptations in analyzing focus
group transcripts, WAC research might ask the following questions:

    In describing their processes of carrying out writing tasks, what kinds
       of linguistic resources, rhetorical knowledge, and writing experience do
       focus group participants discuss?

    How did the focus group participants reuse or reshape prior writing
       knowledge to suit new contexts?

    In what ways have focus group participants' backgrounds as multilingual
       writers enabled them to negotiate the novel rhetorical demands of writ-
       ing in their university coursework and in their places of work?

    Are there cases in which the use of alternative discourses were "matters of
       design" (Lu, 2004, p. 26) or the result of a "strategic and creative choice
       by the author to attain his or her rhetorical objectives" (Canagarajah,
       2006b, p. 591)?

    What do such cases suggest about the malleability of genres, discourses,
       or contexts of writing?

   Finally, adaptive transfer could also inform classroom-based research. Reflective
writing assignments are common in WAC and could be revised to help faculty
account for students' processes of adaptive transfer; such writing could also provide
datasets that WAC researchers could analyze with the aim of understanding the
ways students adapt to new writing tasks. Thaiss and Zawacki (2006), for example,
offer a range of practices that faculty across the disciplines might employ, one of
which includes, "Give students opportunities for reflecting on their own growth
as writers and rhetors, in the academy and as related to the workplaces they will
enter" (p. 152). Central to our concerns, such assignments could help students,
instructors, and WAC researchers identify how and when adaptive transfer might
be occurring. Thaiss and Zawacki (2006) recognize that students are not "tabula
rasa[s]" but rather "have a history as writers" that could "either help them in
future situations or limit their understanding or performance" (p. 152-3). Many
of the reflective assignments they suggest (e.g., literacy narratives, journals, blogs,
or eportfolios) could help faculty and WAC researchers understand how students
might be drawing on their "history as writers"--and on their multilingual
backgrounds--to navigate novel rhetorical tasks.

54
                                                                                           Adaptive Transfer

   One particular assignment invites students to "analyze current rhetorical
tasks in the context of relevant challenges" associated with prior writing
experiences (Thaiss & Zawacki, 2006, p. 153). From the vantage of adaptive
transfer, such assignments could also invite multilingual students to analyze
current rhetorical tasks in light of a number of other factors, including their
linguistic backgrounds and the resemblances they perceive between one writing
context and another (Lobato, 2003). Specifically, such assignments could
prompt students to identify and describe the rhetorical patterns or linguistic
features of their native languages or dialects and then consider how they might
use or reshape those patterns to help them complete a current writing task.
Teachers might use questions like the following to help their students frame a
reflective writing assignment:

    How does this writing task compare with those you have encountered
       in the past?

    What previous writing experiences might help you fulfill this task?
    How might you need to adapt what you did previously to fit the current

       rhetorical situation?
    How might the way you talk, think, and write in your native language(s)

       help you fulfill this task?
    How might your approach to this task differ from the approach of native

       English speakers?
   For WAC researchers, such writing could point to evidence of when and
how students reshape or reuse prior writing knowledge in new contexts. To help
them analyze these texts, researchers might use questions like the following:
    What resemblances across rhetorical contexts do students perceive?

       What do these resemblances suggest about the potential malleability and
       fluidity of genres, discourses, or rhetorical forms?
    What types of prior writing experiences do students identify as poten-
       tially helping them fulfill the current task? What do their comments
       regarding their idiosyncratic processes of adaptation tell us about the
       nature of adaptive transfer in general? What do their comments suggest
       about learning to write?
    How do multilingual students perceive their linguistic backgrounds as
       shaping how they approach current tasks? What do such perceptions tell
       researchers about the fluidity of languages and contexts of writing?
   What evidence, if any, suggests that students are intentionally altering
discourses as the result of a "strategic and creative choice by the author to attain
his or her rhetorical objectives" (Canagarajah, 2006b, p. 591)?
   Overall, the purposes of such measures would be to expand WAC researchers'
conceptions of what happens when students write across contexts by identifying

                                                                                                 55
DePalma and Ringer

the diverse ways in which NES and multilingual students navigate unfamiliar
writing situations. It would do so by highlighting the complexity of learning to
write, particularly in terms of how individuals reuse or reshape prior rhetorical
and linguistic knowledge in new contexts. Understanding how these reshapings
occur may help WAC researchers and administrators develop programs that
take advantage of multilingual and NES students' diverse resources. As a result,
the insights gained from such research would likely have significant implications
for faculty who teach with writing in the disciplines.

TEACHING WITH WRITING IN THE DISCIPLINES

   Along with helping WAC researchers understand how students navigate
novel writing situations, adaptive transfer also has significant implications for
the pedagogical practices that WAC professionals promote as they guide faculty
to teach with WID. More specifically, WAC specialists might offer the lens of
adaptive transfer as means by which to reinvigorate how faculty teaching with
WID view language and language change; student writers and texts; contexts
of writing; and the aims of writing instruction. In using the lens of adaptive
transfer to reshape how faculty understand the nature of learning to write and
the aims of teaching with WID, WAC specialists will have an opportunity to
address faculty expectations regarding the transfer of writing knowledge. They
will also be able to influence the kinds of assignments and evaluation methods
that faculty employ in their courses.

   The aims of learning to write across the curriculum are often premised on
traditional notions of transfer, as is evident in Condon's (2001) articulation of
the responsibilities of WAC faculty:

         Teachers--WAC faculty in particular--need to know what
         they can reasonably expect students to be able to do with
         and in writing, and they need to match those expectations
         with the level of expectations that are implicit in the
         teachers' own course objectives, objectives which, in turn, are
         determined by their location within the curriculum. Teachers
         need to know how to build more effective assignments--
         knowledge that involves both information about the writing
         students will do after taking a particular course (in careers
         or in subsequent courses) and information about the
         writing students have done to that point in the university's
         curriculum. (p. 31)

56
                                                                                           Adaptive Transfer

   Though he does not mention transfer specifically, Condon (2001) is
alluding to the possibility that students will be able to apply what they learned
in prior courses when they encounter writing tasks in later courses or careers.
As such, the implicit view of learning to write is that it occurs with a degree
of predictability in terms of what students will learn, how they will learn it,
and their ability to transfer such learning. While we certainly agree that it is
important for faculty across the disciplines to understand where their course fits
into the wider curriculum, we also contend that premising such discussions on
traditional notions of transfer will likely result in unrealistic expectations: faculty
will expect students to carry over generic, disciplinary, or rhetorical knowledge
and will grow frustrated when this does not occur--a frustration that so often
motivates criticisms leveled at first-year writing courses from faculty across the
disciplines who complain that students "don't know how to write."

   In drawing upon the framework of adaptive transfer to guide faculty teaching
with WID, however, WAC professionals can promote a different picture of
learning to write. Specifically, WAC specialists could use adaptive transfer to
complicate faculty expectations regarding what students have learned prior to
entering their courses and what they will do with that knowledge following
those courses. Regarding multilingual students in particular, WAC professionals
could offer adaptive transfer as a means by which to help faculty teaching
with WID envision students not as passive recipients of writing knowledge,
but as individuals with unique educational and linguistic backgrounds who
may appropriate and transform prior or new writing knowledge for their
own purposes (Canagarajah 2006b). This is not to say that every multilingual
student will consciously reshape prior writing knowledge for his/her own
ends, but it does provide space for this possibility. Likewise, WAC specialists
might encourage faculty teaching with WID to consider the kinds of intuitive
reshaping that may occur as students shift between writing contexts. In short,
adaptive transfer might be productively used by WAC specialists to reinvigorate
how faculty teaching with WID view language change, student texts, contexts
of writing, and the purpose of writing instruction.

Language

   Adaptive transfer highlights the ways in which languages and language
varieties are "always in process, located in and subject to ongoing and varying
material practice" (Horner & Trimbur, 2002, p. 596). In recent years, specialists
in second language (L2) writing have demonstrated the dynamic nature of
language and the multiplicity of language uses (Canagarajah, 2002; Canagarajah,
2006a; Canagarajah, 2006b; Lu, 2004; Lu, 2006; Matsuda, 1997; Matsuda,

                                                                                                 57
DePalma and Ringer

2002). These discussions have not only called attention to the need to alter
views about language, but have also indicated the extent to which assumptions
about writing and writing instruction must change if we are to adequately
prepare NES and multilingual writers for the varied tasks they face as students
and professionals. To this point, Horner and Trimbur (2002) argue, "If we grant
that definitions of academic discourse and competence in it are arbitrary, then
the notion of leading students through a fixed developmental sequence of stages
to mastery of that language has to be rethought" (p. 620). Recognizing "the
heterogeneity and fluctuating nature of writing" necessitates rethinking "how
[instructors] design both individual writing courses and curricular programs"
(Horner & Trimbur, 2002, p. 620). The framework of adaptive transfer helps
to foreground the view that all language is invariably in flux. As such, adaptive
transfer has the potential to help faculty across the curriculum rethink the ways
that writing is taught in both L1 and L2 writing contexts. The lens of adaptive
transfer, that is, might encourage faculty teaching with WID to adopt the
kinds of culturally and linguistically inclusive approaches to writing instruction
that L2 specialists have called for. These include the utilization of a "code
meshing" strategy that will allow multilingual writers to blend standard written
English (SWE) with other language varieties (Canagarajah, 2006a, 2006b); the
adoption of pedagogical strategies for doing "Living-English Work" (Lu, 2006;
p. 605); and the inclusion of pluralized forms of academic writing that have
been brought to the fore by various scholars (Schroeder, Fox, & Bizzell, 2002;
Thaiss & Zawacki, 2006).

Student Texts

   By encouraging progressive views of language use through the framework
of adaptive transfer, WAC specialists can also help faculty teaching with WID
consider how native English speakers and multilingual students might reshape
writing skills they've learned in prior contexts to fit new ones. Working from
an adaptive transfer perspective, that is, faculty teaching with WID might be
less apt to claim that transfer did not occur when students' texts disrupt their
expectations. Instead, faculty might ask how students have attempted to adapt
writing skills learned in other settings to their current rhetorical situation.
Further, if students defy a disciplinary convention, faculty might be more
likely to ask students why they made the rhetorical choices they did instead
of dismissing those choices as signs of error. The view of language encouraged
by the framework of adaptive transfer, in other words, might help broaden
faculty perceptions of student texts. Rather than approaching student writing
with preconceived notions about what student texts should look like, adaptive

58
                                                                                           Adaptive Transfer

transfer encourages faculty to recognize when students attempt to reshape prior
knowledge to suit both the demands of the rhetorical situation and students'
own objectives.

   Such a reconception of student writers and texts could certainly inform
teachers' processes of evaluation. For example, faculty working from the
perspective of adaptive transfer might ask student writers to complete the kind
of reflective writing we discussed earlier. Asking students to "analyze current
rhetorical tasks in the context of relevant challenges of the writer's past"
(Thaiss & Zawacki, 2006, p. 153) could lead to productive insights for faculty
regarding students' writing knowledge, processes, histories, and challenges. By
prompting students as Thaiss and Zawacki (2006) suggest, faculty teaching
with WID are apt to learn valuable information about the assumptions guiding
each writer's rhetorical and linguistic choices. For example, if Leki's (1995)
student Julie had been provided an opportunity to reflect on the rhetorical
choices she was making while composing her history paper, her teacher may
have gained important insights into Julie's reasons for "rewriting the terms of
the assignment to suit what she thought she could do best" (Leki, 1995, p.
243). Such information would have been valuable in evaluating Julie's written
work because it would have highlighted her rhetorical processes of adaptive
transfer. Specifically, it would have underscored that Julie's resistance resulted
from a "strategic and creative choice [...] to attain [...] her rhetorical objectives"
(Canagarajah, 2006b, p. 591). Such reflective writing could play an even more
significant role for students who similarly rewrite assignments but do not fare as
well as Julie. In such cases, faculty teaching with WID who know why students
chose to write an assignment differently would be able to take such motives into
account when evaluating written work.

   Using this kind of reflective writing as part of teachers' processes of evaluating
student texts might also allow faculty teaching with WID to see how factors
such as race, class, gender, socioeconomic status, educational history, genre
knowledge, and language repertoire shape how individuals encounter new
writing situations (DePalma & Ringer, 2011; Zamel & Spack, 2006). Finally,
such reflective writing will likely encourage faculty to more readily account for
the highly diverse ways in which students will learn to write in new genres,
disciplines, and contexts.

Contexts of Writing

   Along with informing how faculty teaching with WID interact with students'
texts, adaptive transfer might also encourage faculty to embrace a dynamic
theory of writing, which has implications for both native English speakers

                                                                                                 59
DePalma and Ringer

and multilingual writers. In the dynamic model of multilingual writing that
Matsuda (1997) proposes, both the writer's and the reader's backgrounds are
included in the context of writing. Matsuda (1997) defines this space as "the
dynamic environment that surrounds the meeting of the writer and the reader
through the text in a particular writing situation" (p. 248). Because adaptive
transfer stems from a dynamic view of writing that views contexts for writing
as shared, negotiated, and constantly in flux, adaptive transfer has the potential
to alter faculty members' views of and attitudes toward NES and multilingual
writers across the curriculum. Rather than viewing students solely as novice
writers with little to contribute to the discourse communities they are seeking
to enter, adaptive transfer encourages faculty to see students as agents who
possess a range of valuable language resources and knowledge that might shape
their writing in productive ways. Students are thus reconceived of as potential
contributors to an ever-changing rhetorical context rather than as repositories
of genre knowledge and conventions. They are, in other words, transformers
rather than transferers of writing knowledge and writing contexts (Brent, 2012).
When thinking in terms of adaptive transfer, that is, faculty would be more
likely to ask how students' texts might influence contexts of writing.

Aims of Writing Instruction

   In addition to influencing the ways faculty across the curriculum approach
student texts and view student writers, adaptive transfer also has significant
implications for how faculty teaching with WID understand the aims of writing
instruction. Rather than seeing the goal of writing instruction as teaching
students to master discourses of power, adaptive transfer foregrounds a pedagogy
that allows students to question writing conventions at the same time that they
are being taught to practice them. Because of this, adaptive transfer might
encourage faculty to adopt an alternative discourses approach, such as that noted
by Thaiss and Zawacki (2006). Whereas traditional pedagogies assume that all
students desire to learn dominant discourses, an alternative discourses approach
that informs adaptive transfer might help faculty acknowledge that students
have different reasons for learning to write, one of which may include the desire
to change contexts of writing. Thaiss and Zawacki (2006), for instance, note
that the faculty they interviewed recognized "the dynamism of disciplines," such
that "a teacher preparing students for academic writing would be hard pressed
to label any discursive practice always unacceptable" (p. 137). Thus, rather than
only using the expectations of the instructor's academic discourse community as
a basis for determining instructional aims, adaptive transfer might urge faculty

60
                                                                                           Adaptive Transfer

to also view students' strategic design to create new discourses as a legitimate
goal of writing instruction in the disciplines.

   While we would be remiss to argue that multilingual students' various
reshapings are always conscious and strategic, we would be equally remiss to
argue that they never are (Canagarajah, 2006b). In some cases, the decision
to depart from disciplinary conventions is purposeful, and the framework of
adaptive transfer helps us to recognize this kind of intentional reshaping. When
considering adaptive transfer as a guide in structuring curricular goals, faculty
members' ideas about how to encourage students to reshape and reform learned
writing skills to fit new tasks are liable to shift. Instead of setting the reuse
of disciplinary conventions as the primary goal of instruction, the framework
of adaptive transfer might prompt faculty members to adopt a multilingual
approach that takes full advantage of students' diverse rhetorical and linguistic
resources.

CONCLUSION

   Adaptive transfer has significant implications for multilingual and NES
writers across the curriculum and for the WAC programs that support them. It
thus serves as a framework that can help WAC scholars and faculty adjust their
practices in ways that effectively serve the growing population of multilingual
learners in US higher education. As we continue to realize the "New America" in
which we live--an America, as Hall (2009) writes, wherein multilingualism is
now more common than monolingualism--it is imperative that WAC scholars
account for the complex ways in which all students learn to write across the
curriculum. In doing so, it is our hope that WAC scholars and faculty will be
able to recognize multilingual writers' rhetorical and linguistic backgrounds as
resources and not liabilities (Canagarajah, 2006b). We hope that the framework
of adaptive transfer will help achieve such ends, so that WAC researchers and
faculty across the disciplines can ethically and effectively help students learn
to write--and value students' multilingual, idiosyncratic ways of writing and
knowing as part of that enterprise.

REFERENCES

Beach, K. (1999). Consequential transitions: A sociocultural expedition be-
   yond transfer in education. In A. Iran-Nejad & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Review

                                                                                                 61
DePalma and Ringer

   of research in education, 24 (pp. 101-139). Washington, DC: American Edu-
   cational Research Association.
Belcher, D. (1995). Writing critically across the curriculum. In D. Belcher &
   G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and
   pedagogy (pp. 135-154). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Belcher, D. & Braine, G. (1995). Academic writing in a second language: Essays
   on research and pedagogy. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Bergmann, L. S. & Zepernick, J. (2007). Disciplinarity and transfer: Students'
   perceptions of learning to write. WPA: Writing Program Administration,
   31(1/2), 124-49.
Bloch, J., Condon, W., Hickey, D., McLeary, L., Matsuda, P. K., Rilling, S.,
   and Palmquist, M. (2001). Connecting WAC and ESL? Academic.Writing,
   2. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/aw/forums/
Bradford, J. D. & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking transfer: A simple pro-
   posal with multiple implications. In A. Iran-Nejad & P. D. Pearson (Eds.),
   Review of research in education, 24 (pp. 61-100). Washington, DC: American
   Educational Research Association.
Brent, D. (2012). Crossing boundaries: Co-op students relearning to write.
   College Composition and Communication, 63(4), 558-592.
Broudy, H.S. (1977). Types of knowledge and purposes of education. In R. C.
   Anderson, R. J. Spiro, & W. E. Montague (Eds.), Schooling and the acquisi-
   tion of knowledge (pp. 1-17). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). Critical academic writing and multilingual students.
   Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Canagarajah, A. S. (2006a). The place of world Englishes in composition:
   Pluralization continued. College Composition and Communication, 57,
   586-619.
Canagarajah, A. S. (2006b). Toward a writing pedagogy of shuttling between
   languages: learning from multilingual writers. College English, 68, 589-604.
Carroll, L. A. (2002). Rehearsing new roles: How college students develop as writ-
   ers. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Condon, W. (2001). Accommodating complexity: WAC program evaluation
   in the age of accountability. In S. H. McLeod, E. Miraglia, M. Soven, & C.
   Thaiss (Eds.), WAC for the new millennium: Strategies for continuing writing-
   across-the-curriculum programs (pp. 28-51). Urbana, IL: NCTE.
Conference on College Composition and Communication. (2009). Statement
   on second language writing and writers. Retrieved from http://www.ncte.org/
   cccc/resources/positions/secondlangwriting
Connor, U. (1996). Contrastive rhetoric: Cross-cultural aspects of second-language
   writing. New York: Cambridge University Press.

62
                                                                                           Adaptive Transfer

Currie, P. (1999). Transferable skills: Promoting student research. English for
   Specific Purposes, 18(1), 329-345.

DePalma, M.-J. & Ringer, J. M. (2011). Toward a theory of adaptive transfer:
   Expanding disciplinary discussions of "transfer" in second-language writing
   and composition studies. Journal of Second Language Writing, 20(2), 134-47.

Dias, P., Freedman, A., Medway, P., and Par, A. (1999). Worlds apart: Acting
   and writing in academic and workplace contexts. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erl-
   baum.

Dively, R. L. & Nelms, G. (2007). Perceived roadblocks to transferring knowl-
   edge from first-year composition to writing-intensive major courses: A pilot
   study. Writing Program Administration, 31(1/2), 214-240.

Downs, D. & Wardle, E. (2007). Teaching about writing, righting misconcep-
   tions: (Re)envisioning "first-year composition" as "introduction to writing
   studies." College Composition and Communication, 58(4), 552-84.

Dyson, A. H. (1999). Transforming transfer: Unruly children, contrary texts,
   and the persistence of pedagogical order. In A. Iran-Nejad & P. D. Pearson
   (Eds.), Review of research in education, 24 (pp. 141-171). Washington, DC:
   American Educational Research Association.

Grabe, W. & Kaplan, R. B. (1989). Writing in a second language: Contrastive
   rhetoric. In D. M. Johnson & D. H. Rohen (Eds.), Richness in writing: Em-
   powering ESL students (pp. 263-83). White Plains, NY: Longman.

Greeno, J. G., Smith, D. R., & Moore, J. L. (1993). Transfer of situated learn-
   ing. In D. K. Detterman and R. J. Sternberg (Eds.), Transfer on trial: Intelli-
   gence, cognition, and instruction (pp. 99-167). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publish-
   ing Corporation.

Hall, J. (2009). WAC/WID in the next America: Redefining professional iden-
   tity in the age of the multilingual majority. The WAC Journal, 20. Retrieved
   from http://wac.colostate.edu/journal/vol20/hall.pdf

Haskell, R. E. (1998). Reengineering corporate training: Intellectual capital and
   transfer of learning. Westport, CT: Quorum Books.

Haswell, R. H., Briggs, T. L., Fay, J. A., Gillen, N. K., Harrill, R., Shupala, A.
   M., Trevino, S. S. (1999). Context and rhetorical reading strategies: Haas
   and Flower (1988) revisited. Written Communication, 16, 3-28.

Hinds, J. (1983a). Contrastive rhetoric: Japanese and English. Text, 3(2), 183-
   95.

Hinds, J. (1983b). Linguistics in written discourse in particular languages:
   Contrastive studies: English and Japanese. In R. B. Kaplan (Ed.), Annual
   review of applied linguistics III (pp. 78-84). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.

Hinds, J. (1990). Inductive, deductive, quasi-inductive: Expository writing in
   Japanese, Korean, Chinese, and Thai. In U. Connor & A. M. Johns (Eds.),

                                                                                                 63
DePalma and Ringer

   Coherence in writing: Research and pedagogical perspectives (pp. 87-110). Al-
   exandria, VA: TESOL.
Horner, B. & Lu, M. (2007). Resisting monolingualism in "English": Reading
   and writing the politics of language. Paper presented at the University of New
   Hampshire, Durham, NH.
Horner, B. & Trimbur, J. (2002). English only and US college composition.
   College Composition and Communication, 53, 594-630.
James, M. A. (2006a). Teaching for transfer in ELT. ELT Journal, 60(2), 151-
   159.
James, M. A. (2006b). Transfer of learning from a university content-based
   EAP course. TESOL Quarterly, 40, 783-806.
James, M. A. (2009). "Far" transfer of learning outcomes from an ESL writing
   course: Can the gap be bridged? Journal of Second Language Writing, 18, 69-
   84.
Johns, A. M. (1995). Teaching classroom and authentic genres: Initiating stu-
   dents into academic cultures and discourses. In D. Belcher & G. Braine
   (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy
   (pp. 277-91). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Johns, A. M. (1997). Text, role, and context: Developing academic literacies. New
   York: Cambridge University Press.
Kang, J. Y. (2005). Written narratives as an index of L2 competence in Korean
   EFL learners. Journal of Second Language Writing, 14, 259-79.
Kaplan, R. B. (1966). Cultural thought patterns in intercultural education.
   Language Learning, 16, 1-20.
Kaplan, R.B. (1988). Contrastive rhetoric and second language learning: Notes
   towards a theory of contrastive rhetoric. In A. C. Purves (Ed.), Writing across
   languages and cultures (pp. 275-304). Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Kobayashi, H. (1984). Rhetorical patterns in English and Japanese. Dissertation
   Abstracts International, 45(S), 2425A.
Kubota, R. (1998). An investigation of L1-L2 transfer in writing among Japa-
   nese university students: Implications for contrastive rhetoric. Journal of Sec-
   ond Language Writing, 7, 69-100.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics, and culture in every-
   day life. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participa-
   tion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Leki, I. (1995). Coping strategies of ESL students in writing tasks across the
   curriculum. TESOL Quarterly, 29(2), 235-260.
Leki, I. (2007). Undergraduates in a second language: Challenges and complexities
   of academic literacy development. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

64
                                                                                           Adaptive Transfer

Leki, I., & Carson, J. G. (1997). "Completely different worlds": EAP and the
   writing experiences of ESL students in university courses. TESOL Quarterly,
   31(1), 39-69.

Lobato, J. (2003). How design experiments can inform a rethinking of transfer
   and vice versa. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 17-20.

Lu, M. (2004). An essay on the work of composition: Composing English
   against the order of fast capitalism. College Composition and Communication,
   56, 16-50.

Lu, M. (2006). Living English work. College English, 68, 605-18.
MacDonald, S. P. & Cooper, C. R. (1992). Contributions of academic and

   dialogic journals to writing about literature. In Herrington, A. & Moran, C.
   (Eds.), Writing, teaching, and learning in the disciplines. (pp. 137-155). New
   York: Modern Language Association.
Matsuda, P. K. (1997). Contrastive rhetoric in context: A dynamic model of
   L2 writing. In T. Silva & P. K. Matsuda (Eds.), Landmark essays on second
   language writing (pp. 241-255). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Matsuda, P. K. (2002). Alternative discourses: a synthesis. In C. Schroeder, H.
   Fox, and P. Bizzell (Eds.), ALT/DIS: Alternative discourses and the academy
   (pp. 191-96). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.
McCarthy, L. P. (1987). A stranger in strange lands: a college student writing
   across the curriculum. Research in the Teaching of English, 21(3), 233-65.
McLeod, S. H. & Miraglia, E. (2001). Writing across the curriculum in a time
   of change. In McLeod, S. H., Miraglia, E., Soven, M., and Thaiss, C. (Eds.),
   WAC for the new millennium: Strategies for continuing writing-across-the-cur-
   riculum programs (pp. 1-27). Urbana: NCTE.
Oi, K. (1984). Cross-cultural differences in rhetorical patterning: A study of
   Japanese and English. Dissertation Abstracts International, 4, 5(8), 251 IA.
Parks, S. (2001). Moving from school to the workplace: Disciplinary innova-
   tion, border crossings, and the reshaping of a written genre. Applied Linguis-
   tics, 22, 405-438.
Petraglia, J. (1995). Reconceiving writing, rethinking writing instruction. Mah-
   wah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pierce, K. A., Duncan, M. K., Gholson, B., Ray, G. E., & Kamhi, A. G. (1993).
   Cognitive load, schema acquisition, and procedural adaptation in noniso-
   morhpic analogical transfer. Journal of Educational Psychology, 85, 66-74.
Prior, P. A. (1998). Writing/disciplinarity: A sociohistoric account of literate activ-
   ity in the academy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Riazi, A. (1997). Acquiring disciplinary literacy: A social-cognitive analysis of
   text production and learning among Iranian graduate students of education.
   Journal of Second Language Writing, 6, 105-37.

                                                                                                 65
DePalma and Ringer

Royer, J. M. (1979). Theories of the transfer of learning. Educational Psycholo-
   gist, 14, 53-69.

Royer, J. M., Mestre, J. P., & Dufresne, R. J. (2005). Framing the transfer prob-
   lem. In J. P. Mestre (Ed.), Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary
   perspective (pp. vii-xxvi). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.

Russell, D. (1995). Activity theory and its implications for writing instruction.
   In J. Petraglia (Ed.), Reconceiving writing, rethinking writing instruction (pp.
   51-77). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Russell, D. (2001). Where do the naturalistic studies of WAC/WID point?
   A research review. In S. H. McLeod, E. Miraglia, M. Soven, & C. Thaiss
   (Eds.), WAC for the new millennium: Strategies for continuing writing-across-
   the-curriculum programs (pp. 259-98). Urbana: NCTE.

Schroeder, C. L., Fox, H., & Bizzell, P. (2002). ALT DIS: Alternative discourses
   and the academy. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

Simpson, J. M. (2000). Topical structure analysis of academic paragraphs in
   English and Spanish. Journal of Second Language Writing, 9 (3), 239-309.

Smit, D. W. (2004). The end of composition studies. Carbondale: Southern Il-
   linois University Press.

Snow, M. A. (1993). Discipline-based foreign language teaching: Implications
   from ESL/EFL. In M. Krueger & F. Ryan (Eds.), Language and content: Dis-
   cipline- and content-based approaches to language study. Lexington, MA.: D.C.
   Heath & Co.

Spack, R. (1988). Initiating ESL students into the academic discourse commu-
   nity: How far should we go? TESOL Quarterly, 22, 29-51.

Spack, R. (1997). The acquisition of academic literacy in a second language: A
   longitudinal case study. Written Communication, 14(1), 3-62.

Stitt-Bergh, M. & Hilgers, T. (2009, December 3). Program assessment: Pro-
   cesses, propagation, and culture change. [Special issue of Writing Across the
   Curriculum and Assessment] Across the Disciplines, 6. Retrieved from http://
   wac.colostate.edu/atd/assessment/stittbergh_hilgers.cfm

Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cam-
   bridge: Cambridge University Press.

Thaiss, C., & Zawacki, T. M. (2006). Engaged writers and dynamic disciplines:
   Research on the academic writing life. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook
   Heinemann.

Thomas, F. L. (2009, December 3). Developing a culture of writing at Virginia
   State University: A new writing emphasis. [Special issue of Writing Across
   the Curriculum and Assessment] Across the Disciplines, 6. Retrieved from
   http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/assessment/thomas.cfm

66
                                                                                           Adaptive Transfer

Voss, J. F. (1989). On the composition of experts and novices. In E. Maimon,
   B. Nodine, & F. W. O'Connor (Eds.), Thinking, reasoning, and writing (pp.
   69-84). New York: Longman.

Walvoord, B. E. & McCarthy, L. P. (1990). Thinking and writing in college: a
   naturalistic study of students in four disciplines. Urbana: NCTE.

Wardle, E. (2007). Understanding "transfer" from FYC: Preliminary results of a
   longitudinal study. Writing Program Administration, 31(1/2), 65-85.

Wardle, E. (2009). "Mutt genres" and the goal of FYW: Can we help students
   write the genres of the university? College Composition and Communication,
   60(4), 765-89.

Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity.
   New York: Cambridge University Press.

Zamel, V. & Spack, R. (Eds). (2004). Crossing the curriculum: Multilingual
   learners in college classrooms. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

                                                                                                 67
CHAPTER 2

DEVELOPING RESOURCES FOR
SUCCESS: A CASE STUDY OF
A MULTILINGUAL GRADUATE
WRITER

Talinn Phillips
Ohio University

This is the story of Chozin, a graduate multilingual writer who was
an unlikely success story. I followed Chozin through two years in a
writing-intensive, interdisciplinary graduate program; here I describe
the numerous strategies he developed to overcome writing failures and
a low level of English proficiency and then consider how his experience
might benefit other writers. Chozin's story deepens our understanding
of the strategies multilingual graduate writers use to navigate their
programs of study.

   Chozin (Koh-ZEEN) was a bright, engaging Indonesian graduate student
who participated in my research project on how international multilingual
graduate writers learn to write for their fields. Initially a very poor writer in
English, Chozin managed to overcome the low expectations of his advisor
(and this researcher) to become a highly successful graduate student in his
interdisciplinary program and a much-improved writer. Chozin was a very
unlikely success story; thus his experience highlights the resourcefulness
that multilingual writers may bring to their writing development. Chozin's
particular resourcefulness also deepens our understanding of the strategies
multilingual learners use when they encounter writing assignments in the
US academy. Chozin's story reminds us too of the value of having a support
network and of receiving feedback as we write. Finally, his story provides a
compelling example of what it means for a multilingual graduate student to
write across multiple, largely unfamiliar, disciplines and of the value of WAC
to international students who may not be well prepared for the demands of
writing in graduate school.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.02                       69
Phillips

   I begin by describing the larger study that Chozin was part of and then
introduce readers to Chozin and his primary professor, Dr. G. before moving
to a discussion of some of the key strategies that Chozin developed in order to
succeed--strategies for receiving useful feedback, for collaborating successfully
on group projects, for managing the data collection process for his papers, and
for improving his overall literacy. I conclude by considering the implications of
Chozin's experience.

INTERNATIONAL GRADUATE STUDENTS'
DEVELOPMENT AS WRITERS

   Chozin's eventual success was largely the result of his own diligence and
resourcefulness; he was quick to develop successful strategies to overcome his
writing challenges and developed a number of these strategies throughout his
graduate career. Chozin's case study adds to a growing body of research on
international graduate students, including well-known studies by Casanave and
Leki. Research by Casanave (2002) and a research collection by Casanave and
Li (2008) examine international graduate students' development as writers in
great detail. Casanave and Li's (2008) edited collection, for example, provides
an unusual yet useful way of understanding how graduate students learn to
write. Structured as a series of personal narratives, many by non-native speakers
of English, on the graduate writing life, most of the chapters focus on writers
encountering new writing challenges and subsequently developing a better
understanding of themselves and/or of writing in their disciplines. In Writing
Games, Casanave (2002) includes a chapter on the academic enculturation of
five graduate MATESOL (master's degree in TESOL) students, some of whom
were native-English speakers and others non-native English speakers. Casanave's
aim is "to look closely at students' experiences with and attitudes toward writing
and to discover any changes over time in how the students viewed themselves
and their field" (p. 93). Casanave employs the metaphor of "writing games"
as she focuses on the writers' shifting identities and on how the MATESOL
program functions as a community of practice. Explaining her choice of "game"
to describe such a serious topic, Casanave writes that the notion of writing games

         seems to depict people's sense that academic writing consists
         of rule- and strategy-based practices, done in interaction with
         others for some kind of personal and professional gain, and
         that it is learned through repeated practice rather than just
         from a guidebook of how to play. (p. 3)

70
                                                                        Developing Resources for Success

As I'll show, Chozin learned to play the "writing game," not only through
repeated writing experiences but also through the strategy-based practices he
developed. (Also see DePalma & Ringer [this volume] for an examination of
how L2 writers can and do become effective agents of their own learning as they
develop strategies to cope with unfamiliar writing demands and expectations
through the process of adaptive transfer). Chozin's story provides an example of
how one graduate student adapted his practices to carry out--and sometimes
resist--the writing tasks assigned across his courses.

   Leki's (1995) study "Coping Strategies of ESL Students in Writing Tasks
Across the Curriculum" was the first to attempt to research and catalogue
the strategies that multilingual writers employed when they encountered
writing assignments. Leki followed five students (three graduates and two
undergraduates) through a semester of courses and catalogued their strategic
moves, grouping them as follows: clarifying strategies, focusing strategies,
relying on past writing experiences, taking advantage of first language/culture,
using current experience or feedback, looking for models, using current or past
ESL writing training, accommodating teachers' demands, resisting teachers'
demands and managing competing demands (1995, p. 240). As I will discuss,
Leki's categories provide a good context for analyzing Chozin's resourcefulness
at the same time that his experiences also problematize some of Leki's (to be fair,
preliminary) categories and suggest new or broader ones. For example, whereas
Leki's participants relied on past successful writing experiences for positive
transfer to other writing tasks, one of Chozin's most effective strategies was to
learn from failure, i.e. to take negative writing experiences and craft a plan to
avoid the same outcome in the future.

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

   While in this chapter I'm focusing on Chozin, he was one of five participants
in my two-year, IRB-approved study on how incoming international
multilingual graduate students learn to write for their fields and the resources
they use to support their writing development. Though Chozin is only one
writer, Newkirk (1992) argues that although qualitative approaches like the
case study have no internal mechanism for generalization (such as a large,
representative sample size), these approaches instead allow readers to perform
the act of generalization; readers determine whether the case study looks like
their own students or classrooms and therefore whether it should inform, alter,
or trigger an overhaul of their own theories and pedagogies. Further, Newkirk
argues that "the case study gains generalizability through particularity--

                                                                                                 71
Phillips

through the density of detail, the selection of incidents, the narrative skill of
the researcher" (1992, p. 130). The case study thus functions as a heuristic,
offering possible explanations and possible solutions to its readers. The reader
is then prompted to engage in the analytical act of assessing which features of
the case study might best be generalized to his/her own situation and which
are irrelevant, perhaps because of differences in contexts. I thus offer Chozin's
story and suggest potential implications, but leave readers to make their own
determinations.

   Chozin and other participants were recruited through campus flyers and
email messages to various international student organizations. I sought and chose
participants who were beginning their programs and who had not previously
attended an English-medium institution other than to take English-language
classes; therefore, these writers would be new to graduate school and new to
taking disciplinary courses in English. I also attempted to recruit participants
who were linguistically and disciplinarily diverse, though with limited success.
Two participants were Chinese, one was Sudanese, and two were Indonesian,
one of whom was Chozin. Both Chozin and the other Indonesian participant
were in the Southeast Asian Studies program. The remaining students were in
linguistics, environmental studies, and communication studies.

   I followed these five writers through the first year of their programs and
continued to follow Chozin and another participant for a second year until they
completed their master's degrees. I recorded audio interviews with them at least
twice a month, collected copies of the syllabi for their courses and their drafts
and final papers with teacher responses, and interviewed the instructors who
made themselves available after the term had ended. For Chozin, I analyzed
six seminar papers, two conference papers, three drafts of his thesis, four short
projects for blogs and local newspapers, and nearly two dozen focus/response
papers and other short assignments. He provided me with papers from his
anthropology, political science, biological sciences, geography, and graduate
writing classes.

   I also read writing center observation reports if and when the students
worked with writing tutors. Participating in writing tutoring was not a
requirement for participation in the study, however. Although I was interested
in how participants used the writing center, I was far more interested in the
resources that they chose for themselves so that I could see the full range of
resources they chose to employ as they developed as writers and scholars.

   After the data collection was complete, the interviews were transcribed, read
repeatedly and analyzed to understand the resources the writers used to support
their writing development. I coded the data for both institutional resources like
the writing center and graduate writing classes as well as personal resources such

72
                                                                        Developing Resources for Success

as developing a network of proofreaders. Bishop (1999), among others, argues
that the validity of qualitative results is strengthened through data triangulation,
investigator triangulation, and methodological triangulation, or in other words,
by collecting multiple types of data from multiple sources and by multiple
means. This study used three groups of "investigators," these being myself, the
writing center staff, and the student writers' teachers, as well as multiple types
of data. However, I was the only person who coded the data.

   I chose to focus on Chozin in this chapter because he was enrolled in an
interdisciplinary master's program in Southeast Asian Studies, and thus was
being asked to write in anthropology, sociology, marine biology, political
science, and geography courses, many of which were writing intensive. I look
primarily at the first year of his program as that is when most of his writing for
his courses occurred, thus when he was receiving the most feedback. Chozin
completed his thesis quite quickly and with little problem by the middle of his
second year.

   I also focus on Chozin because he was such an unlikely success story. At the
beginning of my study his English was very weak. He had one of the lowest
proficiency levels I'd encountered in over five years of tutoring our campus's
multilingual graduate students.1 Moreover, I knew some of his fall quarter
professors, and I knew how much writing they required of their students. Having
tutored a number of students in the Southeast Asian Studies program, my initial
assessment was that Chozin wouldn't be able to complete it. I was very happy to
be proven wrong when he graduated on time, having presented at international
conferences and having been awarded his department's outstanding thesis prize.

INTRODUCING CHOZIN

   Chozin's undergraduate degree was from a Bahasa-medium institution in
Indonesia where he had studied marine biology. He had just arrived at our
university from coordinating tsunami relief work near Aceh, Indonesia, and
had contacted me via email after learning about my study during international
student orientation and from the international student association. We arranged
an initial meeting so that Chozin could learn more about the requirements of
the study and so that I could assess his suitability as a participant. After Chozin
had formally enrolled in the study, we began meeting every week or two. From
the beginning, Chozin was friendly and easy to talk with. He was quite willing
to share his own struggles and as his language proficiency grew, so did his
willingness to talk. In our early interviews, I would struggle to understand him,
and we would spend a fair amount of time negotiating meaning and clarifying

                                                                                                 73
Phillips

what he had to say. By the end of the study, he required very little prompting
from me in order to talk for long stretches about his writing and research.
Chozin seemed to develop a reflective habit of mind over the course of his
graduate career, and as that habit of reflection developed, he became more and
more willing to share what he was learning about himself as a writer.

   In our initial interview, Chozin reported that he had struggled through his
undergraduate work, that he had not graduated on time, and that he had often
been behind on his work. He was now entering a master's program "centered
on interdisciplinary curricula that combine the traditional foundations in the
social sciences and humanities, components within the natural sciences, and
the professions" (Center for International Studies, para. 1). In this program,
students take a standard core of courses which are themselves interdisciplinary
(educational research, geography, anthropology), and they then have wide
latitude to specialize in a particular aspect of Southeast Asian culture; Chozin
chose to specialize in maritime studies.

   Given Chozin's undergraduate struggles, he was now entering a challenging
master's program that would require him to take courses in multiple disciplines,
to engage in regular field research and intensive writing, and to do all of this
in a second language, without having had prior writing instruction in English,
Javanese, or Bahasa. In their examination of the roles of writing in international
academic contexts, Russell and Foster (2002) note that the "ubiquitous tradition
[of first-year composition] in the United States--perhaps the only common
denominator in what is otherwise a sprawling and diverse higher education
system--strikes many teachers in other nations as strange" (p. 7). Russell and
Foster remind us that Chozin's lack of writing instruction before entering the
US academy is more likely to be the rule than the exception among multilingual
writers, making their task of succeeding in the academy--and doing so at the
graduate level--even more difficult.2

   Chozin readily acknowledged that he struggled with writing. His other
English language skills were weak as well, and these weaknesses were highlighted
by the nature of research in his program. Over the course of his first year, Chozin's
assorted writing projects required him to interview farmers at the local farmers'
market, Caucasian American-born Muslims, a Southeast Asian, a person who
had given him a gift, university food service personnel, and Indonesian blast
fishers. Each of these interviews constituted the primary source for different
writing projects and formed the bulk of the content for his respective papers.
The necessity of conducting all these interviews to complete so many different
papers made his language difficulties all the more obvious. It also meant that
he struggled with the entire writing process, not just with composing, but also
with comprehending the input needed to produce even a rough draft.

74
                                                                        Developing Resources for Success

   When I first asked Chozin to describe his writing ability, he identified
organization and length of composing time as his primary difficulties: "I have
problem with writing to arrange the uh, paragraph. Uh, yeah. It's maybe for
my friend, when we have assignment two page, she already just need one hours
but for me, need four hours to do that."3 Chozin's experience is consistent with
research in second language studies that has shown that multilingual writers
need more time to compose (Silva, 1993, pp. 661-662). In addition to struggling
to understand the language input of his interviewees, Chozin did indeed have
problems with organization, as my own assessment of his work confirmed,
along with development and with integrating secondary sources. Chozin did
make marked improvement in composing fluency and in writing style over the
course of his program. He was less successful at improving his organization,
development, and source use and, in fact, never gave any indication that he
recognized these problems. Rather, he focused on increasing his fluency and
building his vocabulary and on developing strategies to manage other problems
that he encountered during his program. I will return to Chozin and the
strategies he developed to succeed below; first, however, it is important to
introduce another research informant, Chozin's recruiter, teacher, and advisor,
Dr. G.

INTRODUCING DR. G.

   Chozin's story would be incomplete without including Dr. G., a faculty
member in his program. Dr. G. was interested in writing studies and had become
a convert to writing-to-learn theory through a series of WAC workshops. The
WAC program at this institution was fairly new and was growing quickly at
that time. John Bean's (2001) Engaging Ideas, particularly his extensive use of
writing-to-learn activities, had been a focal point in the WAC program's faculty
development seminars.

   Chozin took one course with Dr. G. each quarter of his first year, and each
of those courses utilized writing-to-learn activities extensively, typically in
the form of weekly "focus papers." These were 1-2 page response papers that
sometimes became dialogue journals as described by Carter and Gradin (2001).
The papers did not have specific prompts; instead the topics were student-
driven based on their reaction to the readings. In some cases the papers were
simply submitted as response papers. At other times students would be asked
to trade papers during class and engage in written dialogue about the ideas in
the paper. The papers were treated as informal writing projects, with comments
focused on students' ideas and grades based on engagement.

                                                                                                 75
Phillips

   Dr. G. therefore provided me with vital insight into Chozin's development
as a student and a writer. As Chozin's advisor, he was also a key player in that
development since Chozin's thesis was an extension of Dr. G.'s research. Chozin
had actually been directly recruited by Dr. G. while Dr. G. was doing field
research in Indonesia. Dr. G.'s insight was also important because he was the
only one of Chozin's professors who agreed to be interviewed.4 Chozin was
clearly fond of Dr. G. and respected him. He had formed this relationship before
even arriving at the university, and he continued to cultivate it throughout his
program and beyond. I return now to the strategies Chozin developed as he
made his way through his master's program.

DEVELOPING STRATEGIES TO SUCCEED

   During his first year Chozin developed a number of strategies to manage
the writing process and to improve his writing. Throughout this section I
contextualize Chozin's strategic moves within the categories described by Leki
(1995). Chozin never mentioned engaging in some of the strategies Leki identifies
and he complicates others, as I discuss below. Chozin also developed several other
strategies not mentioned by Leki's participants, as I noted earlier, including seeking
feedback, developing a personalized course, and managing the data collection
process. I begin by discussing Chozin's strategy for seeking feedback.

A Network of Editors

   Chozin sought feedback throughout his program from teachers, professional
editors, and from a carefully developed network of peers that I term his "editor-
friends." Initially these friends were other Indonesians, but after his first quarter
Chozin began seeking out native-English-speaking (NES) students in his
courses and asking them for help. He preferred to work with NES students who
were also studying Bahasa, thus enabling him to "trade" writing tutoring for
language tutoring. Being able to provide help in return seemed to make Chozin
feel better about asking for assistance and thus allowed him to develop a more
equitable relationship with his editor-friends.

   It was obvious from our conversations that these editor-friends provided
Chozin with a measure of moral support, but I found no evidence that they
helped him engage in the kind of substantive revision that, based on my own
assessment, his papers needed. When I compared first drafts, edited drafts, and
final drafts, only sentence-level changes and corrections were evident yet there
were often significant problems with development and organization. In some

76
                                                                        Developing Resources for Success

cases I could not identify a purpose and, in several others, basic requirements
of a genre were missing (e.g. a conclusion), a problem two of his teachers
noted in their final paper comments. It is possible that Chozin was unable or
unwilling to enact more substantive revision based on conversations with his
editor-friends, but their written comments were focused almost exclusively on
sentence-level issues, not on development, organization, genre, or other global
issues. To Chozin, though, these corrections were apparently adequate, even
though professors continued to lower his grades because of his writing. He
often identified NES students in his classes who were also studying Javanese
and asked them to read his writing. Chozin identified these students and then
sought to "trade" writing tutoring for language tutoring.

   Finally, although I (and, one might argue, Chozin's professors) found
the feedback provided by Chozin's editor-friends to be lacking, Chozin was
proactively seeking writing support. From his first quarter of graduate school,
Chozin developed the valuable habit of seeking out feedback on his work.
During his program he also transitioned to working with more professionalized
"editor-friends." Chozin began working regularly with his graduate writing
teacher in spring quarter of his first year, which proved much more successful,
as I discuss below. He also began working with a semi-professional editor in
the community who had been recommended by a professor. It's difficult to
imagine that Chozin received no benefit from so much editing and so many
conversations about his writing, even if we can also imagine how he could have
benefited more from a reader who challenged him to improve his organization,
develop his ideas, and use secondary sources more effectively.

Developing a Personalized Course

   Chozin developed a number of new strategies in winter quarter, beginning
by enrolling in a graduate writing course to "accommodate his professor," a
strategy described in Leki's (1995) taxonomy. During fall quarter, Dr. G. deemed
Chozin's writing so poor that he told Chozin to enroll in a graduate writing
class for winter quarter. In my meeting with Dr. G., he had noted that Chozin
had significant problems with organization and described his English skills as
"among the worst" he had ever seen in the program. He described Chozin as
being "in that category that I kind of dread because they know enough English
to pass the test,5 but not enough to write a clear paper by himself."

   Chozin took Dr. G.'s advice this time, enrolling in the second of a sequence
of three cross-disciplinary graduate writing courses that were designed for
international multilingual writers and which were taught by faculty from
the TESOL program. The courses were Introduction to Graduate Writing,

                                                                                                 77
Phillips

Advanced Graduate Writing, and Thesis/Dissertation Writing. Although the
courses were designed as a sequence, there were no prerequisites; therefore,
students could take any course at any point. During the winter quarter, Chozin
took the middle course, Advanced Graduate Writing. In this course students
completed a variety of summaries and critiques that were sometimes based on
texts he was reading in his disciplinary classes.

   Chozin seemed to benefit minimally from this course, however. He received
little positive feedback from his teacher, and the feedback he did receive seemed
overly critical.6 She identified problems like "lang. is non-idiomatic" and
"sentence structure" but rarely offered Chozin alternative language. Her final
comments on his first paper, a critique of two articles, identified problems but
did not seem to offer any particularly constructive comments towards revision
or future writing projects. She wrote:

         You are clearly confused in this assignment. 1) The outline
         is wrong. 2) Discussion of comparison/contrast between the
         articles is too short. 3) There is no evaluation/response part
         that conveys your opinion (or position) in response to the
         articles summarized.

   Throughout the quarter her comments suggested that he did not understand
the assignments he was given. He never mentioned any specific benefits from
the class and also seemed slightly frustrated that the course did not include
"grammar instruction," something that he believed he needed. Chozin was most
enthusiastic about the class when discussing the individual conferences he'd had
with his teacher. After one conference, Chozin said, "She give me comments
and she give me, like, tips or strategies how to write it, how to compose the
paragraph, how to arrange the whole writing with some paragraphs. She give
me a lot of lessons." When Chozin took the graduate writing course a second
time, as I describe in the next paragraph, his teacher worked with him to create
a more individualized experience.

   In the spring term Chozin attempted to sign up for the third writing class,
Thesis/Dissertation Writing, so that he could work on his thesis proposal;
however the course was full. Instead, he registered for Advanced Graduate
Writing again, but this time with a different teacher. At the teacher's suggestion,
he worked with her to develop what was essentially a personalized syllabus so
that he could still benefit from repeating the class.7 The spring course primarily
consisted of one-on-one tutoring with the instructor as Chozin wrote his
thesis proposal. (This iteration of the course is similar to the graduate writing
seminar described by Fredericksen & Mangelsdorf [this volume], which

78
                                                                        Developing Resources for Success

requires students to create individual learning contracts based on writing tasks
assigned in other coursework.) He was able to develop a positive relationship
with this new teacher and found this course much more beneficial. In a sense,
Chozin added his graduate writing teacher to his network of editor-friends.
She provided frequent proofreading and feedback as Chozin wrote his thesis
proposal during spring quarter. Yet again, Chozin had taken a writing struggle
and developed a strategy to succeed.

Finding the Right Collaborators for Group Projects

   One of the greatest challenges Chozin faced during his program was devising
a strategy for completing group projects. On the surface, Chozin had been
quite successful in his first quarter and had earned strong grades. But it turned
out that Chozin had--involuntarily--played a very minimal role in writing a
group paper that comprised a large portion of the grade in his geography class.
Chozin's group experience in this class was a major site of frustration for him.
I quote extensively from our conversation here so that readers can see Chozin's
own description of the group project and then compare it to his description
of a group project in a later course.8 When asked about the outcome of his
geography paper, Chozin reported:

         C: In the geography class, actually, I have paper, but it's not
         individual paper. We make, like, report for my project for
         people in my group, and actually, I didn't--I didn't write
         much because all my group know that I'm not English
         speaking, so they write. I do the reading, I do some research
         with them, and they write a lot of the report .... So the report
         is not mine, actually; it's not my writing. [It's] my friends'
         [members of the group] writing.

         Talinn (T): So did you feel ... like, did it bother you at all
         that everybody else did the writing for that project?

         C: Uh, actually, just once doing the writing. I mean, I send
         just my conclusion--my report and then give it to another
         and she write it for to be combined and edited ....

         T: Were you happy with how you did with that class?

         C: In the group? In the group I feel like I didn't enjoy in the

                                                                                                 79
Phillips

         group. In the class I enjoy, but in the group I didn't enjoy
         because, uh, because everybody is, um, native speaker but I
         am in the group. I am limited in my language and everybody
         talking ... I am just quiet in my group. And I just waiting.
         One day they give me "You--you do this one" and I do in
         my home and then give it to him. But the group--they make
         a decision about my work. Yeah. They do more work than
         me, actually, but actually, I need to do more but I cannot do
         that because I have limited language to communicate with
         them. And also the study, the report area, is Cincinnati. I
         don't know about the area at all, so I just follow my group.
         They decided everything [because I didn't know anything
         about the Cincinnati area].

         T: So would you have rather done something--written your
         own paper?

         C: Yeah, yeah. Because if I had my own paper I can, I mean,
         I can express my--my opinion in my paper and then I also
         can, uh, get advice from other people. I can consult my paper
         to others, but in the group--in the group I have problem
         with my speaking, my expression. And maybe, yeah, because
         I'm not native speaking, so some of my group think that
         you are not expert in this area so they do everything. They
         help me a lot so that I can't do everything. Because they do
         everything in the group, so I don't feel involved.

         T: So did they do everything because they didn't think you
         could do the work, or because you didn't think you could do
         the work?

         C [forcefully]: I can work.

         T: So maybe they didn't really give you a chance to do the
         work?

         C: Yeah.

         T: They just kind of decided, "We'll give him something
         that's easy"?

80
                                                                        Developing Resources for Success

         C: Yeah, because when they have meeting, I have to contact
         it. When they have meeting, I want to come.

         T: So they weren't contacting you about the meetings?

         C: Yeah the one. Once they had announcement the meeting
         and then they never send me email again, so I always contact
         them, "When we meeting?" and "When can I do the
         meeting? And what can I do? What my role in this group?"

         T: Wow.

         C: Yeah I just follow their order.

   Many of us have watched or been part of groups where one student was
clearly taking advantage of the rest of the group, but Chozin's group seems, at
some point in the project, to have chosen to exclude one of its members. As
the only multilingual writer and the only person who knew nothing about the
city of Cincinnati, Chozin was at a double disadvantage before this project ever
started and, presumably, his group thought he had nothing to contribute to
their success. Although they probably knew relatively little about environmental
hazards, they were "authorities," to some degree, on Cincinnati--at least when
compared with Chozin. He had no other source of authority to counterbalance
whatever knowledge they had of Cincinnati and their belief that his poor
English skills were a liability. Thus, instead of including him in the project, they
chose to exclude him.

   This kind of exclusion is certainly not unheard of among multilingual
writers. Leki (2001) reports on the negative "collaborative" experiences of Ling
and Yang. Ling's group was dominated by two other members and thus Ling
"was not allowed to bring in her particular expertise; nor was she able to benefit
from the expertise of the [native-English-speaking] group members" (p. 55).
Yang had a much better personal relationship with her group members, but
her weak oral skills in English still meant that she "was also constructed as
something of a burden or a problem to be fixed" (p. 55). Yang, who seemed to
be reduced to the role of holding up posters and introducing group members,
says "'My job just--a lot of job is done by my classmate--easy .... . The other
conversation job was done by my classmates .... But I do best I can'" (Leki, 2001,
p. 55). Cox (2010) reports a similar case with Min. Though not described as
being actively excluded by her peers, those peers do not seek out Min's obvious
expertise either. Further, Cox reports that while other students saw themselves

                                                                                                 81
Phillips

as learning from each other, Min "did not seem to be part of this network" (p.
86).

   Whereas Yang, in Leki's (2001) study, seems to blame herself for her weak
speaking skills, and Min, in Cox's (2010) study, seems unaware of (or at least
unconcerned with) her exclusion, Chozin was both conscious of his exclusion
and upset with his group members as a result. When winter quarter began,
Chozin discovered that he was again required to participate in a group paper.
Not surprisingly, he was concerned that he might be excluded from another
group; however, when I checked in with him several weeks into the quarter, he
gave me a glowing report of his successful strategy. I turn again to an excerpt
from the interview to let Chozin explain in his own words.

         Chozin [excitedly]: Very different from group last term--
         was bad experience. I learning from this experience so this
         term I tried to make new strategy--trying to make it better.
         [My partner] become my best friend, I think, and she
         understands me .... When we become closer we can, like,
         make joking each other. That's a good thing with learning
         English so it means that I can catch up some expression in
         English. She's an undergraduate, not a graduate because there
         were only two graduate students in the class. I was the only
         international student in class, so I'm the only one who has
         problems with language. My writing, my language, but I'm
         trying to get better. I try to speak. I don't care whether they
         understand my language or not. When the teacher asked
         us to work in pairs to do research, my research was at the
         farmers market. I think, "If I don't initiate the research topic,
         I won't have a group because no one will ask me." So my
         strategy was, "I have idea so I have to speak to some of my
         classmates, and anyone who wants to follow my topic, then
         he or she will be my partner."

         I initiate I will do the Farmers Market because I know some
         people there and I have some data already. One of my friends
         wants to join me. It was good experience because we worked,
         like, equally. Even if I have limit with my language--with
         my writing--but she understand me and so she always
         give me chance to work. I work like my idea, like, I decide
         which one I have to interview and then she follow me. And
         after I writing, she read it and she edit it so it's like, we

82
                                                                        Developing Resources for Success

         work equally. We always go together to interview. Before
         interview I always write my question and give it to her. If I
         have problem with my language when I ask question, she will
         understand my objective, what I want to say; she can explain.
         It's very helpful.

   I was impressed when Chozin told me about this project. He really
seemed to have taken responsibility for his own learning and had shown great
resourcefulness. In contrast to Leki's informant Yang, who sadly reported, "Just
hate myself, I can't get good English" (2001, p. 57), Chozin says, "I don't care
whether they [my group members] understand my language or not"; he is
determined to press ahead with his learning. When he entered the class, he
recognized that there could easily be a repeat of last term's problems if he weren't
proactive. In a class where there was only one other graduate student and no
other multilingual writers, Chozin knew he was positioned to be excluded from
another group project. But he also recognized that his past research could work
to his advantage if he developed a topic quickly and presented potential partners
with a fully formed idea, thereby saving them the bother of coming up with
one on their own. Chozin successfully thought of a topic for the paper--one
that he had already studied during fall. His prior experience gave him added
marketability to potential partners.

   Choosing the topic--one that he was familiar with and interested in--also gave
Chozin a level of control and authority that was never possible in his other group
when they were asked to write about the culturally-bound topic of environmental
hazards in Cincinnati, Ohio--an area completely unfamiliar to Chozin. However,
in winter quarter, Chozin was able to barter his initiative in choosing a topic and
his prior research on the farmers' market when finding a partner. He was then able
to use that authority to balance his lack of authority as an English speaker. This
created a much more equitable dynamic in Chozin's group and a better learning
environment for him. Developing strategies to find the right collaborators was a
highly effective move on Chozin's part. Not only did he feel better about himself
after participating in the second group, but this time he actually got some practice
with writing, a feature missing from his earlier experience.

   Here, Chozin seems to be complicating the categories Leki (1995)
developed--or perhaps introducing a new one. She reports that her participants
"rel[ied] on past writing experiences" and "us[ed] current experience or feedback
to adjust strategies" (p. 248). For example, she writes that her participant Tula
"had done a great deal of essay exam writing in Finland and so felt relatively
unconcerned about the demands of essay writing here" (p. 248). Tula had been
successful in the past and used that experience as a roadmap for current writing

                                                                                                 83
Phillips

projects. Likewise, Leki writes that her participants used current feedback on
early assignments to shape their future work. I would argue that Chozin is
doing something a bit different when he strategizes to write a successful group
paper: He is learning from failure. While Leki implies that Tula relied on past
successful writing experiences, Chozin wasn't able to do that. Instead, he took a
moment of failure, analyzed the decisions that led to it, and mapped out a plan
to avoid that same failure again.

Managing Data Collection

   During winter quarter Chozin also developed a new strategy for managing
the data collection process. Not only did Chozin's weak English skills mean that
some of his classmates didn't trust him, but they also meant that he struggled in
interview situations. He recognized that his English was sometimes difficult to
understand, so he developed additional strategies to bridge the gap.

         Chozin: When I went to interview I always ask my American
         friends to accompany. So because the problem is, when I
         interview by myself, sometimes--sometimes I'm asking that
         something that he already answered. Because I interview Ed
         and he was talking a lot, a lot, and talking much, and--a lot
         of information. And I hearing, hearing and then when he
         finish the talking, I asking [the same] questions again. But [the
         interview failed because I [already] asking [him that] thing. If
         [I] interview students, it's easy for me to understand because
         they're speaking, maybe, formally [at the university], but
         people on the street are using slang or maybe something they
         understand. Also I have strategy to always bring my recorder.

   Once again, Chozin had learned from failure. He had actually devised a
number of strategies to help him bridge from his current listening and speaking
abilities to the point of writing a successful paper built on primary sources. He
drafted his interview questions beforehand and asked a native-English speaker
to check them to ensure clarity. He then interviewed his participants in tandem
with a native-English speaker so that his partner could clarify, either for Chozin
or for the interviewee. Finally, he recorded all of the interviews to further
improve his comprehension. In order to do all this, Chozin had to demonstrate
a remarkable amount of planning and coordination--and all this was just to
gather the primary sources for his papers.

84
                                                                        Developing Resources for Success

TAKING A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO LITERACY

   Throughout the first year of his program, Chozin had been working to
improve his writing by tackling specific problems. He sought feedback on most
papers, he accommodated his professor by taking graduate writing classes and
worked to make those courses useful for him, and he learned from failure by
developing strategies to manage group writing projects as well as writing projects
that required him to engage in oral interviews for source material. Though I had
observed Chozin developing these strategies to address specific challenges, in
the spring of his first year it became clear that Chozin was also taking a broader,
holistic approach to improve his writing. He had been developing several tactics
to improve his vocabulary, fluency, and style and had begun engaging in a
number of additional literacy tasks in English like journaling, online chatting,
and extra-curricular reading. Reporting on his progress, Chozin said:

         Yeah, I feel I start to get my writing style I think, because
         when I writing I feel like "Oh, I have to use this word. I have
         to exchange this sentence with this sentence." So I think
         I've increased my capability with writing because I feel my
         style now. Before that I never feel it, just write, write, and
         write .... I used to write poems, so when I write, like, essay
         I'm not feel good in essay. Because when I read, like, three
         or four paragraph I feel tired, exhausted even though I still
         have many ideas--even in Indonesian, so I tend to write
         poems to express my mind. But I cannot do this in English
         because I cannot write poetry in English. I just use words
         to represent the ideas so I try more to write easy in English
         by writing my diary in English. I try to send email to my
         friend in Indonesia in English. I try to doing chat [rooms] in
         English. I think it useful for me to improve my writing and
         in English.

   Chozin then continued to list his tactics to improve:

         And I took graduate writing class, and I read more because,
         yeah, I know--I know--I believe as more I read, as more I
         get new words, so it will enrich my words to use in writing
         and so I read more. I read more magazine, more books, and
         yeah, it's also very helpful.

                                                                                                 85
Phillips

   By this point in his first year, Chozin seemed to be demonstrating recognition
that all of his discreet literacy activities were interrelated and mutually supportive.
He didn't view his personal writing or even his writing in Javanese and Bahasa
as separate from his academic writing in English, and he didn't view vocabulary
development as divorced from his speaking fluency. Instead, he recognized that
all of his language experiences--in Javanese, Bahasa, and English--and all of
their component parts--reading, writing, speaking, listening--were vitally
connected to one another. He understood that to improve one part affects all
of the others, improving the whole. In consequence, this final strategy might be
termed "taking a holistic approach" or "understanding the relationships between
the parts and the whole." (In all of these respects, Chozin might be said to be
demonstrating the kind of adaptive transfer--and agency--that DePalma &
Ringer [this volume] describe.)

REALIZING THE INVESTMENT

   At the end of his first year Chozin's writing remained quite weak in many
ways, but it was improving noticeably and he was increasingly proactive in
addressing those weaknesses. His writing had actually appeared to get worse
instead of better during winter quarter. He had continued to rely on friends to
provide him with editing, but his winter paper load was high and his editor-
friends were very busy, so they were less able to help him. As a result, Chozin
paired high levels of sentence-level errors with a lack of understanding of basic
academic genres; he continued to leave out sections that his professors expected
him to include like conclusions, evaluations, and responses. He received
writing feedback that was almost exclusively negative and his grades suffered.
It appeared as though he were stagnating or even sliding backwards. Chozin
seemed to be in the middle of a "u-shaped learning curve," a common feature
of writing development in which the cognitive overload of learning so much
new material results in temporary setbacks in areas that writers seemed to have
already mastered (Feldman & Benjamin, 2004; Perrault, 2011). Feldman and
Benjamin (2004) argue that these "essential backward movements ... prepare
the way for positive advances" (p. 98).

   This backward action to pave the way forward is exactly what Chozin
seemed to be experiencing in winter quarter. He had been busy developing
strategies that would bring significant rewards during the rest of his program
and the tremendous number of writing-to-learn assignments Dr. G. asked him
to complete had begun to pay off. It wasn't obvious at the time, but Chozin was
beginning to make large strides in fluency and composing speed. At the end of

86
                                                                        Developing Resources for Success

his first year, he described the impact of his strategies and the last six months of
intensive writing in various courses.

         This is my last focus paper and, yeah, once a week, two pages
         is not hard anymore. It's like before that it's hard for me to
         write it, but now it's--I don't have any problem to write two
         pages every week. I get--I get used to write it.

   A few weeks earlier he had been caught off-guard by the due date of a focus
paper assignment. He surprised himself by successfully writing the paper in the
hour before class began. And by the end of Chozin's two-year program, he had
successfully defended both his thesis proposal and his thesis ahead of most of
his classmates.

   The case of Chozin therefore stands in contrast to some of the more recent
research on multilingual writers and WAC, which has suggested that multilingual
writers may receive little benefit or even be harmed by WAC pedagogies that
encourage the intensive use of writing in courses, particularly if that writing
does not have some relevancy to the writer's future field (Leki, 2003b) or if
that writing occurs in the form of high-stakes assessment (Cox, 2011). In Cox's
(2011) recent review article, she argues that "literature emerging from second
language writing studies ... reveals WAC as a program that can close doors for
L2 students" if teachers are encouraged to assign more writing without also
being offered professional development to help them work effectively with
multilingual writers (para. 1). Leki (2003a) goes so far as to ask, "Is writing
overrated?" (p. 315). In critiquing Sternglass's study on the benefits of writing
for students, Leki writes, "My L2 students found their writing requirements
occasionally satisfying and sometimes frustrating, but most often they regarded
writing assignments as necessary evils they would have preferred to avoid" (p.
317).

   In remarkable contrast, Chozin neither complained about nor reported
feeling disadvantaged by the heavy writing requirements in his courses. On
the contrary, those assignments provided Chozin with a vivid indicator of how
much his writing fluency had increased.

CONCLUSION

   After examining Chozin's thesis and other writing projects from late in his
master's program, I still placed him in the bottom half to one-third of graduate
writers I had worked with as a tutor. Yet he managed to be highly successful

                                                                                                 87
Phillips

as a graduate student and much of that success was signified by some kind
of writing achievement. As I mentioned earlier, his conference papers were
solicited for journals, he received grants to support his research, and his thesis
won the department's award and was later published. At the end of Chozin's
first year, Dr. G. said, "I think he's done really well. He's not fluent, but he's
come a long way. As far as his academic work, he's doing fine."

   Ultimately, I concluded that Chozin's success did not really hinge on
his writing ability. It seemed much more connected to his resourcefulness,
leadership, and to his knowledge of his field. Further, Chozin also drew upon
his lived experience as a Southeast Asian, doing so explicitly in several classes and
again in his thesis; he was no doubt a stronger student as a result. Particularly
when compared to a monolingual Caucasian American who entered graduate
school immediately after completing an undergraduate degree, Chozin had
some marked advantages in his program.

   Yet his lived experience was certainly not the only resource that Chozin
brought to his graduate work. Interviews gave repeated indications that
Chozin's research area was of great interest to his colleagues. It was also clear
that Chozin was a leader in his class and had deep knowledge of his field. The
best conclusion I could reach when trying to reconcile the mismatch between
his writing ability and achievements was that people valued Chozin's other
abilities and his research so highly that they were willing to overlook Chozin's
writing challenges.

   Chozin brought valuable experience to his graduate program and those
experiences encouraged his success, but he then also developed many new
resources to solve writing problems. He thus offers an example of a successful
multilingual student who developed as both a professional and as a writer.
The strategies that he developed were all quite personal, yet most have broad
applicability. Using Chozin's choices as examples, teachers of multilingual
writers might recommend that their students map out concrete plans for how
they will manage an interview, or consider how they can position themselves as
valued members of a group project. As teachers, we might even explicitly build
such moments of planning into our courses in order to encourage a deeper
learning experience.

   Further, Chozin's strategy of learning from failure offers discouraged writers
a means of productive response. Chozin struggled with writing throughout his
graduate career. Instead of simply being discouraged or defined by his failures,
however, he seemed to focus on the path that led to the problems he experienced
and tried to identify ways that he could shift that path the next time.

   Chozin's experience also highlights the importance, at least for some writers,
of feedback and human connection through the sometimes difficult process of

88
                                                                        Developing Resources for Success

composing. Chozin deeply wanted to be in relationship with others and to talk
about his writing. In consequence, he carefully cultivated relationships with his
classmates, with his teachers, with other Indonesian students, and even with me.
Chozin's story reiterates the value of creating multiple feedback opportunities for
our students. Although Chozin was clearly quite motivated to seek feedback, Dr.
G. was deeply tied to many of the feedback experiences Chozin had.

   Finally, Chozin offers other students a rich example of a writer who seemed
to understand that all of his languages and literacies were parts of the same whole
and that the time spent engaging in each literacy act had positive implications
in a range of other contexts. Instead of compartmentalizing his English
academic literacy away from the other aspects of his life and from his home
language, Chozin recognized that his personal and professional literacies were
intertwined and worked to improve both. Chozin was an unlikely success story
and that makes what he accomplished all the more impressive and potentially
encouraging to other struggling multilingual writers. His case study offers us
yet another model for considering the complex, integrated process by which
second language graduate students acquire the competence to write successfully
in their chosen fields.

NOTES

1. My work with graduate students as a writing tutor was one of my motiva-
tions for the project, but I was not a tutor during the study. During the second
year of the study I was the interim Writing Center Coordinator but I did not
tutor or respond to the writers' papers. I did provide moral support and at times
offered very general advice as a peer, such as recommending a meeting with a
professor or a session with a writing tutor.
2. See Zawacki et al. (2007) for additional stories of non-native-speakers' (lack
of ) writing instruction in their home languages and the challenges they faced in
understanding American academic genres.
3. These were direct quotes from oral interviews and therefore are full of the
pause fillers, false starts, and repetitions that are part of oral speech. Reporting
oral speech verbatim often makes the speaker sound inarticulate at best, but I
wanted to preserve Chozin's real speech at this point in his language learning
and felt that editing out the "ums" and "uhs" would create an inaccurate repre-
sentation. Preserving his actual speech also makes his gains in vocabulary and
fluency all the more evident as his story progresses.
4. Chozin's other professors did not explicitly decline to be interviewed; they
simply did not respond to repeated email requests to discuss Chozin's work.

                                                                                                 89
Phillips

5. Dr. G. is referring to meeting the qualifications for admission, not to any
particular assessment tool.
6. Chozin's teacher did not respond to requests for an interview.
7. Because Chozin's second teacher also did not respond to requests for an
interview, it was unclear whether Chozin was unique in being offered this "per-
sonalized course" or whether this was common practice. However, I do know
from other students that the third writing class focuses exclusively on drafting
and revising a thesis/dissertation; significant portions of class time are devoted
to writing and conferencing with the teacher. Chozin's report of his modified
"advanced course" seemed comparable to reports of the content in the Thesis/
Dissertation course.
8. Readers may note several moments in this excerpt where I seem to ask Chozin
very leading questions. During this conversation I was following Chozin's tone
and nonverbal cues in addition to his speech; both suggested that there was a
more serious problem than the spoken language of the transcript reveals. Spe-
cifically, I had the impression that Chozin was quite upset by what had hap-
pened in the group and yet that he was also trying to avoid disparaging other
group members. Instead of trying to infer what had happened in the group, I
chose to ask Chozin clarifying questions and give him the opportunity to cor-
rect my understanding of events. Instead, Chozin's words, tone, and nonverbal
cues confirmed my preliminary understanding of what had happened.

REFERENCES

Bean, J. C. (2001). Engaging ideas: The professor's guide to integrating writing,
   critical thinking, and active learning in the classroom. San Francisco, CA:
   Jossey Bass.

Bishop, W. (1999). Ethnographic writing research: Writing it down, writing it up,
   reading it. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Carter, D., & Gradin, S. (2001). Writing as reflective action: A reader. New York:
   Addison Wesley Longman.

Casanave, C. P. (2002). Writing games: Multicultural case studies of academic
   literacy practices in higher education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Casanave, C. P. & Li, X., (Eds). (2008). Learning the literacy practices of graduate
   school: Insiders' reflections on academic enculturation (pp. 14-31). Ann Arbor,
   MI: University of Michigan Press.

Center for International Studies, Ohio University. (n.d.). Master of arts. Re-
   trieved from http://www.internationalstudies.ohio.edu/academic-programs/
   grad/index.html

90
                                                                        Developing Resources for Success

Cox, M. (2010). Identity, second language writers, and the learning of work-
   place writing. In M. Cox, J. Jordan, C. Ortmeier-Hooper, & G. G. Schwartz
   (Eds.), Reinventing identities in second language writing (pp. 75-95). Urbana,
   IL: NCTE.

Cox, M. (2012). WAC: Closing doors or opening doors for second language
   writers? Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from wac.colostate.edu/atd/
   ell/cox.cfm

Feldman, D. H., & Benjamin, A. C. (2004). Going backward to go forward:
   The critical role of regressive movement in cognitive development. Journal of
   Cognition and Development, 5(1), 97-102.

Leki, I. (1995). Coping strategies of ESL students in writing tasks across the
   curriculum. TESOL Quarterly, 29(2), 235-60.

Leki, I. (2001). A narrow thinking system. TESOL Quarterly, 35(1), 39-67.
Leki, I. (2003a). A challenge to second language writing professionals: Is writ-

   ing overrated? In B. Kroll (Ed.), Exploring the dynamics of second language
   writing (pp. 315-331). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Leki, I. (2003b). Living through college literacy: Nursing in a second language.
   Written Communication, 20(1), 81-98.
Newkirk, T. (1992). The narrative roots of the case study. In G. Kirsch & P. A.
   Sullivan (Eds.), Methods and methodology in composition research (pp. 130-
   52). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Perrault, S. T. (2011).Cognition and error in student writing. Journal on Excel-
   lence in College Teaching, 22(3), 47-73.
Russell, D. R., & Foster, D. (2002). Rearticulating articulation. In D. Foster &
   D. R. Russell (Eds.), Writing and learning in cross-national perspective: Tran-
   sitions from secondary to higher education (pp. 1-47). Mahwah, NJ: NCTE/
   Erlbaum.
Silva, T. (1993). Toward an understanding of the distinct nature of L2 writ-
   ing: The ESL research and its implications. TESOL Quarterly, 27(4), 657-
   77.
Zawacki, T. M., Hajabbasi, E., Habib, A., Antram, A., & Das, A. (2007). Writ-
   ing process, readers' expectations, and grammar anxiety. Valuing written accents:
   Non-native students talk about identity, academic writing, and meeting teachers'
   expectations (2nd ed.). Diversity Research Group. Fairfax, VA: George Ma-
   son University.

                                                                                                 91
CHAPTER 3

"HEY, DID YOU GET THAT?": L2
STUDENT READING ACROSS THE
CURRICULUM

Carole Center and Michelle Niestepski
Lasell College

This chapter reports on a qualitative research study investigating read-
ing demands in college courses during the first and second year for
seven second language students. The study focuses on the expectations
for student reading in courses across the curriculum and the strategies
that these students developed for responding to those expectations. Our
findings suggest that second language students learn to prioritize as-
signments; approach their instructors for clarification, help, and/or
modifications with assignments; and limit the number of courses with
high reading and writing demands that they enroll in each semester.
Instructors in all disciplines can help all students become stronger read-
ers by assigning reading for which students are held accountable, by
providing a context and guidelines for reading, and by making use of
writing-to-read activities.

   This study investigates the experiences first and second year second language
(L2) college students have with reading across the curriculum. As our small, private,
four-year college plans for an increase in the international student population,
we, as composition specialists, sought to learn more about L2 students' abilities
and needs as academic readers and writers. Agreeing with Horning (2007) in
her Across the Disciplines article, "Reading Across the Curriculum as the Key to
Student Success," that "reading and writing must go hand-in-hand" (para. 6), we
interviewed seven L2 students to try to understand the strengths, weaknesses, and
strategic moves that these students bring to their reading assignments. Hedgcock
& Ferris's (2009) claim that "it has been well established in L1 and L2 research
that, although successful readers may not necessarily be effective writers, it is
virtually impossible to find successful writers who are not also good readers" (p.
215), confirms our consistent observation as teachers of both L1 and L2 students

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.03                          93
Center and Niestepski

that less able readers are less able writers, and, conversely, the best writers in our
classes also read with facility and insight. Like many college instructors, we are
concerned that so many of our students, both L1 and L2, lack the ability and/
or willingness to read assigned texts closely and critically. Whether prompted
by inability or unwillingness, their failure to read assigned texts in-depth limits
their access to writing proficiency. This concern has led us to focus on reading
across the curriculum, exploring the expectations for reading in courses in other
disciplines. We believe that to understand the challenges that reading assignments
present for many students, we need to understand the contexts and purposes for
reading in all their classes (Hedgcock & Ferris, 2009, p. 50). In focusing on the
subgroup of L2 students, we have collected information from student interviews,
syllabi, students' reading diaries and writing samples, and inventories of student
reading strategies to form a picture of the texts, contexts, and purposes for which
they read in all their classes.

   We came to focus specifically on L2 students' reading after investigating
the frequently-voiced alarm that today's college students in general are less able
readers. As Horning (2007) puts it, if one "asks teachers about the problems
students have with reading ..., they will invariably say that students can't read
and don't read" and that contemporary students are unable "to read complex
texts with full understanding" (para. 10 ). Similarly, a survey by Sanoff (2006),
reported in The Chronicle of Higher Education, found that only one-tenth of
the college faculty surveyed thought that entering students were well-prepared
for reading assignments. In addition to these reports of students' deficits in
reading ability, Jolliffe and Harl (2008), in a study of student reading at the
University of Arkansas, reported detailed evidence of students' unwillingness
to read for their courses, finding that "many of the participants rushed through
their required reading simply to get it done" (p. 612), which was not surprising
as the students reported that the assigned reading was "uninspiring, dull, and
painfully required" (p. 611). As incoming students' preparation for the demands
of assigned reading decreases, college teachers across the disciplines are forced
to pay more attention to the ways that we can help students to read and write
about complex, college-level texts.

   If reading is such a burden for so many L1 students, how, we wondered,
do L2 students cope with the greater burden that the demands for reading in
their courses across the curriculum place on them and what can their teachers
do to help? As Hedgcock and Ferris (2009) note, "all L2 students struggle
with academic reading" due to the more sophisticated and often specialized
vocabulary in academic texts and the greater amount of reading expected (p.
55) as well as the differences in the writing system and its linguistic and textual
structures that these readers may encounter in the L2 (p. 106). The focal student,

94
                                                                           Reading Across the Curriculum

Yuko, in Spack's 2004 case study provides poignant testimony of this struggle:
"I used to open some reading and the printed words used to scare me" (p. 31).

   With considerable variation between categories of L2 students and among
individuals within these categories, many L2 students lack the advantage of
years of oral language exposure, which allow L1 learners to come to reading
with extensive vocabulary and knowledge of the way words and sentences are
put together (Hedgcock & Ferris, 2009, p. 50). These issues tend to manifest
differently for international and immigrant students, with international students
typically having the advantage of being experienced L1 readers with a foundation
of grammar and vocabulary instruction in the L2, but experiencing disadvantages
when it comes to genre knowledge and cultural background. Immigrant students,
on the other hand, may not be experienced readers in their L1 or their L2,
depending on their educational and immigration circumstances, but will usually
have more knowledge of text genres and more cultural familiarity (Hedgcock &
Ferris, 2009, pp. 51-55). As Hedgcock and Ferris (2009) comment, it is rarely
possible for an L2 language learner, who is an international student or a recent
immigrant, to put in the years of study or exposure to the L2 that would give the
learner the equivalent preparation for reading in the new language that a L1 reader
acquires (p. 59). Reid (2006) points out that many international students are, in
her terms, "eye readers" who have studied L2 vocabulary and linguistic rules, often
extensively, but who may be weaker listeners and speakers than they are readers (p.
79). Nevertheless, international L2 readers often lack confidence in their reading.
Reid (2006) characterizes immigrant L2 students as "ear learners," who, having
taken in American culture for a number of years, are often fluent speakers and
listeners, but whose reading skills may be weaker than they acknowledge or than
teachers anticipate (p. 77).

   In addition to these potential issues of competence, L2 students may
experience a "confidence gap," which predisposes them to reading behaviors,
such as word-by-word translation, that interfere with their L2 reading
(Hedgcock & Ferris, 2009, p. 61). We saw this confidence gap in action when
one of our international participants, a second year student, initially refused
to be interviewed because she felt that her English language skills were not up
to having the conversation. In an email to us she explained, "I actually do not
have confidence to help the research (because of my English skills), so I am not
be able to help it. I am sorry" (personal communication, November 7, 2010).
As Spack reports in her case study, L2 students may find that an increase in
confidence is the most beneficial outcome of persisting with academic reading in
the L2 because, as Yuko concludes, it "is not the improvement in the vocabulary
(or background knowledge)" as much as the "confidence/boldness not to be
bothered by what I didn't understand" that leads to her academic success (as

                                                                                                 95
Center and Niestepski

quoted in Spack, 2004, p. 43). Often such boldness will be seen when students
are able to move from word-based reading, in which they may read word-for-
word, read too slowly, translate, and/or overuse the dictionary (Hedgcock &
Ferris, 2009, p. 219), to a more fluent reading in which they are able to read for
the gist of a text without understanding every word (Auerbach & Paxton, 1997,
p. 244; Leki, 1993, p. 9). Until they are ready to take this step, L2 readers remain,
as Paxton eloquently describes, "prisoners of the unknown words" (Auerbach
& Paxton, 1997, p. 253). Both reading competence and confidence can be
boosted by instruction and practice in a combination of intensive and extensive
reading. When reading intensively, readers use before, during, and after reading
strategies to engage closely with a text. Extensive reading--general, self-selected
reading for information and pleasure--can compensate to some extent for L2
readers' lack of exposure to the patterns of language in the L2 (Hedgcock &
Ferris, 2009, p. 214).

   All writers benefit from reading as they accrue tacit knowledge of the genres
and conventions of written language and are exposed to ideas and data that
spur their thinking. In the considerable body of research into the reading-
writing connection for L2 students-- Hedgcock and Ferris (2009) cite fourteen
articles that review research on reading-writing interaction (p. 215)--the strong
correlation between reading proficiency and writing ability found in studies
of L1 students, while sometimes evident, is not as consistent as in L2 research
(Ferris & Hedgcock, 1998, p. 31). Ferris and Hedgcock (1998) suggest that "we
cannot assume reading-writing relationships to be as clear or predictable for ESL
students as they might be for their NES counterparts" due to some L2 students'
underdeveloped knowledge of the L2 and of the writing skills measured in
empirical studies (p. 31). While L2 students may have more variation between
their reading and writing skills, i.e. one cannot assume that a good reader will
necessarily be a good writer and vice versa (Flahive & Bailey, 1993, p. 133;
Grabe, 2004, p. 30), nevertheless, scholars agree that for L2 students as for
L1 students, reading and writing are mutually reinforcing activities because
"reading facilitates the development of writing skills" just as writing experiences
help to improve reading (Ferris & Hedgcock, 1998, p. 43). As composition
specialists, our interest in students' attitudes and approaches to their assigned
reading stems from this reading/writing connection.

PARTICIPANTS

   Our research site is a small college, which, like many US colleges, is actively
recruiting international students. We sought our research participants from

96
                                                                Reading Across the Curriculum

English 101 for ESL students, a credit-bearing, first-year writing class for L2
students, recruiting four first-year students, all of whom happened to be either
immigrant students or, in the case of a student from Guam, a multilingual
US citizen. To balance the number of immigrant and international students,
we then recruited three international students: two sophomores who had
completed the first-year writing courses during their freshmen year and a
sophomore transfer student new to the college (see Table 3.1). The students
volunteered to participate and received a small stipend.

   We met with six of the seven students twice for thirty-minute recorded
interviews. The exception was Martin, whose first interview could not be
scheduled until almost the end of the semester; consequently, we did not
interview him a second time. The first interviews focused on the reading demands
students faced in their courses across the curriculum and their ways of meeting
those demands; the second, follow-up interview focused mainly on the writing
assignment the students selected for our examination. As detailed in Table 3.1,

Table 3.1 Student Demographics

                      Pseudo-  Gender L1         Major          Native     High School
                      nym      female Spanish    Legal Studies  Country
                                                                           2 years in US
                      Maria                                     Dominican
                                                                Republic   middle school/
                      Chase male Vietnamese Accounting                     high school in
                                                                Vietnam    US

First-Year Students   Felix    male  Portuguese  Fashion        Brazil     high school in
                                                 Design         Guam       US
                      Martin male    Chamorro    Athletic       Vietnam
                                     English     Training                  Guam
                      Teddy male     Vietnamese                 Japan
                      (transfer)                 Accounting                1 year ESL school
                                                                           and 2 years
Second-Year Students  Aya      female Japanese   Psychology                international
                                                                           school in
                                                                           Vietnam

                                                                           International
                                                                           school in Hong
                                                                           Kong and high
                                                                           school in Japan

                      Rina     female Japanese   Hospitality Japan         Japan

                                                                                           97
Center and Niestepski

gender and first- and second-year standing were quite evenly distributed among
our participants with a good mix of ethnicities, languages, and majors. While all
of the second-year students were international students and all of the immigrant
students were first-year students, we found little difference in the attitudes and
strategies that students brought to their reading assignment between students
in either of the two groups: international/immigrant or first-year/second
year. Students across both groupings used strategies for accommodating and
managing teachers' demands around reading that are strikingly similar to the
strategic moves that Ilona Leki found in her study of L2 students dealing with
writing assignments, "Coping Strategies of ESL Students in Writing Tasks
Across the Curriculum" (1995). And while we assumed the sophomores would
have more reading demands because they were taking more 200-level courses,
in fact, the majority (5/6) of courses with the highest reading demands were
100-level courses.

   The students' test scores indicated weaknesses in English proficiency with low
TOEFL scores or low critical reading and writing test scores on the SAT despite
the fact that all of the immigrant students had attended at least some years of high
school in the US and the international students had studied English for several
years. In addition, each of the international students had had some additional
classes in English before entering our college; these experiences ranged from
an English language school in the US to community college classes. Coming
from Guam, Martin had all of his schooling in English. Some of the immigrant
students had a year of ESL instruction in high school and/or special language
tutoring in a public school. However, as Hedgcock and Ferris (2009) note "[e]
ven L2 readers mostly or entirely educated in English-speaking environments
typically have read relatively less than their native-speaking counterparts ... [as
they] face the added challenges of a later start in learning English and living in
a non- or limited English-speaking home" (p. 219). The international students
reported that little of their English instruction involved reading.

   The courses the students were taking during the fall semester 2010 are
shown in Table 3.2.

READING DEMANDS

   As we expected, our interviewees told us that their reading and writing
assignments in college were more demanding than those they had faced in high
school, whether in their native country or in the US. However, they made it
clear that the reading demands varied considerably from course to course, with
humanities courses, social science courses, and one of the first-year seminar

98
                                                           Reading Across the Curriculum

courses presenting the most demand for reading. Most students reported that in
one or more of their courses, no reading of a textbook or other whole text was
required. For example, Rina volunteered, "We really don't read" for all three of
her 200-level courses and added, "I actually bought the book for this class but
we never used that" for two of her three courses. When we examined syllabi for
the classes in which the students were enrolled, we found reading assignments
listed in most. In a few cases, the course schedule in the syllabi listed topics
without a reference to a particular reading, so it was difficult to determine
whether those topics were merely covered in class or if they corresponded to
reading assignments. All of the syllabi listed at least one required textbook.
In the specific cases where students told us that there was no reading assigned
during the semester, the syllabi did list weekly reading assignments. Therefore,

Table 3.2 Majors and Courses

                      Pseudonym L1            Major        Courses

First-Year Students   Maria       Spanish     Legal        5 courses: ENG 101 for ESL
                                              Studies      Students, Legal Studies 101, Math
Second-Year Students  Chase       Vietnamese               104, Political Science 101, and
                                              Accounting   First-Year Seminar
                      Felix       Portuguese
                      Martin      Chamorro    Fashion      5 courses: ENG 101 for ESL
                                  English     Design       Students, Economics 101, Math
                      Teddy       Vietnamese  Athletic     104, Business 101, First-Year
                      (transfer)              Training     Seminar
                      Aya         Japanese
                      Rina        Japanese    Accounting   5 courses: ENG 101 for ESL
                                                           Students, Art 101, Fashion Design
                                              Psychology   103 and 105, First-Year Seminar

                                              Hospitality  5 courses: ENG 101 for ESL
                                                           Students, Athletic Training 101
                                                           and 103, Math 203, First-Year
                                                           Seminar

                                                           5 courses: English 104, Academic
                                                           Reading and Writing (an elective),
                                                           Math 205, Math 208, Sociology
                                                           101, First-Year Seminar

                                                           4 courses: Human Services 101,
                                                           Sociology 101, Psychology 221,
                                                           History 104

                                                           4 courses: Business 206, Business
                                                           220, Communications 206,
                                                           History 104

                                                                    99
Center and Niestepski

we are not sure whether the students meant that, while reading was assigned,
they felt that they did not actually have to do the assigned reading in order
to do well in the course or whether the assignments in the syllabi were not
actually enforced. For example, Aya and Rina both reported that there was no
textbook assigned for some of their courses (in sociology, human services, and
business), but the syllabi show an assigned textbook and chapter assignments to
be completed each week.

   What was clear from the interviews is that often professors would lecture
about the material in the textbook and/or make their Power Point notes
available on the course website, and, in some cases, students found that there
was therefore no reason to do the reading even if it was assigned. Reading the
teacher's notes is, of course, still reading, but such reading does not make the
same demands as reading a book. One textbook even came with an instructional
DVD, obviating the need for Martin to rely on his reading skills alone.
However, it was not always the case that lectures or online Power Points meant
that the students did not do the reading, as Aya reported that she always did the
reading for her 200-level psychology course and then depended on the lectures
to explain things she did not understand when reading on her own, having
found that both were necessary to fully understand the material. Similarly, Felix
read the textbook for his fashion design course, Clothing Construction, because
he found that it reinforced what the teacher conveyed in class. The students
did report a number of assignments that required shorter readings, such as the
assignment in Economics 101 to locate an article from the Wall Street Journal or
another business-oriented newspaper or magazine online and then write about
it or report on it to the class. Such reading, according to Chase, is "easy." The
fact that reading is not necessary in all courses is consistent with reports that
typical L1 students can do well in their courses and receive good grades without
doing much of their assigned reading. Jolliffe & Harl (2008), for example,
report that "[p]rofessors admit that students can actually pass exams if they
come to lectures and take (or buy) good notes, whether or not they have read
the assigned material" (p. 600).

   Of the thirty-three courses in which the seven students were enrolled,
they identified six as posing high reading demands: Felix's first-year seminar,
an introductory history course that Aya and Rina took together, Teddy's
introductory sociology course, Maria's introductory legal studies course, and
Rina's psychology course, the only 200-level course so identified. The difficulties
these courses posed included the amount of required reading, the unfamiliar
content of the reading, and the lack of the cultural background that would have
provided scaffolding for the readings. These difficulties in unfamiliar language
and content are consistent with the challenges that reading assignments pose

100
                                                                           Reading Across the Curriculum

for L2 students described in the literature. In addition, the interviews revealed
that issues outside of the linguistic demands of reading in the L2 can also make
reading difficult. These additional difficulties include limitations on students'
time for reading and writing posed by the requirements of other kinds of assigned
work, student activities, and team sports; the difficulty of performing critical
thinking tasks; and the challenge of sustaining the concentration required for
reading when the subject is not among one's interests.

   In the history course, Aya and Rina experienced the kind of difficulties that
the literature describes as typical for international students, finding that the
amount of reading, the vocabulary, and their lack of background knowledge
all presented challenges. Aya said that her history and psychology courses
presented the most difficulty, partly because she isn't interested in history,
but more so because the vocabulary is difficult: "I kind of understand but
for some few sentences the wordings are difficult that I sometimes get stuck
with it." Rina reported that she needed considerable translation to understand
the words in the history textbook. For both the textbook and an additional
book, My Battle of Algiers (Morgan, 2005), Rina and Aya noted their lack of
background knowledge. For example, Aya said that she had no context in
which to understand topics such as the Mughal Empire or Islam and world
trade. Although Rina and Aya felt at a disadvantage in comparison to the L1
students, their instructor commented that the L1 students did not know much,
if anything, about these subjects either.

   Maria reported that the reading load and the technical language in her legal
studies reading assignments presented difficulty, particularly at the beginning
of the semester. The reading was longer and more complex than any she had
encountered before. According to the department chair, most students in this
class find the terminology difficult and benefit from creating a glossary. Maria
probably experienced no more difficulty than the native speakers in her class.
In fact, research in second language writing has found that faculty consider L2
students more adept than L1 students at learning the vocabulary in a discipline
that is new to them, which may be attributed to the L2 students' experience in
acquiring new vocabulary while learning new languages (Leki, 2006, p. 143).
It is clear that Maria, according to her self-report, spends more time studying
than most U. S. college students do, as she reports spending five hours a night,
seven days a week while the National Survey of Student Engagement found the
majority of college students spend fewer than sixteen hours per seven-day week
(Jolliffe & Harl, 2008, p. 601).

   The first-year seminar courses, which all the first year students and Teddy,
the transfer student, were taking, are theme-based courses designed to engage
students in a specific area of interest while providing support for making a

                                                                                                101
Center and Niestepski

smooth transition to the college community. The courses vary widely in terms
of their reading demands. Felix's first-year-seminar was the most demanding,
as his instructor required students to read four novels and write three analytic
papers, a requirement that he found he could not meet partly because, as he
candidly reported, he could only spend about forty-five minutes a day reading
one of the assigned novels before he became too bored to continue. Although
he knew this was not enough time to keep up with his reading assignments, he
found it impossible to continue reading past that point.

   While Teddy had little difficulty with vocabulary in reading his sociology
textbook, he found it difficult to read and understand the case studies that
were also weekly reading. While lack of shared cultural background made it
hard for Teddy to grasp the nuances in the American situations the case studies
described, his bigger difficulty was in thinking critically in the ways the writing
assignments required. When asked to apply the general sociological concepts he
had read about in the textbook to the case studies, Teddy felt that his lack of
experience in critical thinking made this quite challenging:

         Maybe it's because I wasn't born here that I don't have that
         skill [critical thinking] that everyone has. Everybody in
         my class doing so well but not for me ... I understand the
         concept, I understand what is value, what is norm, what is
         sanction, what is bureaucracy, and everything, but when they
         ask me to apply it to one of the story [case studies], I cannot
         do it, I cannot get the inside like everybody else.

Teddy made clear in subsequent interviews that during his schooling in
Vietnam, students were expected to memorize, not to express ideas or apply
concepts. In this, he is like some of the student informants in Zawacki and
Habib's 2010 study, such as Sri, who reported that in India, "You learn it by
memory and put it back on the page word for word ... Your own expression was
not really accepted, unlike here where there's a lot of emphasis on your thoughts
and expression" (p. 61).

MEETING THE DEMANDS: READING STRATEGIES

   To explore the students' use of the reading strategies that the literature de-
scribes as typical practices of experienced readers, we asked each of the six stu-
dents to complete an inventory listing multiple strategies based on a reading
inventory developed by Auerbach and Paxton (1997). In Table 3.3, we list the

102
                                      Reading Across the Curriculum

strategies employed before, during, and after the reading that three or more
students reported using regularly.

   Even though only four of the participants reported using a dictionary when
they came across unknown words, during the interviews all of the students said
they look up unknown words to varying degrees. Rina, who had little focus
on reading in her English studies in a Japanese high school and never reads for
pleasure in her L1 or L2, and Teddy, who had considerable experience reading
in English both in his community college and on his own, represent opposite
ends of the continuum between hesitant, word-for-word reading and more con-
fident, fluent reading. While Rina remains heavily dependent on translation
and electronic translators, Teddy reported that he used to use a translator but

Table 3.3 Student Reading Strategies

Before you start reading, what (if anything) do you typically do?       Responses
                                                                        (out of 6)
Glance at the whole text first, checking length or other text features  4
Skim the whole article                                                  4
Read the title and think about what might be coming                     4
While you are reading, what goes on in your mind? What are you doing?
Taking notes, marking the text                                          5
Asking questions                                                        4
Writing                                                                 4
Skimming or skipping parts                                              3
Going back and forth between parts                                      3
Making predictions                                                      3
What do you do when you come to unknown words or passages you
don't understand?                                                       4
Guess                                                                   4
Use the dictionary                                                      3
Re-read                                                                 3
Mark the word/passage and come back to it
After you finish reading, what do you do?                               4
Go back and re-read specific parts                                      3
Re-read the article                                                     3
Stop and turn immediately to the assignment                             4
Go back and re-read specific parts

                                                                                    103
Center and Niestepski

found it "expensive and very annoying" to spend so much time looking up
words. He made the transition from word-based to meaning-based reading in
his international high school. Teddy has developed a higher tolerance for not
understanding every word and more facility in guessing meaning from context:
"There's a lot of words I'm not sure about but based from my experience, I
just read the whole thing and I just guess. That usually does help, and it saves
me a lot of time ... Reading without a dictionary, I can enjoy the content of a
story; reading with a dictionary, it just makes the reading really boring." Rina,
in contrast, translates continually, even translating some of the words in the
history syllabus she showed us; she worries that "sometimes I check every time
the same word," meaning that she isn't adding the words that she translates to
her vocabulary.

   Overall, the results indicate that these L2 students make use of many of
the strategies emphasized in intensive approaches to reading. What is equally
interesting are the practices that the students did not report making use of. For
example, only one student said that while reading he thought of something
from his own experience or thought about other articles/courses. The students
we interviewed seemed to focus solely on understanding the text and were not
able to use experiences outside of the text to help them understand it.

MEETING THE DEMANDS: COPING STRATEGIES

   In her study of L2 students dealing with writing assignments, "Coping
Strategies of ESL Students in Writing Tasks Across the Curriculum," Leki (1995)
found that students employed a number of strategic moves to deal with the
writing tasks assigned. The students in this study used similar strategic moves in
response to the reading demands they faced. Like Leki's participants, they took
advantage of their first language and culture, approached their professors and,
in some cases, peers, for clarification and help, managed competing demands
by choosing the number of courses and the type of courses they enrolled in each
semester with reading and writing demands in mind, managed their work load
by setting limits on their investment in particular courses or assignments, and
regulated their cognitive load by strategically using reading to reinforce what
they had heard in class. (A number of these moves are similar to those employed
by Chozin, the graduate student who is the subject of Phillips' case study [this
volume]; he too learned to take the initiative in managing his learning and
writing environment in order to complete his assignments successfully.)

   Some of the students' strategies for managing their reading tasks involved
taking advantage of their first language by doing "outside research" in the

104
                                                                           Reading Across the Curriculum

L1 in order to understand texts and lectures. Most often this took the form
of looking up background information on the Internet about the topic.
For example, Aya reports that in her history class, "on the syllabus it says
like the title of what she's going to talk about today, so I like go on the
Internet and look up kind of like an overview or background information
in Japanese and kinda get the idea and I go to the class." Both Aya and Rina
talked about looking online for information in Japanese about the Battle of
Algiers in order to help them understand My Battle of Algiers (Morgan, 2005).
Similarly, Chase found his economics instructor's notes hard to understand,
so he would read material on Google until he was able to understand the
concepts and complete his homework. Rina reported that at the beginning of
the semester she had her mother send her Japanese books on business to help
with her business courses.

   Teddy was the most assertive of the students we interviewed in asking for
adaptations of assignments so that he could take advantage of this first culture.
He negotiated adaptations in his introductory sociology class by asking the
instructor to let him use his knowledge of his own background, Vietnamese
culture, rather than examples from US culture, an accommodation that the
professor allowed for a group presentation and an exam. For the exam, instead
of writing about a subculture in the US (which he did not clearly grasp), his
instructor allowed him to write about a subculture in Vietnam. By allowing him
to examine the subculture in Vietnam, his instructor was able to gauge how well
he understood the sociological theories he was learning without penalizing him
for his lack of understanding of American subcultures. (Like Chozin with his
writing assignments, as described by Phillips [this volume], Aya, Rina, Chase,
and Teddy show L2 students drawing on knowledge from their L1 to complete
reading and writing-about-reading assignments. As DePalma and Ringer argue
[this volume], when we consider what writing knowledge L2 students might be
transferring across cultural, linguistic, and academic contexts, many of which
are unfamiliar to them, we need to recognize how they are reusing, and in many
cases, reshaping concepts and information from their L1.)

   Another approach students used when struggling with the readings was to
ask someone, typically a classmate or the instructor, for help. Students indicated
that often times they did not feel comfortable asking the instructor questions
about the text during class, but would instead wait until after class to talk with
the instructor or they would email him or her. Martin indicated that if he still
didn't understand after rereading, "I'll like ask another Athletic Training major,
`Hey, did you get that?' and if they don't know, we'll just look it up and kind
of discuss." Chase also reported working with his classmates to complete the
homework problems that were assigned in his economics class.

                                                                                                105
Center and Niestepski

   Aya and Rina managed the high reading demands that they expected to find
in their history course by taking the course together and by limiting their course
load to four 3-credit courses instead of the usual five that semester. (We recently
learned that Chase and Teddy are currently following the same strategy of taking
their history course together.) In our follow-up interviews with five of the seven
participants during the 2011-2012 academic year, most readily acknowledged
that, when they plan their schedules each semester, they seek a balance between
courses with high demands for reading and writing and courses with less
demands. For Teddy and Chase, for example, math-based courses are much less
onerous, so they balance reading/writing-intensive courses with those that are
more math-based. Teddy averred that he could handle a 50-50 balance while
Chase said that he preferred a 70-30 balance in favor of math-based courses. The
content of the reading makes a significant difference, however, as reading in the
student's major, such as Rina's reading about restaurant and hotel management,
was seen as much more manageable than reading in a discipline outside the
major. Similarly, Felix finds his fashion textbooks useful and readable and does
not sell them back to the bookstore, keeping them to use for future reference.

   In Leki's study (1995), students made conscious choices to limit their
investment in particular assignments, courses, and in academic work overall,
choosing, for example, not to reread because it took too much time away from
other assignments or to participate in college activities, socialize or travel rather
than to study in order "to get a more well-rounded educational experience"
(p. 251). Similarly, in our study, some students prioritized the hands-on work
assigned in classes, such as Felix's fashion design courses, and their student
activities over completing their reading assignments. For example, Felix was
part of the Student Government Association and Martin, as a soccer player,
had daily practices and frequent games during the season. Interestingly, they
are the two students who were most forthright about the choices they made to
limit the amount of time they devoted to reading in areas outside their career-
oriented majors because the reading became too boring to tolerate. As Felix
reported, "If it was a book about like about fashion design or like a designer
or something else that I'm like into it, I would just totally, I would just like
spend my entire night not sleeping and just reading the book, but [the assigned
reading in his first-year seminar] is just boring," so "when I'm reading, I start
thinking about something else and my head just goes like, it doesn't stick with
the book." Martin similarly reported that after awhile "I can't keep reading, I'm
gonna get off track and then I'm not going to be paying attention."

   The participants in Leki's study (1995) had a number of strategies to
prepare for and follow up class lectures, including reading ahead in order to
preview what the instructor would say in class and not taking notes in order to

106
                                                                           Reading Across the Curriculum

concentrate in class, strategies Leki terms "regulating cognitive load" (p. 252).
Aya used strikingly similar stratagies. Following the design of the course in
the syllabus, she prepared for the topic to be discussed by reading in her L1
on the Internet, providing her own scaffolding for the upcoming lecture, then
focused on listening in class, and finally read the textbook after the lecture
to reinforce and clarify what she heard. The follow-up interview revealed that
Aya is continuing to regulate her cognitive load in her upper-level psychology
courses. She reads the textbook chapter before class, listens in class, and then
prints out the Power Point slides that are posted on the course website and goes
over these after class to reinforce her learning. In one psychology class, she can't
predict what the professor's lecture will cover from the syllabus, so she listens
during class first, then reads the Power Point slides, then reads the textbook
chapter. Teddy follows a similar routine of reading the textbook before class
to provide scaffolding for the lectures. He reported that he depends heavily on
the textbook for his learning, particularly when the professor is not an effective
lecturer. Teddy observed that "I don't want to put myself in the situation that
I rely on the professor too much ... so I develop a style of studying rely mostly
on the book."

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

   The interviews revealed that, in most cases, these L2 students coped well
with the demands for reading in their courses. Only one student mentioned
resorting to Spark Notes when the reading was too time-consuming. In addition
to the students' self-reports, the writing samples students brought to their second
interviews, all graded as A's or B's, showed evidence of at least rudimentary
skills in selecting and integrating information from readings into the writing.
The students were aided by their own strategies and the help of instructors,
who spoke to students after class, during office hours, and on email to answer
questions about the readings; modified assignments to allow students to use
their own cultural experiences; made accommodations for students who needed
to translate during exams; and used visual modalities to convey information to
students. Students consistently mentioned how helpful it is if instructors are
available to meet with students after class and during office hours. From the
students' comments, it is very clear that they usually do not feel comfortable
asking questions in class and are at times quite self-conscious. In cases where
the students were not able to meet face to face with their instructors after class,
they found it helpful to be able to email the instructor. During Maria's second
interview, she explained that only one of her instructors knew she was not born

                                                                                                107
Center and Niestepski

in the United States and that she did not want to be treated differently from the
other students as it was already hard to be in college. However, she too discussed
how helpful it was to be able to email an instructor for clarification on one of
her assignments.

   In general, an opportunity for a visual component is helpful for L2 students.
Both Aya and Rina talked about an assignment from history class in which they
were asked to respond to a review of a book. Instead of a written review, students
were given the link to a YouTube video interview of the person reviewing the
book. They found it helpful to be able to watch the video repeatedly.

   Based on what we learned from our study and from second language
reading pedagogy, there are several additional practices that could aid students
and promote reading across the curriculum that did not appear to be widely
used, such as providing a context for assigned readings in advance and making
greater use of writing-to-read activities. Several students discussed how helpful
it would be if instructors would provide a context for the readings beforehand.
For example, Aya and Rina struggled with reading My Battle of Algiers because
they had no context for it. Felix struggled with the dialect in Zora Neale
Hurston's Their Eyes Were Watching God (1937/2006) and stated, "For me, it
wasn't English. It was Greek." If instructors are able to give students an overview
of what the reading material will be about, the time period or key persons
involved, or ways to decipher the dialect, this might go a long way in helping
students to understand the reading. In addition, instructors across the disciplines
should help students to become aware of how they read, so that they begin to
recognize the practices that inhibit the development of fluency. Instructors can
then "encourage students to read first for overall meaning without trying to
understand every single word" (Spack, 1993, p. 189).

   While many of the students used notetaking, glossing, and annotating when
they read, they did not mention using other writing-to-read strategies either
on their own time or in their classes. Hirvela (2004) discusses three writing-to-
read strategies that help students to understand the material they are reading:
summary, synthesis, and response papers. Hirvela (2004) draws on previous
studies that have found "more complex writing tasks involving some degree
of composing (e.g., analytic and response-based essays) have a greater impact
on students' learning than do less demanding activities such as notetaking and
answering study questions" (p. 84). While study questions may guide students
to important places in a text, when students are asked to write a summary, they
are forced to decide what information in the text is of the most importance.
According to Hirvela (2004), "In situations where we have reasons to expect our
students to encounter difficulties while reading, adding a writing component
such as summarizing might be the best reading gift we can give them" (p.

108
                                                                           Reading Across the Curriculum

91). This is confirmed by a L2 student, Karimatu, interviewed in Zawacki,
Hajabbasi, Habib, Antram & Das's study (2007), who said, when asked what
she would tell students coming to the United States, "Get used to the habit of
reading, and, if you can read it, take a piece of paper .... when you read, write.
Just write a part from what they learn. Let's say you read two pages, and you
ask yourself what you read. Sometimes you read and your mind is somewhere
else you don't understand. Summarize it in your own words, just to get in the
habit of doing it" (p. 18). (Qian Du [this volume] describes the benefits of
summary writing for L2 students. While a particularly complex process for these
students, as she explains, because it requires an understanding of different levels
of information in the text along with the ability to represent the original text
accurately and concisely, summary writing is a valuable learning and writing
tool for the reasons raised in this chapter.)

   Another written component is synthesizing, which allows students to move
beyond summarizing one text to summarizing and describing the relationship
among multiple texts. Given that when our interviewees described their reading
strategies, only one student mentioned thinking about another text, synthesis
assignments might be a useful technique for instructors to use to help students
see the connections among texts. A third type of writing-to-read activity
is the response assignment, which can take a variety of forms ranging from
pre-reading writing in which students are asked to write about the topic of
the text to post-reading writing in which students describe their reactions to
the texts. Many instructors assign journals in which students respond to the
texts. Like the summaries, response assignments can give instructors insight
into the challenges students are facing with the texts assigned and can easily be
incorporated into classes from all disciplines.

   Yet, other than in the writing courses, we found no evidence that instructors
assigned summaries, syntheses, or response assignments so that students were able
to write in response to readings. Perhaps the use of writing-to-read assignments
is one of the reasons that the students taking writing courses reported that they
read the assigned readings from their composition readers easily.

   Ultimately, instructors in all disciplines can help all students become
stronger readers by assigning reading for which students are held accountable,
so that they continuously practice reading. As noted previously, L2 students
may benefit even more than L1 students do from extensive reading practice
because frequent reading can build tacit knowledge of the L2 and prompt more
fluent reading. Additionally, instructors across the disciplines can design writing
activities and assignments that invite students to go beyond comprehension and
the accumulation of information to analyze, synthesize, and evaluate what they
read. As Carson (1993) notes, "Language is always used to do something; it is

                                                                                                109
Center and Niestepski

not meaningful in and of itself " (p. 99). Reading is meaningful when students
think about the content of their reading and do something with it, composing
their thoughts in response to the language on the page or screen.

REFERENCES

Auerbach, E. R. & Paxton, D. (1997). It's not the English thing: Bringing read-
   ing research into the ESL classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 31(2), 237-261.

Carson, J. (1993). Reading for writing: Cognitive perspectives. In J. Carson &
   I. Leki (Eds.), Reading in the composition classroom: Second language perspec-
   tives (pp. 85-104). Boston, MA: Heinle and Heinle Publishers.

Ferris, D. & Hedgcock, J. (1998). Teaching ESL composition. Mahwah, NJ:
   Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Flahive, D. & Bailey, N. (1993). Exploring reading/writing relationships in
   adult second language learners. In J. Carson & I. Leki (Eds.), Reading in
   the composition classroom: Second language perspectives (pp. 128-140). Boston,
   MA: Heinle and Heinle Publishers.

Grabe, W. (2004). Reading-writing relations: Theoretical perspectives and in-
   structional practices. In D. Belcher & A. Hirvela (Eds.), Linking literacies:
   Perspectives on L2 reading-writing connections (pp. 15-39). Ann Arbor, MI:
   University of Michigan Press.

Hedgcock, J. & Ferris, D. (2009). Teaching readers of English. New York: Rout-
   ledge.

Hirvela, A. (2004). Connecting reading and writing in second language writing
   instruction. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Horning, A. (2007). Reading across the curriculum as the key to student suc-
   cess. Across the Disciplines, 4. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/
   articles/horning2007.cfm

Hurston, Z.N. (2006). Their eyes were watching God. New York: HarperCollins.
   (Original work published 1937).

Jolliffe, D. & Harl, A. (2008). Studying the "reading transition" from high
   school to college: What are our students reading and why? College English,
   70(6), 599-617.

Leki, I. (1993). Reciprocal themes in ESL reading and writing. In Leki & Car-
   son (Eds.), Reading in the composition classroom: Second language perspectives
   (pp. 9-32). Boston, MA: Heinle and Heinle Publishers.

Leki, I. (1995). Coping strategies of ESL students in writing tasks across the
   curriculum. TESOL Quarterly, 29(2), 235-260.

110
                                                                           Reading Across the Curriculum

Leki, I. (2006). Negotiating socioacademic relations: English learners' reception
   by and reaction to college faculty. Journal of English for Academic Purposes,
   5, 136-152.

Morgan, T. (2005). My battle of Algiers. New York: Harper Collins.
Reid, J. (2006). Eye learners and ear learners: Identifying the language needs of

   international students and US resident writers. In P. K. Matsuda, M. Cox, J.
   Jordan, & C. Ortmeier-Hooper (Eds.), Second-language writing in the compo-
   sition classroom (pp. 76-88). Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martin's.
Sanoff, A. (2006, March 10). A perception gap over students' prepara-
   tion. Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from http://chronicle.com/
   article/A-Perception-Gap-Over/31426/
Spack, R. (1993). Student meets text, text meets students: Finding a way into
   academic discourse. In J. Carson & I. Leki (Eds.), Reading in the composition
   classroom: Second language perspectives (pp. 183-196). Boston, MA: Heinle
   and Heinle Publishers.
Spack, R. (2004). The acquisition of academic literacy in a second language: A
   longitudinal case study, updated. In V. Zamel & R. Spack (Eds.), Crossing the
   curriculum: Multilingual learners in college classrooms (pp. 19-45). Mahway,
   NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Zawacki, T. M. & Habib, A. (2010). "Will our stories help teachers under-
   stand?": Multilingual students talk about identity, voice, and expectations
   across academic communities. In M. Cox, J. Jordan, C. Ortmeier-Hooper,
   & G. G. Schwartz (Eds.), Reinventing identities in second language writing
   (pp. 54-74). Urbana, IL: NCTE.
Zawacki, T. M., Hajabbasi, E., Habib, A., Antram, A., & Das, A. (2007). Valu-
   ing written accents: Non-native students talk about identity, academic writing,
   and meeting teachers' expectations. Retrieved from http://writtenaccents.gmu.
   edu/monograph/valuing-written-accents-second-edition.pdf

                                                                                                111
CHAPTER 4

BRIDGING THE GAP BETWEEN
ESL COMPOSITION PROGRAMS
AND DISCIPLINARY WRITING:
THE TEACHING AND LEARNING
OF SUMMARIZATION SKILL

Qian Du
Ohio University

Summary writing has long been perceived as a core academic literacy
skill necessary for students studying in American universities to achieve
academic success, yet limited research has been conducted with regards
to the actual summary writing tasks that L2 writers encounter across
the curriculum. To fill in this gap, this qualitative study examined the
summary writing experiences and practices of a group of international
undergraduate students as they navigate across different disciplinary
courses. The major findings of the study will be discussed in this chap-
ter, and pedagogical implications outlined.

   In Anglophone universities, reading-based writing tasks are commonly
assigned (Bridgeman & Carlson, 1984; Hale et al., 1996), and students are
often expected to effectively work with source texts in various assignments, such
as reading responses, critical reviews, and research papers. Of the major source-
based assignments, summary writing has long been perceived as a core academic
literacy skill necessary for students studying in American universities to achieve
academic success. Because of this, ESL writing programs, which are designed
to socialize second language writers into the target academic community, often
incorporate summary writing as an important component of the curriculum.
ESL students enrolled in such courses are provided with ample opportunities
to practice summarization skill based on the readings selected by the writing
teachers. Despite this central focus on the teaching of summarization, however,
ESL writing courses often do not seem to take into consideration L2 writers'
actual uses of summarization in disciplinary courses. In ESL writing courses,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.04                         113
Qian Du

the readings chosen for summary writing are usually unrelated to students'
academic backgrounds, and the criteria used for the evaluation of summaries
are largely a result of the writing teachers' own understanding of the genre. In
other words, summary writing is often taught as a "context-free" skill in ESL
writing programs.

   Recent research on second language writing has started to explore the
relationship between ESL writing programs and L2 writers' literacy experiences
in their chosen disciplines (e.g. Leki, 2007). Nevertheless, few studies have
examined the discrepancies in the teaching and learning of specific academic
writing skills. To fill in the gap, this study examines summary writing experiences
of a group of international undergraduate students in various disciplinary
courses. By documenting the focal participants' summarization practices
across the curriculum, this qualitative study seeks to unveil the connections
(or disconnections) between ESL composition programs and content classes in
terms of summary writing, hoping to shed light on how summarization could
be more effectively taught in second language writing courses. In this chapter,
I will review key literature on summary writing to contextualize the study, and
then introduce the research design, including the setting, the participants, and
methods for data collection and analysis. Next, I will present major findings in
relation to international undergraduate students' summary writing experiences
across the disciplines, and outline pedagogical implications accordingly.

REVIEW OF THE RESEARCH

   The importance of summary writing in higher education has been
emphasized by a number of second language writing researchers (Kirkland &
Saunders, 1991; Yang & Shi, 2003). As is generally agreed by university writing
instructors, summary writing constitutes as "a gateway skill" (Frey, Fisher &
Hernandez, 2003, p. 48) for undergraduate as well as graduate students to
complete various types of source-based writing assignments in university
settings. Also, summarization skill itself functions as an effective learning
strategy for students to synthesize information from source texts and improve
reading comprehension (Davis & Hult, 1997; Friend, 2001; Rinehart, Stahl &
Erickson, 1986; and also see Center & Niestepski's chapter [this volume], in
which the L2 students they interviewed talk about using summary writing to
help them read and learn course material.) Conceptualizing summarization as
an important literacy skill in English academic writing, writing researchers have
examined novice writers' summary writing practices from different perspectives.
The complexities of this particular reading-based writing task have drawn

114
                                                                                           Bridging the Gap

focused attention from researchers. In order to produce quality summaries,
students need to interact with the source texts recursively, constantly reflecting
on the reading materials and making decisions regarding the level of importance
of information (Kim, 2001; Rinehart & Thomas, 1993). In other words, writers
need to develop an accurate comprehension of the source texts and distinguish
between the main substance and trivial details to produce a good summary. In
addition, students are also expected to explain key points of the source texts in
concise language, which is particularly challenging for second language learners
with developing English proficiency. As Hill (1991) explains, "[t]he process of
learning to write summaries is a long one, accomplished in stages as text-related
variables interact with the developing writer" (p. 539).

   Acknowledging the complexities of summarization, second language writing
researchers have investigated major difficulties and challenges that novice
academic writers encounter while working on such tasks. Johns and Mayes
(1990), for instance, examined the processes of summarization by comparing
the summaries produced by writers with high and low English proficiency. Their
findings showed that although students with a lower level of English proficiency
were more likely to rely on the original wording of the source text, both groups
of writers struggled with generating main ideas in a condensed manner based
on the text. Another study by Johns (1985) also demonstrated that although
less proficient English writers were more inclined to focus on sentence-level
information and infrequently combined idea units at a macro level, both
novice and more experienced college writers distorted the ideas of the source
text to a certain level and included personal comments in their summaries, the
practices of which were inconsistent with the general expectations of academic
summaries.

   Kim (2001) explored Korean university students' summary writing practices
in English. According to Kim, the participants most frequently utilized deletion
as a strategy to generate a condensed version of the source text, and the EFL
learners found it challenging to generalize and re-organize information to
present main ideas. Also looking into summary writing processes, Yang and
Shi (2003) investigated how six first-year MBA students (three Chinese ESL
learners and three native English speakers) approached a disciplinary summary
task that involved the reading and critical examination of a company case. Their
findings suggested that the participants employed a wide range of composing
strategies while working on the task, and students' previous learning experiences
influenced their summarization performances. According to Yang and Shi
(2003), among the six participants, those who had background knowledge
in the content area and previous experience writing about topics within the
discipline were in general more confident of and skilled in completing the task,

                                                                                                115
Qian Du

whereas those who were relatively new to the field found the summarization
task to be difficult. As graduate students have already chosen an area of study
to pursue and are commonly expected to demonstrate their competence of
providing meaningful discussions about disciplinary specific topics, content
knowledge thus becomes an important variable that determines the level of
success of disciplinary summarization.

   Another challenge that novice academic writers often experience while
completing summarization tasks involves using their own words to explain
the meaning in written form. Keck (2006), for example, explored students'
paraphrasing practices for summary writing. By comparing the paraphrasing
behaviors of native-English speaking students and ESL writers, Keck (2006)
showed that ESL writers relied on the original wording of the source texts
more than their American counterparts, highlighting the role that language
proficiency plays in influencing writers' summary writing abilities. Also looking
into the relationship between language competence and summary writing, Baba
(2009) examined one particular aspect of lexical proficiency and how it affected
L2 writers' summarizing abilities. According to Baba (2009), the participants'
competence of defining words and manipulating synonyms played a critical
role in determining the quality of their summaries. Comparing original source
texts and students' summaries, Basham and Rounds (1984) found out that
writers seemed to have difficulties maintaining the original tones of the authors
through appropriate manipulation of verb tenses, adverbs and modal verbs.
Also exploring wording and meaning changes, Hood (2008) analyzed the
processes of summarization based on brief notes taken along the source text.
The researcher showed how the seemingly straightforward process is in fact a
complex one, where writers needed to attend to subtle meaning implications of
changed wordings while using their own words to express meanings.

   These studies have all demonstrated multifaceted factors that may influence
the quality of the final write-up of a summary. As Kirkland and Saunders
(1991) aptly point out in their article, both internal constraints (e.g. language
proficiency of the writers, knowledge about the content of the readings,
cognitive and metacognitive skills to distinguish between important and trivial
information and to control the processes of summary writing) and external
constraints (e.g. the types of materials being summarized, the nature of the
assignments, time limit, the target audience of the summaries) affect how the
writers approach various summarization assignments. Moreover, these internal
and external constraints "are all interactive" (Kirkland & Saunders, 1991, p.
114), which further complicates summary writing processes.

   Considering the challenges that college students experience while working on
summarization tasks, writing researchers have also examined potential teaching

116
                                                                                           Bridging the Gap

strategies that can help learners to develop an adequate ability of summary
writing. Day (1986) contended that when dealing with challenging tasks such
as summarization, writers would benefit from explicit instruction of specific
writing strategies integrated with self-regulatory skills that help to monitor
their own performances (e.g. checking and paying attention). Friend (2001)
conducted a study to examine how explicit instruction on reading strategies may
help novice writers to develop the ability of differentiating between main ideas
and details in source texts. The participants of the study included three groups
of college writers: one group was taught the strategy of argument repetition,
a second group learned the strategy of generalization, and a third group (the
control group) was asked to rely on their personal reactions to the texts while
identifying main ideas. The results suggested that both experimental groups
outperformed the control group in terms of the ability to distinguish between
different levels of information. Based on the findings, Friend (2001) pointed out
that explicit instruction on generalizing information of source texts is crucial
in helping novice academic writers to develop the ability of going beyond the
exact wording and understand the gist. Also advocating for explicit instruction,
Casazza (1993) emphasizes the importance of directly showing students how to
interact with texts and engage in meaning construction when summarizing. Cox,
Bobrowski, and Maher (2003) also support explicit instruction on summary
writing by sharing their experiences about how to teach business majors to
critically evaluate source texts and identify key claims and ideas.

   Kirkland and Saunders (1991) maintain that when teaching summarization,
teachers may need to first attend to the instruction of essential study skills such
as note taking in order to help learners to keep track of the different levels
of information presented in the texts. Ko (2009) investigated the effectiveness
of a module used to teach summary writing. The quantitative and qualitative
findings showed that the Korean university students who participated in the
study improved in terms of their ability to distinguish between different levels
of information, and developed a more positive attitude towards their own ability
of summary writing and the importance of learning to summarize effectively.
Radmacher and Latosi-Sawin (1995) explained that engaging students in
meaningful comparisons of summaries of different qualities would help
learners to develop a clearer understanding of the criteria often used to evaluate
summaries. The authors also advocated for the use of disciplinary reading
materials as source texts for summarization tasks in order to expose students to
authentic writing contexts that they are likely to encounter in different courses.

   Although the extant literature has generated insights about the challenges
that novice academic writers (ESL students in particular) encounter when
working on summarization tasks and how writing courses could help learners

                                                                                                117
Qian Du

to develop the ability to summarize, many of the studies are based on specially
designed summary tasks in writing programs, with insufficient attention
directed to the actual types of summarization assignments that students are
expected to complete in disciplinary courses. To fill in the gap, the study reported
here examined the summarization practices of a group of ESL undergraduate
students studying in various disciplines at a US university.

METHODS

   To shed light on ESL undergraduate writers' summarization experiences across
disciplinary courses, this qualitative-oriented study tracked six focal participants
pursuing undergraduate degrees at a comprehensive mid-western US university.
The following research questions guided data collection and analysis.

    In what types of summarization tasks did the ESL writers engage in dif-
       ferent disciplinary courses, including their major courses, general edu-
       cation courses, and elective courses? What expectations are commonly
       associated with such tasks?

    What are the participants' perceptions of the usefulness of summariza-
       tion skill across the disciplines?

    What are the major connections and disconnections between what is
       taught in the ESL writing program and disciplinary expectations regard-
       ing summarization?

   The study took place in a mid-western US university, which features a large
international student population from Asian countries, China and South Korea
in particular. The university offers a three-course sequence of ESL writing
program that aims to help these international students develop an adequate
understanding of academic writing so that they can successfully handle writing
tasks commonly assigned in disciplinary courses. All incoming international
undergraduates are required to take a placement test at the beginning of their
studies and are then placed into one of the three courses according to their
writing proficiency reflected by the test. Although there are a number of
students who need to take the lowest-level course, the majority of international
undergraduates are able to skip it because of their quality performance in the
placement test and directly start with the latter two courses in the sequence.
Both of these courses focus on source-based writing, with summary writing
constituting a major component of the curricula, although in the most advanced
course, summarization is often taught in relation to research paper writing.

   The participants for this study were all students who took one or two
required ESL composition courses with me in the past year. I first distributed a

118
                                                                                           Bridging the Gap

short survey that elicited information from a large number of students regarding
whether they had experiences with summary writing in their disciplinary
courses and invited those who had such experiences to participate in the study.
Altogether, six core participants--Yvonne, Lee, Carla, Leslie, Gloria, Cherry
(all pseudonyms)--completed the whole project with me. Lee was originally
from Korea, whereas the rest of the participants were from China. Of the
participating students, Yvonne and Lee were studying accounting, Carla was
a finance major, Leslie was double majoring in mathematics and economics,
and Gloria and Cherry were both studying in the architecture program. All
the participants were international students who were relatively unfamiliar
with English academic writing in general and summarization in particular
before taking the ESL composition course. After recruiting the participants,
I conducted semi-structured interviews with them, seeking information about
the types of summarization assignments they were required to complete in
various disciplinary courses and asking the participants to explain in detail the
purposes and nature of the summarization tasks.

   I also collected relevant documents, such as course syllabi where requirements
about different writing tasks were explained as well as students' summarization
products. In addition, I examined the course syllabi of the ESL writing courses
regarding the teaching of summary writing, aiming to identify connections
and disconnections between what participants did in the writing program
and in different content courses. For data analysis, I adopted the commonly
used "thematic analysis" (Glesne, 2006, p. 147), and continuously created and
refined codes and categories based on my research questions.

FINDINGS

   In this section, I briefly report major findings based on my analysis, focusing
on three trends regarding summarization practices in disciplinary courses,
namely, the incorporation of summarization as a prerequisite skill for source-
based writing assignments, the diverse formats of source texts in different
courses, and the extensive use of summarization as a tool for learning.

Summarization as a Prerequisite Skill for
Source-Based Writing Assignments

   As reported by the participants, summarization constitutes a threshold skill
that they are expected to master in order to complete such larger writing tasks
as article critiques, reading responses, and analysis papers commonly assigned in

                                                                                                119
Qian Du

general education courses. As one participant, Leslie, said in the interview: "You
just have to know how to summarize, because it's the beginning of almost every
writing assignment." Leslie had abundant experiences with summary writing
in a variety of courses that she took across the curriculum. In the introduction
to design course that she took as an elective, for example, she was asked to
read extensively on chosen topics according to the syllabus, and respond to
the readings. In one week, she was asked to look for information about several
designers, choose one to introduce his/her life and work, and then discuss how
the person influences her thinking about design. The following guidelines were
provided in the syllabus outlining the expectations of the assignment:

         ... choose one of those three designers and write an in-depth
         essay about their life, work, contributions, etc. Also include
         your own thoughts about their life, work, contributions, etc.
         Length is at your discretion, but remember you are in college
         now.

   As the requirements show, this particular assignment features a mixture
of summary writing and the expression of one's own ideas based on source
information. In order to discuss how a particular designer's life and work
impacted her, Leslie needed to know about the person first and introduce
him/her. In the theater course that she took to fulfill the general education
requirement, she was also required to explain her reactions, but this time
based on show performances that she was expected to watch. To contextualize
her own thoughts, she would always present a short summary paragraph in
the beginning that briefly described the content of the performances, even
though the theater teacher did not provide explicit requirements regarding the
necessity of a summary paragraph. According to Leslie, even though the teacher
did not specify this, she believed that a short summary of the performances
at the beginning of the response paper was indispensable, since it would help
readers who were not familiar with the performances to understand her later
discussions.

   Leslie's experiences with summary writing across the curriculum were quite
representative of those of other participants who took different courses than
she did (e.g. biology, food science and technology, history, economics, women's
studies, architecture --many of which serve to fulfill the general education
requirement). In these courses, students were frequently asked to read about
certain topics in relation to the content of the courses, and discuss their ideas
and perspectives accordingly. Due to the different focuses of the courses,
these assignments often took on different forms. In her biology class, for

120
                                                                                           Bridging the Gap

example, Yvonne was asked to evaluate New York Times articles that introduced
current developments in biological research and related controversies. In one
assignment, she read an article about whether pregnant women in labor should
follow a restricted diet, and then expressed her understanding of this issue
from a Chinese perspective. (See Hirsch [this volume] for examples of writing
projects in WID courses that include summary writing.)

   Despite the various formats of the assignments, the essential task is quite
similar, that is, to express one's informed opinions about certain topics based on
source texts. Because of the central role reading plays in most of the disciplinary
courses, summarization, which entails adequate reading comprehension, has
become a tacit need for source-based assignments, although very few instructors
directly explained this to the participants of the study. Although the ability to
understand the given source texts seems to be assumed across the disciplines,
L2 learners, who are quite unfamiliar with the content of the materials and are
still developing their English language proficiency, often struggle with reading
comprehension when being asked to complete summarization tasks. As the
participants explained, they tended to spend a long time reading the assigned
texts in order to make sure that their comprehension was accurate. (For a longer
discussion of the challenges L2 students face when completing readings assigned
in undergraduate US courses as well as strategies they develop to negotiate these
challenges, see Center & Niestepski [this volume]). Sometimes, even after they
tried to read the materials multiple times, they still felt uncertain about what
the texts were discussing. As a result, the participants had to rely on guessing to
some extent while working on their summaries, which inevitably influences the
accuracy of the final write-ups.

   When asked whether what they had learned in the ESL writing courses about
summary writing was helpful for them to complete disciplinary writing tasks,
the participants agreed that the content covered in the writing courses enabled
them to understand the genre of summary in English, which was relatively
unfamiliar to them. Leslie and Gloria, for example, were completely new to the
concept of summarization before they took the ESL writing courses. As both
of them explained in the interviews, they had never been asked to complete a
summary task in their native Chinese language and had no previous knowledge
about how to write a good summary. In this sense, the ESL writing courses
provided basic information about summarization that functioned as building
blocks for the L2 writers to deal with various disciplinary summarization tasks.
Despite the general satisfaction with the content covered in the ESL writing
courses, all participants also explained that they would have liked the writing
classes to focus more on how to generate key ideas from long texts instead of
the writing conventions associated with summary writing (e.g. the use of topic

                                                                                                121
Qian Du

sentences and reporting verbs). As the participants described in the interviews,
when evaluating the summary assignments, the disciplinary course instructors
usually emphasized the accuracy of the information and often did not pay too
much attention to their language style in which the summaries were written (See
Zawacki & Habib and Ives, Leahy, Leming, Pierce, & Schwartz [this volume]
for further discussion of faculty expectations for L2 writers).

Diverse Formats of Source Texts

   The important role of summarization in disciplinary courses is probably
not news to writing instructors; yet what is quite unexpected is the wide range
of source texts that students are expected to work with across the curriculum.
Although students are always expected to submit their summaries in written
form, the source texts assigned for the summary tasks are not necessarily printed
articles or books. Instead, students are often asked to summarize a variety of
sources, including guest lectures, movies, video clips, paintings, and architectural
models. One of the participants, Gloria, who majored in architecture, was
asked to summarize guest lectures given by invited architects as well as her
major learning from the talks. In such situations, what she needed to do was to
listen to the lectures carefully, identify important points covered by the guest
speakers, note them down in succinct manners, and write them up after the
lectures. According to Gloria, such tasks were challenging in that she had to
attend to both listening and note taking at the same time. As she explained
in the interview, although she had studied in the United States for quite some
time, she still encountered trouble listening to native-speaking professors and
lecturers, and often had to spend extra time in her head to decode and digest
the information from lectures. Often times, new vocabulary, discipline-specific
terminologies, and cultural jokes that frequently appeared in the guest lectures
caused her additional difficulties to understand the information. Consequently,
she found it hard to keep up with the fast speed and unfamiliar content of
the lectures. Also, since each of the lectures lasted for an hour, Gloria found it
extremely demanding to keep track of the gist and distinguish between different
levels of information. As she vividly described, "The lectures are long, and my
mind begins exploding, and I just cannot tell which is the gist, which is the
detail." (See Center & Niestepski [this volume] for ways in which L2 students
use reading to better understand course lectures.)

   Because of these major challenges, Gloria had to make the best use of what
she was capable of doing when working on the summarization tasks: she only
selected points that she was relatively confident of to include in the final write-
up. As Adamson (1990) points out, note taking is a cognitively and linguistically

122
                                                                                           Bridging the Gap

challenging task for most ESL students, since learners need to comprehend the
information obtained from lectures, differentiate between the gist and details,
identify certain logic that guides the presentation of the information and then
concisely write down the most important points. ESL students, whose English
proficiency is still developing, will naturally confront major difficulties in
trying to understand the terminology-heavy lectures as well as finding the most
effective language to note down important information. As Adamson (1990)
aptly explains, faced with the challenges of note taking, ESL learners often "had
to make a trade off between understanding what the teacher was saying and
taking notes" (p. 71), which inevitably led to partial comprehension of the
lectures.

   Leslie also had the experience of working with multimedia source texts in
her elective dance and design classes. In her dance class, she was asked to watch
short video clips that demonstrated key movements of certain styles of dancing,
and describe them in a written summary. As Leslie explained, the content of
the video was not particularly challenging, since the information presented in
a visual manner was straightforward enough for her to understand. Also, since
the key movements demonstrated by the dancers were quite obvious, she did
not experience much trouble identifying the major movements that characterize
a particular dance style. Yet, she still found the task quite demanding in that
it was difficult for her to transform the visual information that she obtained
from the video clips into written English. As she said in the interview, "I can
easily describe all the movements in speaking, but when you ask me to write
them down, everything is different." According to Leslie, she always had trouble
finding vivid words and phrases to describe the artistic dancing movements that
she saw in the video clips. Although she got full grades for all the reports, Leslie
believed that her summaries were inadequate in capturing the stylistic dancing
gestures. As an ESL writer who had taken several academic writing courses,
Leslie was still not confident of her ability to complete such summarization
tasks.

   For second language learners who are developing their English language
proficiency, the summarization task itself is already challenging enough; yet,
what these writers are expected to do in various disciplinary courses is often
more demanding. Although these participants were fairly satisfied with what
they had learned in the ESL writing program about summarization, they all
discussed how the information introduced in the writing courses is, as Gloria
puts it, "a little bookish," and does not transfer easily as they tackle disciplinary
summarization tasks based on a wide range of multimedia source texts. With
the increasing use of multimedia sources in disciplinary courses, the traditional
text-based summarization strategies commonly taught in ESL composition

                                                                                                123
Qian Du

courses, such as underlining key points, paraphrasing topic sentences, selecting
and omitting words from source texts, seem rather insufficient in helping L2
writers to achieve success in summarization tasks across the curriculum.

Extensive Use of Summarization as a Learning Tool

   Apart from relying on summarization skill to complete various source-
based writing assignments, the participants also used it extensively in their
studies as an effective way to organize information. Although the students were
majoring in different disciplines, they all had to read widely on diverse topics
in most courses. Yvonne, for example, was asked to read six books throughout
a quarter for her general education women's studies class. Lee, who was an
accounting major, often had to read thick textbooks in her major accounting
courses. Cherry, an architecture major, was expected to read theoretical articles
that explained the rationales behind the design of certain buildings. For
them, summarization became an indispensable tool to keep track of all the
information obtained from the heavy readings. According to the participants,
they were expected to differentiate between the main ideas and less important
details in most of the courses that they took. Although the professors might
not explicitly ask them to summarize the texts, quizzes were regularly used to
assess whether the students had read the required materials and understood the
most important points presented in them. Because of this implicit expectation,
the participants consciously employed summarization as a study aid to help
themselves distinguish between different levels of information. Lee, for example,
would take notes while reading her thick textbooks. After reading a page or so,
she would write down in her notebook what she considered as key points. To
save time, she chose not to compose paragraphs of summaries; rather, she used
bullet points to list the most important concepts introduced in the books. As
she explained in the interview, "In this way, I get to remember the knowledge
better, and I don't have to go back to the whole book when I need to look up
something." According to her, the summary notes were particularly helpful for
exam preparation, since she normally did not have sufficient time to go through
the thick textbooks again towards the end of a quarter when assignments and
tests started to pile up.

   Similarly, another participant, Carla, also actively used summarization in
her reading to take notes; yet, unlike Lee, Carla chose to write her notes down
on the margins of the texts. When she was preparing for the discussion sessions
of her human resources class, she wrote brief notes (both in English and her
native Chinese language) on the margins of the articles that she was assigned
to read. She also printed out discussion questions that were provided by the

124
                                                                                           Bridging the Gap

instructors and wrote down her short responses based on her summary notes.
For example, when answering the question "What policies could the firm or the
nation implement if they wanted women to lessen their specialization in home
production?" she jotted down several points ("provide same or more wages than
men; regulate their working time") based on her reading notes. As Carla said in
the interview, "I can understand the academic articles more clearly if I use my
own words to express the information. If I don't do this, I feel that I don't really
get what the authors want to say." As the cases of the participants demonstrate,
the skill of summarization permeates their undergraduate studies because
of the large amount of reading in which they are expected to engage. Even
though course instructors may not require them to summarize all the texts, the
participants still did so in their own ways in order to grasp the most important
points discussed in the texts. Gloria vividly explained her understanding of
the role that summarization plays in her disciplinary courses, "We always do
summarizing in various cases, but sometimes we do not even realize that."

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

   Based on the findings generated by this qualitative study, it is not
unreasonable to conclude that summarization skill does play an essential role in
L2 undergraduate students' academic literacy experiences across the disciplines.
Since most courses require students to work with source texts, summarization
is indispensable for learners to distinguish between the gist and less important
details. As the study has shown, summarization functioned as a prerequisite
skill for these ESL students to complete source-based assignments, such as
article critiques and reading responses. In a variety of courses, students were
also expected to work with non-traditional multimedia source texts and express
their ideas and perspectives accordingly. In addition, due to the large amount
of reading in which they were required to engage, the participants also used
summarization as a learning strategy that helped them to organize information
obtained from reading materials.

   In ESL writing courses, summary writing is often taught as a separate and
well defined genre: students are asked to read an article and produce a coherent
paragraph of summary. Because it is considered primarily a writing task, ESL
composition courses tend to focus more on the final product of the summaries,
highlighting the importance for writers to adopt an expected academic style in
their write-ups. In disciplinary courses, however, the emphasis of summarization
is placed on comprehension, and learners are expected to display an accurate
understanding of source texts. Accordingly, disciplinary course instructors

                                                                                                125
Qian Du

often do not pay much attention to the style in which the summaries were
written. Such a discrepancy in the emphasis of summarization in writing and
disciplinary courses may serve to explain why ESL students who have learned
about summary writing in composition courses still experience difficulties
while summarizing disciplinary texts. Although general knowledge covered in
writing courses helps L2 writers, who are often unfamiliar with summarization
conventions in English (Moore, 1997), to develop some understanding of the
task, it seems inadequate for the learners to deal with the often more complex
expectations in disciplinary courses regarding summarization.

   In order to best help ESL writers to cope with the diverse summarization
tasks in disciplinary courses, writing programs need to re-conceptualize
summarization as an essential literacy skill apart from teaching it as an
important genre. Considering the challenges that L2 writers encounter while
reading source texts, ESL writing courses need to place more emphasis on how
to interact with texts effectively. To prepare L2 learners for the large amount of
reading on various topics expected in disciplinary courses, L2 writing courses
also need to take into consideration the range of topics while choosing source
texts for summarization tasks. In addition, instead of using reading materials
(e.g. stories, newspaper articles) as the only type of source texts, writing courses
could incorporate multimedia sources and assist L2 writers to work with them.
For example, ESL writing courses could introduce note taking as a particular
type of summarization (Kirkland & Saunders, 1991), and help familiarize
learners with the situations where they are expected to shuttle between different
skills, such as listening and writing, or reading and writing. In addition, writing
instructors may need to spend more time teaching embedded summarization
to better prepare students for larger source-based assignments that require them
to express their opinions based on the summaries.

   As for instructors across the disciplines, it is important to develop the
awareness that ESL writers, who are still developing their language proficiency
in English and who are generally unfamiliar with disciplinary expectations
in the Anglophone academic context, often encounter major challenges and
difficulties as they work on summarization tasks. Instead of assuming that L2
learners have already developed sufficient reading skills to comprehend source
texts and a linguistic repertoire to explain the main points and substance of the
material, disciplinary instructors need to provide more specific guidance as they
assign summarization tasks. For example, course instructors could provide brief
reading guides that outline the general organization of the reading materials to
help L2 learners cope with the large amount of reading filled with disciplinary
terminologies and background knowledge. Also, worksheets that contain key
disciplinary vocabulary would also be beneficial for L2 writers to complete the

126
                                                                                           Bridging the Gap

write-up of the summaries. (These recommendations for instructor support
and guidance are similar to those given by Center & Niestepski [this volume]
in their chapter on L2 students' strategies for coping with the heavy reading
demands of their courses.) Although the focus of most disciplinary courses is
not on writing, explicit instruction about how to approach major writing tasks
is still needed to facilitate novice academic writers, L2 learners in particular, to
cope with varied disciplinary expectations across the curriculum.

REFERENCES

Adamson, H. D. (1990). ESL students' use of academic skills in content courses.
   English for Specific Purposes, 9, 67-87.

Baba, K. (2009). Aspects of lexical proficiency in writing summaries in a foreign
   language. Journal of Second Language Writing, 18, 191-208.

Basham, C., & Rounds, P. (1984). A discourse analysis approach to summary
   writing. TESOL Quarterly, 18, 527.

Bridgeman, B., & Carlson, S. (1984). Survey of academic writing tasks. Written
   Communication, 1(2), 247-280.

Casazza, M. (1993). Using a model of direct instruction to teach summary
   writing in a college reading class. Journal of Reading, 37(3), 202-208.

Cox, P., Bobrowski, P., & Maher, L. (2003). Teaching first-year business
   students to summarize: Abstract writing assignment. Business Communication
   Quarterly, 66(4), 36-54.

Davis, M., & Hult, R. (1997). Effects of writing summaries as a generative
   learning activity during note taking. Teaching of Psychology, 24(1), 47-49.

Day, J. (1986). Teaching summarization skills: Influences of student ability
   level and strategy difficulty. Cognition and Instruction, 3(3), 193-210.

Frey, N., Fisher, D., & Hernandez, T. (2003). "What's the gist?" Summary
   writing for struggling adolescent writers. Voices from the Middle, 11(2), 43-49.

Friend, R. (2001). Effects of strategy instruction on summary writing of college
   students. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 26, 3-24.

Glesne, C. (2006). Becoming qualitative researchers (3rd ed.). Boston, MA:
   Pearson Education.

Hale, G., Taylor, C., Bridgeman, B., Carson, J., Kroll, B., & Kantor, R. (1996).
   A study of writing tasks assigned in academic degree programs. Princeton, NJ:
   Educational Testing Service.

Hill, M. (1991). Writing summaries promotes thinking and learning across the
   curriculum-but why are they so difficult to write? Journal of Reading, 34(7),
   536-539.

                                                                                                127
Qian Du

Hood, S. (2008). Summary writing in academic contexts: Implicating meaning
   in processes of change. Linguistics and Education, 19, 351-365.

Johns, A. (1985). Summary protocols of "underprepared" and "adept" university
   students: Replications and distortions of the original. Language Learning,
   35(4), 495-511.

Johns, A. M., & Mayes, P. (1990). An analysis of summary protocols of
   university ESL students. Applied Linguistics, 11, 253-271.

Keck, C. (2006). The use of paraphrase in summary writing: A comparison of
   L1 and L2 writers. Journal of Second Language Writing, 15(4), 261-278.

Kim, S. (2001). Characteristics of EFL readers' summary writing: A study with
   Korean university students. Foreign Language Annals, 34(6), 569-581.

Kirkland, M. R., & Saunders, M. A. (1991). Maximizing students' performance
   in summary writing: Managing cognitive load. TESOL Quarterly, 25, 105-
   121.

Ko, M. (2009). Summary writing instruction and student learning outcomes.
   English Teaching, 64(2), 125-149.

Leki, I. (2007). Undergraduates in a second language: Challenges and complexities
   of academic literacy development. New York: Laurence Erlbaum Associates.

Moore, T. (1997). From text to note: Cultural variation in summarisation
   practices. Prospect, 12, 54-63.

Radmacher, S. A., & Latosi-Sawin, E. (1995). Summary writing: A tool to
   improve student comprehension and writing in psychology. Teaching of
   Psychology, 22(2), 113-115.

Rinehart, S. D., Stahl, S. A., & Erickson, L. G. (1986). Some effects of
   summarization training on reading and studying. Reading Research Quarterly,
   21(4), 422-438.

Rinehart, S. D., & Thomas, K. E. (1993). Summarization ability and text recall
   by novice studiers. Reading Research and Instruction, 32(4), 24-32.

Yang, L., & Shi, L. (2003). Exploring six MBA students' summary writing by
   introspection. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2, 165-192.

128
CHAPTER 5

ON CLASS, RACE, AND DYNAMICS
OF PRIVILEGE: SUPPORTING
GENERATION 1.5 WRITERS
ACROSS THE CURRICULUM

Kathryn Nielsen
Merrimack College

The purpose of this qualitative study was to better understand genera-
tion 1.5 student perceptions of WAC and writing faculty, their interac-
tions with white, native English speaking peers in the classroom, and
to hear ideas from them about ways to create more inclusive writing
practices and environments across the disciplines. The study found that
despite being valued for their diversity of thought and experience, these
multilingual students experienced discrimination both inside and out-
side the classroom. It is argued in this essay that in order to create and
maintain inclusive classrooms, instructors must also take into consid-
eration attitudes pertaining to the socioeconomic, racial, and linguistic
climate of their institution.

       Diversity must be couched within a context of institutional
       engagement, be driven by transformational leadership, be valued
       by the faculty community, and be experienced by all students as a
       core component of their educational experience.

              --James A. Anderson, Driving Change through Diversity and
                   Globalization: Transformative Leadership in the Academy

   Only thirty years ago, it would have been nearly impossible to locate
scholarship on multilingual, multicultural students' literacy and learning
experiences, yet the field has grown exponentially in the last decade and a
half. This surge of academic inquiry acknowledges that we are living in times
where technology and global migration patterns are changing the identities of

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.05                          129
Nielsen

neighborhoods, universities and workplaces. In higher education, teachers are
working to meet the needs of differing student populations in composition
and writing-in-the-disciplines classrooms with varying pedagogical approaches
and degrees of institutional support. For small colleges whose demographic
makeup has been predominantly white, monolingual, and monocultural, these
demographic changes present both opportunities and challenges.

   Such is the case at my home institution, a small liberal arts college in
the northeastern US, where the goals and objectives of an equity program
evolved from serving French-speaking Canadian hockey players to identifying,
admitting, and supporting talented bilingual students from the greater
surrounding community who are facing educational and financial difficulties.

   Recognizing the needs of a neighboring immigrant city struggling to provide
services for its growing Latino immigrant population, my institution created a
pathway for local generation 1.5 students to gain admission and scholarships
to the school. The admission of resident, immigrant multilingual, multicultural
newcomers resulted in increased need for support services across institutional
contexts, as well as highlighted the need for faculty development around
writing and teaching. In an effort to help us better understand the writing
needs of generation 1.5 students across the curriculum and to better support
the faculty who teach them, my research invokes the voices of five multilingual,
multicultural students from the Dominican Republic. The perceptions
discussed in this study represent the participants' initiation into living, learning,
and writing as a minority subculture within a predominantly white, affluent,
monolingual campus culture. This IRB-approved, action research study was
designed to explore multilingual writing experiences across the disciplines for
the purposes of assisting composition and WAC faculty in the context of my
institution. Pointedly, the results are not designed to be prescriptive; rather,
they are intended to help frame some of the issues that must be addressed in
order to achieve well-adapted, inclusive writing environments.

GENERATION 1.5 AT THE INTERSECTION
OF CLASS AND RACE

   The term generation 1.5 has come to represent a diverse range of multilingual,
immigrant learners who were born and educated outside the United States and
who enter the US educational system while in the process of learning English.
Because generation 1.5 students arrive with vastly different educational,
political, social and economic histories, it becomes imperative that researchers
and instructors broaden and deepen their understanding of their students'

130
                                                                       Supporting Generation 1.5 Writers

academic realities (Roberge, 2009). Generation 1.5 learners in higher education
may be traditionally-aged students between the ages of 18 and 22 or they may
draw from non-traditionally aged demographics. Generation 1.5 students are
highly differentiated in socioeconomic as well as documentation status (citizen,
resident--documented or undocumented, and refugee). While it is difficult
to secure accurate numbers for undocumented immigrant populations, the
sending countries have typically been Mexico, El Salvador, and Guatemala
(Louie, 2009). It is worth noting that contemporary immigration populations
draw from all socio-economic levels from unskilled to highly skilled labor;
however, there is a correlation between socioeconomic status and country of
origin, specifically:

         Immigrants from "low SES [socioeconomic status]" tend to
         be from the sending nations of the Dominican Republic, El
         Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Haiti, Laos, and Cambodia.
         At the other end of the immigrant spectrum are "high SES
         groups" from many Asian, African, European, and South
         American nations. (Louie, 2009, p. 38)

   According to a report by the Migration Policy Institute (2004), 82% of the
immigrant Dominican population resides in the Northeast where this study
was conducted; correspondingly, Dominican generation 1.5 students comprise
a majority of enrollment in area colleges' equity programs. The resulting factors
of low socioeconomic status such as underfunded schools, poverty, and crime,
as well as family and employment responsibilities can affect student success and
retention rates; as such, SES becomes an important consideration for WAC
educators and researchers trying to reconceptualize writing pedagogies for
immigrant learners in higher education

   Inquiry into understanding cultural and linguistic minority students'
experience with college and the subject of inclusion in higher education, in
particular, continues to proliferate across disciplinary boundaries (Hale, 2004;
Sheared, Johnson-Bailey, Colin, Peterson, Brookfield & Associates, 2010; ;
Sheared & Sissel, 2001; Watson et al., 2002). Watsonet al. (2002) contend that
the work of educating multilingual, multicultural minorities while expanding
White student and faculty cultural awareness and competence remains a
challenging one. However, in the fields of second language writing and WAC,
research on class, race, relations of power, and other equity issues remains scant.
In a study on the dynamic nature of identity formation among L2 writers
in a secondary context, Ortmeier-Hooper (2010) reveals how class and peer
dynamics influence the complex and difficult moves multilingual students make

                                                                                                131
Nielsen

in order to gain acceptance among peers and in group settings. Researching
the social class identity of three privileged second language writers whom the
author labels as "the new global elite," Vandrick (2010) examines how privilege
appears to mediate the effects of the deficit model, an attitude "so commonly
applied (consciously or unconsciously) to second language writers" (p. 258).
(See Fernandes' argument [this volume] for the need to rethink the curricula
of for-profit language schools who serve this population.) Kubota (2003)
corroborates the observation that the categories of race, class, and gender are
commonly overlooked in the field of second language writing, especially as they
apply to issues concerning positionality. In her article, Kubota highlights the
need for new, interdisciplinary approaches to race, class, and gender in second
language writing that move beyond locating rhetorical and linguistic differences
associated with second language writers and toward understanding the politics
behind inequality in specific contexts. In this regard, Roberge (2009) recognizes
that multilingual, immigrant students who arrive and live in the US with
lower socioeconomic status and whose "histories, experiences, and individual
needs don't match traditional institutional profiles" (p. 4) may face additional
challenges in terms of adaptation, identity formation, and marginalization. This
recognition resonates well with this study.

   As diversification trends continue to evolve across campuses nationwide,
researchers are beginning to openly discuss the politics behind the scholarly
and institutional silence on race and diversity that affects multilingual and
multicultural writers. Pointedly, Anson (2012) asserts that WAC scholars
have remained notably silent on issues concerning racial and ethnic diversity,
particularly as they apply to assessment practices. In a comprehensive literature
review focused on race and ethnicity, Anson broadens his claim to state that
WAC scholars either "skirt issues of race or ignore them entirely" (p. 18). But
it is precisely there, in the assumptions, forces, and barriers that underlie the
silence surrounding class, race, ethnicity, and linguistic inequality that the
conversation must begin. It is my sense that Hall (2009) is speaking to the issue
of inequality when he challenges WAC/WID faculty who often self-identify
as institutional change agents to work toward developing "differentiated
instruction methods so that both monolingual, English speakers and multilingual
learners simultaneously have a rich and satisfying classroom experience in the
same writing classroom" (emphasis in the original, p. 42). We must explore local
diversification trends, Hall asserts, as we begin to "rethink everything that we do
to meet the new realities that we face on our campuses and in our classrooms"
(2009, p. 42).

   Anson (2012) speaks plainly about the thorniness and unease of the
work ahead, as the journey involves addressing issues that commonly induce

132
                                                                       Supporting Generation 1.5 Writers

discomfort and illustrate our under preparedness, especially in predominantly
white, monolingual writing classrooms and campus environments. This study
describes the early stages of one faculty member's attempt to answer Hall's call
to action. By beginning a dialogue with immigrant multilingual writers on a
campus where their demographic status places them as a decided socioeconomic
and racial minority, I hope to better understand student perceptions of WAC
and writing faculty, their interactions with white, native English speaking
peers in the classroom, and to hear ideas from them about ways to create more
inclusive writing practices and environments across the disciplines.

   My research examines participant responses to a central question: How
do generation 1.5 students describe their writing experiences in the context
of a predominantly white, monolingual college? During the interview process,
which I'll describe shortly, the five Dominican participants were asked to de-
scribe their experiences as writers in the Introduction to College Writing (CW)
course and writing-intensive (WI) courses, with attention being paid to work-
ing with faculty and working with their peers. Other open-ended questions
included: With regard to improving your writing skills, what helped or hin-
dered you in your CW and WI courses? What did you find the most rewarding?
What did you find the most challenging? Given the lack of faculty development
and diversity training at the research institution, I was particularly interested in
hearing how these generation 1.5 students were faring.

METHODS

Setting

   The institution where this research occurred is situated on the grounds of
two affluent, predominantly white, suburban communities in the Northeast;
the institution also borders an urban city that has been the home of immi-
grants since the twentieth century and continues to be so today with 30.6%
of the population being foreign-born and where 28.2% of the population are
naturalized citizens.1 Further, the city is the "street" site for the majority of the
community projects that the college sponsors. Demographic statistics highlight
several marked differences among these neighboring cities. According to re-
cent census data for the immigrant city, the Hispanic or Latino population is
59.7% of its overall population and 34.3% of all households living below the
poverty line. Compare these statistics to the college's city census data where the
population is 93.7% white and 2.1% of the overall population live below the
poverty line. The college comprises mainly self-selected students who resonate

                                                                                                133
Nielsen

with the mission to "Enlighten minds, Engage Hearts, and Empower Lives."
The demographics of the student population also reflect those who can manage
the high cost of a small private college. Diversity data from 2010 show the larg-
est percentage of full-time students identified as "white non-Hispanic" (81%);
followed by "Race/ethnicity unknown" (12%); "Hispanic" (3%); "Asian/Pacific
Islander" (1.7%); "black non-Hispanic" (1.3%), and "American Indian/Alas-
kan Natives" (.1%). (See Cox [this volume] on the importance of understand-
ing local demographic contexts and student populations when planning WAC
faculty development and outreach around second-language writing across the
disciplines.)

Participants

   Utilizing Roberge's (2009) of generation 1.5 students as those who "immi-
grate as young children and have life experiences that span two or more coun-
tries, cultures, and language" (p. 4), I contacted the Academic Counselor for In-
ternational and Intercultural Students in order to generate as comprehensive list
of candidates as possible for the study. In this project, a homogeneous sampling
was chosen in order to describe a particular subgroup of learners and instruc-
tors in depth (Patton, 2002). In consultation with the academic counselor, 39
students were identified based on Roberge's definition and subsequently invited
to participate in this study. Sixteen students responded with interest; however,
only seven met the criteria I'd set for the study, which included enrollment in
the equity program, arrival time to the US, and completion of both Introduc-
tion to College Writing and a Writing Intensive (WI) course in the disciplines,
which all students must take as an institutional requirement. Introduction to
College Writing (CW) is typically taken in a student's first or second semester
of freshman year; and a writing course in the disciplines with a writing intensive
(WI) designation, can be taken at any point prior to graduation.2 The seven
students who met these qualifications were invited to participate in the study;
five accepted the invitation.

   The five participants in this study are traditionally aged, male and female,
generation 1.5 students between the ages of 19 and 22 who emigrated from
the Dominican Republic to the US between the seventh and eighth grades.
In middle school, they were placed in an immersion program that included
bilingual classrooms, as well as in ESL courses focused on English language
development. It is relevant to note that the institution's equity program partners
primarily with one neighboring high school; as such, the participants are drawn
from the same secondary institution, which has a predominantly Hispanic,
immigrant student population. Specifically, participants attended a public high

134
                                                                       Supporting Generation 1.5 Writers

school where the student population was 88.2% Hispanic (largely Dominican
and Puerto Rican), and resided in a city showing a median household income of
$25,983. Their success in high school was recognized by their acceptance to an
equity scholarship program at my institution where the city median household
income is $116,723. As Hispanics, they would represent 3% of the college's
student population. All participants were enrolled as full-time, matriculated
students who were taking four, four-credit courses each semester. All five
participants worked part-time jobs.

Instruments

   Using standardized, open-ended questions, I conducted two in-depth, taped
and transcribed interviews with each of the participants.

    Interview One: Focused Life History. (Centered on the participant's back-
       ground including immigration history, culture, prior education, family,
       and language acquisition. Students filled out and submitted their respons-
       es to a questionnaire to me ahead of the first interview. See Appendix A.)

    Interview Two: The Details of Lived Experience. (Follow-up centered on
       present experiences in first-year writing and writing across the disciplines.)

   During the interviews I noted that the participants seemed to struggle to
arrive at specific suggestions for improvements faculty could make in their
teaching and classroom management. I suspected that either the participants
needed more time to form a response and/or they were reluctant to share
with me, a white primarily monolingual faculty member. As a result, I wrote
individually to the students via email and revisited the question: "What could
writing and writing intensive instructors do to improve your experience as a
multilingual writer and student?" Four of the five students responded. I read
through the transcriptions and written responses during the first stage of the
analysis process to get a holistic sense of the participants' responses. As I moved
closely through the data, I noted emerging themes in the margins that related
to the central research question and reflected on these in my research journal.
For a second analytic, I utilized a general accounting scheme for codes that were
not content specific, but instead pointed to categories for which codes could
be inductively developed (Miles & Huberman, 1994). The remainder of the
coding process during data analysis followed Creswell's (2008) six-step process
where codes changed, decayed, were eliminated, and reduced. Following that
format, two main themes emerged in their responses.

   The first theme I discuss in this chapter focuses on participants' perceptions
of how they are viewed by faculty at the research institution. The second
theme presents participants' perceptions of working with white, native English

                                                                                                135
Nielsen

speakers (NES) in the writing classroom. Findings for these two themes include
participants feeling valued for their diversity of thought and experience in the
classroom by their writing and writing intensive instructors; the pedagogical
practices that signaled inclusive attitudes from their instructors and which served
to better support their writing and learning, and, conversely, discriminatory
behaviors and practices from instructors and peers that served to distance them
from their writing and campus learning experiences.

PARTICIPANT PERCEPTIONS OF FACULTY ATTITUDES

   Based on a two-year study of generation 1.5 writing experiences, Goen-
Salter, Porter, and vanDommelen (2009) concluded that it is critical for
writing instructors to inquire about students' educational backgrounds and
literacy and language experiences, as well to provide opportunities for students
to comfortably describe them. While their study focused primarily on ESL
and first year composition courses, this conclusion is just as relevant to WAC
instructors as can be seen in the student responses to my question about how
students felt faculty perceived their cultural and linguistic backgrounds. All five
participants in my study expressed feeling as though they brought a different
perspective to CW and WI courses across the disciplines that was recognized
and appreciated by faculty. The students stated that, when choosing topics to
research, offering peer feedback, and participating in classroom activities, they
brought diverse interests and perspectives to the experience that were valued by
the faculty. One participant said, "I think the teacher likes reading my papers
because they are different from white students, because most of the time I write
about my culture." Another offered, "I feel like my life experiences have been
different than the typical [culturally and linguistically dominant] student. I feel
like instructors saw the potential in me and my ideas, what I was bringing to
the table." She continued with the following example:

         I have been doing research about immigration because that
         is what I know the most about from my personal experience
         and from my research on the topic, often times I am able to
         offer/add an insightful idea about the subject. Continuously,
         I lead towards topics that interest me and that I am in most
         interaction with daily. My classmates are not exposed to the
         things I am exposed to as a bilingual, minority student here;
         therefore, we do not write about the same things.

136
                                                                       Supporting Generation 1.5 Writers

(See Hirsch [this volume] for a discussion of designing writing assignments that
allow L2 students to draw on cultural knowledge and make connections to daily
life, and see Phillips [this volume] for a description of a graduate student who
found similar success by drawing on experience and knowledge from his home
culture.) Another described her passion for writing, her love of reading, and
how hard she is willing to work as real strengths that her teachers recognized.
All five participants said that it was their grammar that caused them the most
difficulty with writing, not their ideas.

   I asked the participants if their CW and WI instructors inquired about their
literacy history in class, during their individual conferences, or in a survey; all
five responded no, but each of them assumed that their professors knew that
they were not native English speakers owing to their accents and/or ethnicity.
One participant stated:

         My instructor did not know my literacy history. She might
         have noticed because of my grammatical errors. I think that
         she might have noticed that I wasn't black because one of
         my papers was about the DR and stuff. My writing might be
         accented. I believe it is. My writing is different from other
         [student] writings that I have read. I don't know. I have an
         accent in speaking. I would have to say I write with an accent
         because I write like I talk.

   Another participant said, "If it weren't for my accent, I think I'd be okay."
Another smiled before alluding to her WI professor's knowing that she was not
a member of the dominant student population: "I mean when I speak I don't
sound like a white girl's [speech]. I don't sound like Paris Hilton, for example!"
The same student added, "At first I was not comfortable doing presentations
because I was self-conscious of my accent." Another participant discussed how
an incident that occurred out of the classroom affected her sense of confidence
in the classroom:

         I had a bad experience but that started out of class, you
         know. It was on Facebook and everywhere. They said that I
         couldn't speak English. It's the accent, you know, [it] makes
         it hard to be confident in class and to share your words. I was
         in shock at our first orientation. Everyone was just staring at
         you when you speak like they understood nothing. The white
         kids are more confident in class.

                                                                                                137
Nielsen

While no interview question discussed "writing with an accent" or specified the
words "accent," "ethnicity," or "race," three of the five students perceived one or
more of the latter as identifying markers of being a linguistic, cultural minority
in the WI classroom.

   When discussing their writing experiences, all five participants indicated
that CW and WI faculty were willing to make accommodations for them,
such as giving them opportunities for additional individualized meetings and
modifying assignments in order to address their specific writing needs. (In this
volume, Zawacki & Habib also share findings that indicate that faculty are often
willing to make accommodations for L2 students, and Hirsch demonstrates
that the scaffolding inherent in writing-intensive pedagogy can also work to
provide similar support. ) Pointedly, all participants cited one-to-one contact
time with their instructors as critical to their success. Individual conferencing
has been established as a core pedagogical approach to meeting the needs of
linguistically diverse writers, although it can place considerable demands on
the instructor (Reynolds, Bae, & Wilson, 2009). In addition to benefiting the
writing process in general, Watson et al. (2002) cite that for minority students
on predominantly white campuses, faculty/student relationships remain "one
of the most effective predictors of student outcomes" (p. 79). During the
interviews, the students reported that both their CW and WI instructors made
time or were willing to meet with them individually to discuss their writing,
which they valued; all participants agreed that conferencing with faculty helped
them to understand the assignments better and to improve their writing. One
participant explained that her WI instructor "worked with me one-on-one for
every paper I wrote. She worked with me directly, so I got a lot better in that
class, and I learned how to write better." Another participant described one
way that his (WI) math instructor worked to individualize a reflective writing
assignment:

         I had to write two papers for my math class. So bad. She gave
         us theories. It was abstract math. We had to think of problem
         solving math, not normal number problems and we would
         write and it was really long, really extensive and I thought, "I
         can't do this." So the professor said if you draw me a picture
         of what the writing was, I'll give you that grade. I drew the
         picture, and she liked it. She was showing people the picture.
         It wasn't a research paper; it was a reflective paper, like a page.
         Writing the paper wasn't that bad. Putting it together was the
         problem. I gave her what the reading was about in the draw-
         ing--the main theories. I think she framed it and put it in

138
                                                                       Supporting Generation 1.5 Writers

         the math center. She told me she was going to do that.

   While it's unclear whether this accommodation fit into the WI course
objectives or the purpose of the writing assignment in particular, the
modification did serve to reduce this student's anxiety. During the interview,
the participant's response and demeanor demonstrated a felt connection to his
learning experience. This connection instilled a sense of confidence that he had
not only met the assignment goals, but that his work was valued and respected
by his instructor.

   In terms of working with faculty, all respondents cited not fully
understanding the assessment practices of their instructors, which they felt was
an added challenge to them as cultural and linguistic minorities. (See Zawacki
& Habib [this volume] for faculty perspectives on evaluating and grading L2
students' writing.) Participants differed in how they described these assessment
practices. Despite meeting with their professors and despite expressing feeling
that their writing was improving, all participants shared frustration at seldom
earning a higher grade than a B on most assignments. One student offered
that in her CW course she could "never get an A on a paper. I'd have to rewrite
it a lot. I always talked to the instructor about what I could do, and she saw
my effort--but never an A." Another participant said that some faculty would
help her; however, there was one instructor who "didn't get it." She recalled an
incident that occurred in her WI psychology course when, after turning in her
paper, she was called to meet with the instructor. The instructor informed her
that the writing that she turned in was "too good." The participant interpreted
this to mean that the instructor was calling her a cheater, although plagiarism
was not specifically mentioned in their meeting. She went on to explain that she
had worked extensively on the paper over the course of the semester; in fact, the
paper was an extension of a shorter paper that she had started in another course
and was a topic that she'd been interested in pursuing in-depth. She explained
that this professor had only seen one other piece of her writing at the beginning
of the semester--a brief reflection paper. As a result, the participant concluded
that she had been judged inappropriately, especially in light of the professor's
limited knowledge of her writing.

WORKING WITH CULTURALLY AND
LINGUISTICALLY DOMINANT PEERS

   In questioning participants about experiences involving group, collaborative,
and peer review writing activities in their CW and WI courses, participants

                                                                                                139
Nielsen

were asked about their perceptions and levels of comfort in working with
linguistically and culturally dominant English L1 peers. In the majority of
responses, participants referred to their CW course where peer review occurred
regularly throughout the semester. While peer review may or may not be
pedagogically central to WI courses, the participant's experiences offer insights
for WI faculty who choose to assign collaborative activities or use peer review.
Participants regularly measured their language skills in relation to their white,
English L1 peers and viewed the classroom as a competitive environment. For
example, one participant mentioned competition explicitly:

         I want to compete with the other students in the class. Not
         so much for the teacher, I mean I know what the teachers
         like, but I would like to be much better than my classmate
         than for my teacher to like it. I think it's definitely because
         of the second language. I mean because I write in a second
         language it makes me like want to be better. I have to try
         harder to be better. It has to do with me having to struggle in
         high school to learn English. I want to do extremely better.
         It's nice to get a great grade. I need to know that I did well,
         or as well as the other students. Or better would be good. It's
         just me trying to prove myself. I didn't have that when I was
         in high school. It only started when I came here.

Another participant concurred, "You're competing to gain approval. You feel
you have to stand out." One participant reported that her lived experience as
a bilingual minority directly informed the topics she commonly researched,
which placed her "in a position of advantage." She added, "and that reduces my
reader's critical point of view when reading my work." (See also Phillips [this
volume] for a graduate student's perspective on how writing about knowledge
gained from living in multiple nations and cultures gave him an advantage
when seeking peers for a group project.)

   Two participants expressed feeling comfortable during peer review even
when they were the only multilingual writer in the class. One specifically
preferred working with dominant students:

         I prefer to work with a native English speaker [during peer
         review]. I had that class [CW] with my roommate, and he
         had no grammatical errors ever. Nothing like me. So I don't
         think he would mind [working with a non-native writer]. I
         can offer the native students ideas. But that wasn't done at

140
                                                                       Supporting Generation 1.5 Writers

         the time. Only grammar. But we would talk about our papers
         all the time in the beginning.

The same participant expressed feeling discouraged, however, when seeing how
many grammatical errors were present in his writing in comparison to other
students' writing:

         My college writing was really, I mean sometimes I felt kinda
         weird because my writings had a lot of grammatical errors.
         Other people writing was like perfect. We had to put an X
         on sentences that had grammatical errors, and the paper that
         I got back were full of Xs. Others was almost perfect or with
         one X. I would definitely know how to fix the X, but it was
         discouraging.

   One participant expressed frustration with working with a white, NES,
student whose lack of response to the content of her writing left her feeling
confused and distanced:

         I remember one time I was reading this guy's paper, and
         we were talking about the same thing ... something about
         an event in your life ... something that changed you. I
         was writing about my grandmother dying, and how I was
         watching my mother cry. It was a true story. And he was
         writing about when his grandfather died and how his father
         was going through that pain. So we were writing about the
         same thing, but we read our papers, and there was nothing
         there, and I got no feedback from him. No reaction, really
         dry. Maybe we needed more time, but for me it was one of
         those or maybe it could be something we worked together
         and feed each other ideas, but no response. I said, Oh, we're
         basically writing about the same thing, and he didn't say
         anything. I was taken off guard. I didn't know what to think
         of it, so I like pulled back.

   In their responses, participants recalled tacitly comparing their writing to
that of their NES peers during peer review. During one peer review session when
a dominant student did not offer any response to one participant's writing, the
participant indicated feeling that the dominant student was likely judging her:
"[Maybe] he thought my paper wasn't as good. He was thinking, how can this

                                                                                                141
Nielsen

girl be in this writing course with me? There is no comparison level. I don't
know. I couldn't say anything because I don't know what he was thinking."

   One participant reported on collaborative experiences with majority
students that left him feeling marginalized:

         I had to deal with some students that were afraid that I
         could bring their grades down or that I would not be able to
         carry my load during a group presentation or lab projects.
         Sometimes students will ask me to take the easiest part or
         give me the least amount of time to present, which I was
         always against. I believe that every student in the group
         should have the same amount of responsibility and the same
         amount of time to present regardless of their abilities. How
         can you change this?

(Phillips [this volume] reports on a graduate student's similar experiences of
being marginalized by English L1 group members when they worked on a
collaborative project. See Cox [this volume] for advice for faculty on structuring
peer review that avoids some of the problems described by the L2 students here.)

   All participants made connections between their classroom experiences with
writing and the attitudes of majority students inside and outside the classroom.

         They have told me that the numbers have gone up for
         diversity. I feel okay being in class as a minority. It's not that
         bad. I've heard a lot of stories about people treating other
         people bad because of their ethnicity in the classroom. Not
         by the teacher, but by other students. Um, I think it's more
         the attitude of the students. One of my friends was speaking
         Spanish in my writing class to another person and another
         person said, "Shut up. Don't talk Spanish in front of me
         because it's disrespectful." It was before the class started. It
         wasn't during class time. It was about disrespect to the other
         student. It's an attitude thing.

The participant shook his head while telling this story. I asked him if the
stories of other multilingual students affected him in working with white, NES
students. He posited:

         I would say that some of the stories affect me, but I try to
         not have any feelings like that during classroom. I know they

142
                                                                       Supporting Generation 1.5 Writers

         feel more comfortable with their group. Like if I'm here and
         there's a white girl here and a white guy here that she would
         prefer to talk to him in class discussion because they're more
         comfortable. That happens in the classroom. Everywhere.

One participant offered the following example of an interaction with majority
students outside the classroom that affected her sense of self-worth and
negatively affected her learning:

         One day last semester I was having lunch with an
         administrator and other students who were part of a
         leadership training. One student asked the VP what were
         they going to do with the academic levels of the incoming
         students. The student went on saying that when sitting in
         class some of these classmates asked questions that makes him
         think, "How can this kid be in class with me?" Apparently,
         he feels some of his classmates are not smart enough to
         be in class with him. Certainly me and other multilingual
         students felt uncomfortable with his comment, and he later
         apologized. The point is that this comment affected me
         because I feel uncomfortable when my fellow classmates think
         less of me for having less knowledge or being less smart than
         they are. It discourages me to express an opinion, and it could
         lead to lower self-esteem and self-doubt. The multilingual
         student knows a lot about other different things that his
         fellow [dominant] classmates do not know about.

   The feelings of continuously being judged by and against the cultural and
linguistic majority and needing to perform better than the NES students were
not uncommon experiences for the students in this study. One participant
stated that she felt WI faculty were also likely comparing their writing to that of
their NES peers. She offered the following;

         The professor knew I knew the material, it's just the way I
         was writing it down didn't sound like the person next to me.
         Um, so that happened in that class and again this semester in
         another course where I had to write papers.

   All participants emphasized the need for faculty to do more to raise the
cultural awareness of the linguistic and cultural majority students on campus

                                                                                                143
Nielsen

within the context of the classroom. Additionally, and across all interviews,
students placed an enormous value on open discussions of one's culture. One
participant articulated, "I think informing, educating others about the issues
we encounter as minorities through discussion and lectures by experts on the
topic would help." One respondent acknowledged that some WI faculty are
working to raise student awareness of cultural differences by introducing inter/
cross cultural topics into their coursework:

         It depends on the type of professor you have. In (WI)
         psychology my professor was from the Middle East, and he
         put in a lot of cultural things. He said that culture has an
         effect on psychology, and he would bring videos from other
         cultures and that had a big impact on class and the topics
         students could consider writing about.

   Another participant felt that majority and minority students needed
more opportunities to interact with one another on campus. She surmised
that increasing interactions would help to engage students more fully in the
classroom by reducing apprehension, increasing participation, and would serve
to draw upon the strengths of all students:

         I believe that if students were given the opportunity to
         develop an open mind through interaction with the different
         ethnic groups on campus, students in general will have
         a chance of speaking up, of not shying away from all the
         opportunities presented to them, and of understanding the
         differences each and every one of us as students bring into
         a classroom. If students do not learn to accept, listen, and
         appreciate what the classmate is sharing, chances are that
         by the end of the day, a student will not learn to appreciate
         where each of us come from and thus will never understand
         that a classroom is not only composed of an instructor's
         teachings, but of the knowledge every individual brings forth
         in a shared community ... a diversified classroom.

IMPLICATIONS

   While the findings from this study reflect a relatively small sample of
students, they provide needed insight into the experiences of resident,

144
                                                                       Supporting Generation 1.5 Writers

multilingual writers who are navigating predominantly White, monolingual,
socioeconomically privileged classrooms and campuses. I was surprised yet
heartened to hear that the students overwhelmingly felt their instructors
valued the diversity of thought and experience they brought in the classroom,
especially in light of the fact that the instructors did not formally inquire about
their cultural and linguistic backgrounds. However, the findings also suggest
that these multilingual students experience discrimination, particularly in
relation to their written accent, from peers and instructors, in relation to peer
review and group work, assessment practices, and in the social dynamics of the
classroom. Sue (2010) calls these "microaggressions," which he defines as "the
brief and commonplace daily verbal, behavioral, and environmental indignities,
whether intentional or unintentional, that communicate hostile, derogatory,
or negative racial, gender, sexual-orientation, and religious slights and insults
to the target person or group" (p. 5). These microaggressions (to which I
would add "class") can have damaging consequences. The findings that center
on discriminatory attitudes and behaviors in this study are particularly and
more holistically troublesome when one considers that the institution partners
with the neighboring immigrant city (where the generation 1.5 students draw
from) for the dual purposes of providing community service and assistance and
transformative learning opportunities for its undergraduate students. Ultimately,
the participants in this study reported feeling, at times, alienated and distanced
from the majority demographic based on perceived attitudes about difference,
attitudes which could potentially affect their writing development considering
that participants reported pulling back or being marginalized during peer
and group writing activities. And the consequences are not limited to writing
development; they also work to deny educational opportunities not only for
the immigrant, multilingual writers in the classroom, but also for the white,
monolingual majority.

   Discovering the best practices for working with multilingual and
multicultural writing students in a globalized educational context cannot
focus solely on the multilingual students themselves. It must also include
increasing the cultural and linguistic awareness of white faculty, students,
and administrators and developing inclusive pedagogical practices. The five
generation 1.5 student voices in this study support this argument. Sociocultural
theorists posit that, increasingly, students "see themselves as the `portfolio' of
their experiences and achievements, gained through experience inside, and more
and more importantly, outside of school" (Gee, 2001, p. 120). The student
participants' responses support this connection between the campus climate
around diversity and their in-class writing experiences. Correspondingly, WAC/
WID professionals can benefit from understanding the impact of a hostile

                                                                                                145
Nielsen

campus climate on multilingual, multicultural students as they work to create
and maintain welcoming, inclusive, and safe writing classrooms across the
disciplines. The generation 1.5 student responses in this study suggest potential
places to begin:

   1. Ask about student literacy histories in writing and writing-intensive
       classrooms.

   2. Develop ways to individualize course curricula, assignments, and peda-
       gogical practices based on these histories.

   3. Frame peer review practices to include discussions of accented voice
       (both oral and written), appropriation,3 and the cultures of silence.4

   4. Imbed one-to-one conferencing time into the syllabus or semester plan-
       ning in order to individually talk about current writing experiences.

   5. Develop assessment practices that acknowledge cultural and linguistic
       diversity.

   6. Commit to understanding the cultural, linguistic, and socioeconomic
       climate on campus as well as increasing personal cultural awareness, es-
       pecially as it applies to one's own institutional context.

At my institution, we are in the beginning stages of designing a series of ongoing
faculty workshops and brown-bag lunches for the purpose of addressing these
very issues.

   According to Watson et al. (2002), existing research on linguistic and cultural
minority students' experiences on predominantly white campuses exposes the
tenuous nature of the relationships that minority students share with their non-
minority faculty and fellow students. The causes of strained interactions and
relationships are varied but appear to center on "a lack of critical mass of minority
students, harassment based on ethnic [and/or linguistic] identification, curricula
that imply assimilation as the only measure of success, low expectations from
professors, social events and hangouts that are off limits, and negative attitudes
from labeling and placement" (p. 70). Additionally, Louie (2009) points out
low SES students may also face dominant majority concerns that "immigration
will alter our language (witness the English-only movement) and debates about
whether immigrants serve as a benefit to or drain on the nation's economy" (p.
38). The responses provided by the generation 1.5 participants in this study are
consistent with many of the concerns articulated in the literature cited above
and point to the need for critical, transformative, and emancipatory research
that addresses how issues of class and race affect multilingual writers.

   Writing is fundamentally a social act, and because we ask students to work
collaboratively in our classrooms and to meet our expectations for their writing,
it is imperative that we consider the implications of class, race, and language in
these requests with a grounded knowledge of the local institutional setting and

146
                                                                       Supporting Generation 1.5 Writers

the students' experiences. Secondary research such as that I've presented here
can also help us understand better our multilingual, multicultural students.
Hall posits that the future of WAC "is indissolubly tied to the ways in which
higher education will have to, willingly or unwillingly evolve in the wake of
globalization in response to the increasing linguistic diversity of our student
population" (p. 34). It is my belief that the success of all our students will
depend on our commitment to addressing issues of equality and fairness in
both our classrooms and campus environments.

NOTES

1. References to demographic and institutional data have been reported with-
out citation in order to maintain anonymity for the institution and study
participants.
2. My institution does not have a formal WAC program; instead, a well-fund-
ed writing center and writing fellows program provide support for faculty and
student writers. Once students are admitted to the college, there are no lan-
guage placement exams; correspondingly, CW is the sole credit-bearing, first-
year writing course option--there are no basic, ESL, blended or linked course
options offered. All CW and WI courses have enrollment caps of 15.
3. References to demographic and institutional data have been reported with-
out citation in order to maintain anonymity for the institution and study
participants.
4. Paulo Freire (1972) referred to cultures of silence as places where voices of
oppressed groups were marginalized. He sought pedagogies that served to trans-
form environments where such marginalization persisted.
5. Adapted from pp. 238-240 of Goen-Salter, Porter, and vanDommelen
(2009).

REFERENCES

Anderson, J. A. (2008). Driving change through diversity and globalization:
   Transformative leadership in the academy. Sterling, VA: Stylus.

Anson, C. (2012). Black holes: Writing across the curriculum, assessment, and
   the gravitational invisibility of race. In A. B. Inoue & M. Poe (Eds.), Race
   and writing assessment (pp. 15-28). New York: Peter Lang.

Creswell, J. W. (2008). Educational research. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Freire, P. (1972). Cultural action for freedom. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.

                                                                                                147
Nielsen

Gee, J. P. (2001). Identity as an analytic lens for research in education. Review
   of Research in Education, 25, 99-119.

Goen-Salter, S., Porter, P., & vanDommelen, D. (2009). Working with gen-
   eration 1.5 pedagogical principles and practices. In M. Roberge, M. Sie-
   gal, & L. Harklau (Eds.), Generation 1.5 in college composition: Teaching
   academic writing to US-educated learners of ESL (pp. 235-259). New York:
   Routledge.

Hale, F. W. (2004). What makes racial diversity work in higher education. Ster-
   ling, VA: Stylus.

Hall, J. (2009). WAC/WID in the next America: Re-thinking professional
   identity in the age of the multilingual majority. WAC Journal, 20, 33-47.

Kubota, R. (2003). New approaches to gender, class, and race in second lan-
   guage writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 31-47.

Louie, V. (2009). The education of the 1.5 generation from an international
   migration framework: Demographics, diversity, and difference. In M. Rob-
   erge, M. Siegal, & L. Harklau (Eds.), Generation 1.5 in college composition:
   Teaching academic writing to US-educated learners in ESL (pp. 35-49). New
   York: Routledge.

Migration Policy Institute. (2004). The Dominican population in the United
   States: Growth and distribution. Retrieved from http://www.migrationpolicy.
   org/pubs/MPI_Report_Dominican_Pop_US.pdf

Miles, M. B. & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis (2nd ed.).
   Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Ortmeier-Hooper, C. (2010). The shifting nature of identity: Social identity,
   L2 writers, and high school. In M. Cox, J. Jordan, C. Ortmeier-Hooper, &
   G. G. Schwartz (Eds.), Reinventing identities in second language writing (pp.
   5-28). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods (3rd ed.).
   Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Reynolds, D., Bae, K-H, & Wilson, J. (2009). Generation 1.5 in college compo-
   sition: Teaching academic writing to US-educated learners in ESL. New York:
   Routledge.

Roberge, M. (2009). A teacher's perspective on generation 1.5. In M. Roberge,
   M. Siegal, & L. Harklau (Eds.), Generation 1.5 in college composition: Teach-
   ing academic writing to US-educated learners in ESL (pp. 3 -24). New York:
   Routledge.

Sheared, V., Johnson-Bailey, J., Colin, III, S., Peterson, E., & Brookfield, S.D.
   (2010). The handbook of race and adult education. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Sheared, V., & Sissel, P.A. (2001). Making space: Merging theory and practice in
   adult education. Westport, CT: Bergin and Garvey.

148
                                                                       Supporting Generation 1.5 Writers

Sue, D. W. (2010). Microaggressions in everyday life. Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley &
   Sons.

Vandrick, S. (2010). Social class privilege among ESOL writing students. In M.
   Cox, J. Jordan, C. Ortmeier-Hooper, & G. G. Schwartz (Eds.), Reinventing
   identities in second language writing (pp. 257-272). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Watson, L. W., Wright, D., Terrell, M., et al. (2002). How Minority Students
   Experience College: Implications for Policy and Practice. Sterling, VA: Stylus
   Publishers.

APPENDIX: STUDENT SURVEY QUESTIONS5

Your Student Information
   Name:
   Email:
   Phone Number:
   Class level: Freshman Sophomore Junior Senior Other:
   What is your major?
   How many credit hours are you taking this semester?
   Are you a Massachusetts resident or an out of state student?
   Are you working this semester? If so, how many hours per week?
   Where were you born?
   When did you arrive to the US?
   When did you start school in the US?

Your Family Information
   What language(s) does your father speak? Mother?
   What language(s) does your father write? Mother?
   What is the highest level of education your father received? Mother?
   What langue does your family use at home? At work?
   Do they use more than one language at home? At work?
   Do you have brothers and sisters? What are their ages?
   Where do they live and with whom?
   What languages do you use with your brothers and sisters?
   Do you/your parents or relatives visit your home country? How often?
   How often do you/they call your relatives in your home country?
   How often do your relatives come to visit you in the US?
   How long do they stay here?

Your College Reading and Writing Experiences
   What writing or English courses have you taken at this school?
   Who were your instructors?

                                                                                                149
Nielsen

   What writing or English courses have you taken at other schools over the
   past few years?
   What Writing Intensive course did you take?
   Who was your instructor?
   Have you worked with a writing fellow before? If so, in what class?
   Have you worked with a tutor in the Writing Center?
   How often would you say you visit the Writing Center?
Your Language Background
   How long have you been speaking English?
   How long have you been reading English?
   How long have you been writing English?
   What language(s) do you speak in addition to English?
   Do you read and write in another language? If so, which one(s)?
   What language would you consider your "home" language(s)?
   What's your strongest language for listening and speaking? (Check one)
   English ______ My other language(s)________Both (all) are strong_____
   What's your strongest language for reading and writing? (Check one)
   English______ My other language(s)_________Both (all) are strong______
   Do you read for pleasure? If so, what and in what language(s)? For example,
   books, magazines, newspapers, other media?
   Do you write for pleasure? If so what do you write and in what language(s)?
   For example, poetry, music, journals, social media (Facebook, MySpace,
   blogging) short stories, letters etc.

150
CHAPTER 6

WRITING INTENSIVELY:
AN EXAMINATION OF THE
PERFORMANCE OF L2 WRITERS
ACROSS THE CURRICULUM AT AN
URBAN COMMUNITY COLLEGE

Linda Hirsch
Hostos Community College, CUNY

Using both qualitative and quantitative measures, a WAC Coordina-
tor examines the academic performance of ESL students in Writing
Intensive (WI) classes at an urban community college. Drawing on
comparisons of pass/fail rates and grades of ESL students in WI sections
and non-WI sections of the same course, Hirsch reveals higher pass
rates and greater retention for ESL students in WI sections. To con-
textualize and amplify the quantitative findings, Hirsch analyzes two
WI syllabi from WI sections available to ESL learners to identify the
pedagogical practices which may have contributed to student success.
She concludes that ESL students can benefit from and succeed in WI
classes that provide pedagogical supports including scaffolded writing
assignments, informal writing-to-learn activities which recognize con-
nections between reading and writing, models for writing, instructor
feedback, opportunities for revision, practice in oral language develop-
ment, and faculty open to addressing their needs.

I study, and I think I got the intelligence what is with this, but it's
too much. And without help ... I can read, but I need three days.
I need some few days to understand this work and compare with
my dictionary. --Astrubal, ESL student enrolled in Introduction
to Business (Hirsch, 1986, 1988)

I have to read [Dewey's chapter] twice because when I read first
time I don't understand. I'm lost ... My questions is I'm not sure

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.06                        151
Hirsch

       if [Dewey] believe in science or he just believe in philosophy ...
       Because I'm not sure ....

                        --Neha, ESL student enrolled in Introduction to
                             Philosophy WI (Fishman & McCarthy, 2001).

   Though decades apart, the voices of the English-as-a-Second Language
(ESL)1 students above reverberate, reminding us of the seemingly intractable
hurdles they must overcome on their quest to academic success. This quest is
only intensifying with increasing numbers of students entering our campuses
with native languages other than English. The impetus to mainstream ESL stu-
dents into English-language content courses has quickened over the last de-
cade with more and more of these students finding themselves sitting alongside
native speakers of English (NES) in college classes. Today ESL students will
not only be enrolled in a college-level content course taught in English, but
they may also be taking writing-intensive (WI) courses as part of a Writing
Across the Curriculum (WAC) program. Since their start in the 1970s, WAC
programs have proliferated with substantial growth over the past twenty years.
Thaiss and Porter (2010) report that since the previous nationwide survey of
WAC/WID undertaken in 1987, the presence of such programs in the US has
increased by one-third. But how much do we know about their effects and ef-
fectiveness on the academic performance of second-language (L2) learners? In
her comprehensive review of the literature on ESL students in WAC programs
and WAC scholarship, Cox (2010) notes that few studies exist on the experi-
ences of L2 writers in courses designated as WI and that WAC research, until
quite recently, has not addressed the issue of supporting these students in WAC
programs. Research on the impact of WAC programs on community college
students is even more limited (Gardner, 2010), perhaps owing to the smaller
presence of WAC programs on community college campuses as compared to
other higher education institutions (Thaiss & Porter, 2010).

   With many campuses implementing such programs along with their con-
comitant requirements of more complex and genre-specific writing, the de-
mand for academic language proficiencies has become even greater. A num-
ber of second language and WAC researchers (Leki, 1995; Zamel, 1995; and
Zawacki & Habib, 2010) have provided us over the years with voices of ESL
students as they describe the tensions inherent in their attempts to negotiate the
differing linguistic demands of courses across the curriculum. Their narratives
reveal that ESL students in WAC programs have more than writing to worry
about. The transition from an ESL class to academic classes in English is a huge
leap in the complexity of material to be comprehended and the corresponding

152
                                                                                         Writing Intensively

linguistic and cognitive proficiencies required. The multi-competencies needed
to succeed in academic courses are broad and take time to acquire (Collier,
1995, and also see chapters by Center & Niestepski and Phillips [this volume]
on the coping strategies L2 students employ to meet the reading and writing
demands and expectations of their teachers across the disciplines). This chapter
presents research undertaken at one urban community college to add to our
understanding of the impact and academic effects of WAC programs on ESL
students enrolled in WI classes across the curriculum as well as to identify those
pedagogical practices which might explain these outcomes.

   The ESL student struggle to succeed academically is readily apparent in the
City of University of New York (CUNY), the nation's largest public university
system, whose mission is to provide access to quality higher education for the
full range of the city's inhabitants, regardless of income, gender, or ethnicity.
The university serves more than 480,000 students at 23 colleges and institu-
tions in New York City, including 11 senior colleges, seven community colleges,
the Macauley Honors College, the Graduate center, and Graduate Schools of
Journalism, Law, Professional Studies and Public Health. The CUNY system
is also the nation's most diverse with a student population that is over 41%
foreign born. It is against this backdrop of an urban, multi-campus, diverse
student body that CUNY sought to strengthen its students' writing proficien-
cies. Recognizing the vital role that writing plays both in a college education
and in future academic and professional success, the CUNY Board of Trust-
ees passed a resolution in 1999 establishing a CUNY-wide Writing Across the
Curriculum (WAC) Initiative, which mandated that writing instruction be a
university-wide responsibility and that writing proficiency become "a focus of
the entire undergraduate curriculum" (http://policy.cuny.edu/board_meetng_
minutes/1999/01-25/pdf/#Navigation_Location). Each CUNY campus has
developed its own WAC Initiative responsive to its own particular needs though
most share pedagogical underpinnings derived from a broad range of WAC
theorists and compositionists2 (Hirsch & Paoli, 2012). To bring this ambitious
university-wide plan to fruition, the initiative is linked to a CUNY Writing
Fellows Program which places CUNY doctoral students from a variety of disci-
plines on each member campus to assist in project implementation.

   Of the approximately 230,000 CUNY undergraduates enrolled in fall 2011,
44% spoke a native language other than English. While lower levels of ESL
instruction still exist at some of the CUNY community colleges, the ESL desig-
nation has virtually disappeared at the CUNY senior colleges. Yet the students
have not. As it completes its first decade of its mandated university-wide WAC
initiative, the City University continues to address the pedagogical needs of stu-
dents whose placement tests indicate they are ESL or developmental students

                                                                                                153
Hirsch

or whose language proficiency issues are not fully resolved upon admission or
transfer to the four-year college. Often still lacking college-level proficiency in
reading and writing, these students may not fare as well as their more prepared
peers as they enter the college mainstream.

   With many CUNY ESL students barred from admission to the senior col-
leges until they are able to pass CUNY-mandated proficiency exams in writ-
ing, reading and math, the university's seven community colleges have become
the institutions responsible for welcoming these students into higher educa-
tion and helping them become "college-ready." Hostos Community College,
established in 1968 to serve the needs of NYC's impoverished South Bronx
community, is an urban, bilingual college of 6000 students located just blocks
away from Yankee Stadium. Fifty-five percent of Hostos' first-year students
require developmental composition and 43% require developmental reading
courses. The majority of these students plan on transferring to a four-year
institution and will need more advanced literacy skills to make this transi-
tion. The Hostos WAC Initiative, renamed WAC/RAC (Reading Across the
Curriculum) in 2005 to reflect the reciprocal relationship between reading
and writing, is committed to serving the language and writing needs of all its
students including ESL students, speakers of Black Vernacular English (BVE),
and Generation 1.5 English-language learners. To that end, the WAC/RAC
Initiative provides opportunities for writing and reading at all levels of a stu-
dent's academic experience both generally throughout the curriculum and in
specially designed WI classes. These courses require both informal writing and
10-12 pages of formal writing along with required faculty professional devel-
opment. (See www.hostos.cuny.edu/wac for a description of WI criteria and
policies.) At Hostos, WIs are certified by section based on faculty presentation
of a WI syllabus designed for the course they teach. Thus in courses with mul-
tiple sections, only some sections may be designated WI. Though WI require-
ments vary among CUNY campuses, in many institutions, including most of
CUNY's 11 senior colleges, WIs are viewed as capstone or higher-level cours-
es. Yet developmental students and ESL students seem most in need of early
exposure to increased writing and reading, including in WI courses which can
support their evolving literacies.

   Hostos requires that students complete two WI courses prior to graduation
and permits students at the end of the ESL sequence (ESL 091/092) and de-
velopmental levels (ENG 091/092) to enroll in one WI course prior to passing
CUNY exams for admission into Freshman Composition. But student gaps
in reading and writing proficiencies provide a formidable challenge to a WAC
program and raise a number of issues regarding its implementation. Can WAC
principles and pedagogies help these students to succeed in college-level course

154
                                                                                         Writing Intensively

work? Is it an unfair burden to second-language students to enroll them in more
demanding WI sections when non-WI sections of the same course are often
available? And is it unreasonable to expect faculty who teach WI courses to also
address the more complex reading and writing difficulties these students bring
to class?

   With course pre- and co-requisites set by departments, and with more de-
partments raising the pre- and co-requisite English-levels for WI courses to
a minimum first-year composition level (ENG 110), it seemed the time had
come to look closely at the performance of ESL and developmental students
in those WI sections which did permit them to enroll along with students at
higher levels of English proficiency (HEP). If faculty perceptions that ESL and
developmental students could not succeed in these courses were borne out,
then perhaps it was unwise to allow them to take WI classes. While the Hostos
WAC/RAC Initiative has assessed its program every year since its inception,
in spring 2011, with the help of graduate student research assistant Carole K.
Meagher, my WAC Co-Coordinator, Andrea Fabrizio, and I began a study to
determine if ESL and developmental students could and should compete with
HEP students in these sections. We examined student success by combining the
performance of ESL and developmental students in WI sections and comparing
their success in terms of grades and pass/fail rates to HEP students in WI and
non-WI sections of the same courses. Our findings revealed that, overall, ESL,
developmental, and HEP students in WI sections passed at a higher rate than
they did in non-WI sections and did so with no statistically significant differ-
ences according to student composition levels. In fall 2011 and spring 2012 we
expanded this work by de-aggregating our data from spring 2011 to isolate the
performance of ESL students from developmental students and also examining
ESL student performance in WI courses in fall 2011.

   This chapter addresses the academic implications of offering WI courses to
linguistically underprepared students by drawing on the qualitative and quan-
titative studies undertaken both in academic year (AY) 2011 and spring 2012
on the effects of WAC and WI courses in the mainstreaming of ESL students.
Qualitative data is drawn from student responses to a survey instrument admin-
istered to all students enrolled in WI courses that measures student satisfaction
with WI courses and self-reported writing improvement. Quantitative data re-
flecting AY 2011 focuses on two key components of academic success: grades
and retention. For the study reported here, these include, 1) examining the
pass/fail rates of ESL students in WIs and non-WIs; 2) comparing the grades of
ESL students in WI sections to the grades of ESL students in the same courses
which are non-WI; and 3) comparing ESL student grades to the grades of stu-
dents at other levels of English in the same WI sections.

                                                                                                155
Hirsch

   The chapter is divided in two sections. Part I begins with an analysis of the
qualitative and quantitative data outlined above and its implications for second-
language learners in WAC programs. In order to amplify and provide a basis for
understanding the significance of the quantitative data gathered in AY 2011and
to identify those WAC strategies which might have led to these statistical find-
ings, Part II analyzes two WI syllabi from AY 2011 courses--CHE 210 (Gen-
eral Chemistry) and HLT 110 (Introduction to Community Health), both of
which have English-language pre/co-requisites making them available to ESL
and developmental students as well as HEP students. The syllabi reviewed here
have been selected specifically because the faculty who designed them are com-
mitted to serving the needs of ESL students and ESL students have had success
in passing these sections. What do these WI sections look like, and how do they
address the needs of L2 students? In what ways, if any, might they differ from
those WI sections that do not permit L2 students to enroll?

   Through these pluralistic measures we have sought to determine the effects
of mainstreaming ESL students into WI sections as well as to gain an increased
understanding of how WAC can best support their emerging literacies. The
trends that emerged regarding student success and the suggestions that con-
clude the chapter may provide new perspectives on ways in which WAC pro-
grams and scholars can indeed open rather than close their doors to ESL stu-
dents (Cox, 2011).

PART I: ASSESSING THE PERFORMANCE
OF L2 STUDENTS IN WI SECTIONS

   Addressing the needs of ESL students has been a Hostos priority since its
founding as CUNY's first college with a bilingual mission. Our attempts to
understand how to best serve this population have informed our work since
the college's inception. In order to better appreciate the principles that underlie
our current WAC program, it is instructive to look back on some of the
research which led to the evolution of today's program design. In 1984 Hostos
undertook one of the first studies to determine if WAC principles and practices,
especially talking and writing-to-learn, were applicable to ESL students through
an investigation of the academic performance of ESL students across disciplines
(Hirsch, 1986, 1988). Using both qualitative and quantitative measures, the
study compared the success of those engaged in principles of "language across
the curriculum" through a specially designed tutorial model which included
writing-to-learn and the use of talk as a learning tool to a control group of
ESL students not partaking in similar practices and receiving no additional

156
                                                                                         Writing Intensively

support. The tutorial model also employed cognitive strategies such as activating
prior knowledge and making personal connections between new and known
material to aid in comprehension of course material. The tutoring-model was
discontinued due to lack of funding, but the knowledge we gained regarding
ESL students across the curriculum formed the basis for much of our present-
day CUNY-funded WAC Initiative.

   While the earlier study demonstrated the statistically significant academic
gains made by participants engaged in WAC practices and the primacy of talk
in the learning process for ESL students, it also documented the difficulties
confronted by ESL students in mainstream classes (Hirsch, 1996). Over
time ESL educators have become even more familiar with and attuned to the
cognitive, linguistic, sociocultural and affective hurdles confronted by these
students across the curriculum. In addition to the challenges presented by
course readings and vocabulary, note taking, oral communication, and complex
discipline-specific writing assignments, ESL students also face the demands
of twenty-first century literacies, including blogs, discussion boards, social
networks, and wikis, which require navigating the rules and voices of all these
differing discourses. (In her chapter [this volume], Du describes the challenge
of summarizing information from digital and multimedia "texts," along with
oral texts such as course lectures, for the purpose of providing evidence of one
kind or another in response to writing assignments they're given.) Drawing on
our earlier research on the effectiveness of talk and writing for ESL students,
we designed our current WAC/RAC Initiative to address the many writing
challenges confronted by our linguistically diverse population and to assist
faculty in designing curriculum to support their academic success.

   As noted previously, the Hostos WAC/RAC Initiative seeks to broaden
student experience with writing and reading generally throughout the
curriculum and in WI sections specifically. Supporting its view that ESL and
developmental students can only benefit from early exposure to more complex
reading and writing tasks, it permits students to enroll in one WI prior to passing
CUNY exams in reading and writing. It is important to determine empirically
if ESL students are provided with the support they need and if they actually
can and do succeed in WI courses. The next section describes both qualitative
and quantitative measures undertaken to ascertain the effect of WI classes on
the academic performance of second language (L2) learners. While the focus
is on L2 learners, their success is compared with developmental students
and students at higher-levels of English-language proficiency enrolled in WI
sections. Proficiency levels are determined by student performance on CUNY-
mandated exams: The CAT-W writing test and the ACT Reading test. Students
are placed into ESL, Developmental English or Freshman Composition based

                                                                                                157
Hirsch

on exam scores set by CUNY. The same exams are also used to exit ESL and
developmental reading and writing courses. Students must pass these exams
in order to enroll in Freshman Comp (ENG 110), a gateway to many other
academic courses and programs.

Assessing the WI Experience: Qualitative Results

   Each semester, students in WI classes are surveyed to determine their
satisfaction with these sections and their perceived improvements in the
learning of content and writing. For example, they are asked to Strongly Agree,
Agree, Disagree or Strongly Disagree with statements such as, "This course helped
me understand course topics and concepts" as well as assess the course's helpfulness
in improving their writing. There is also space for student comments. Table
6.1 breaks down student responses for spring 2011 by English-language levels.
"Basic Skills" refers to students who are either ESL or developmental; "Freshman
Comp" refers to those students taking Freshman Composition 1 (ENG 110);
and "Post-ENG" refers to students who have finished Freshman Composition 1
and are either taking the second semester of freshman year comp, Comp 2; no
English course, or higher-level English courses, such as an English Department

Table 6.1: Students who responded "Strongly Agree" or "Agree" by
composition level

WI Class      All                  Basic      Freshman  Post-
Improved:     Students             Skills     Comp      ENG

              n                 %  n       %  n     %   n      %

Overall writing 494             87.1 25    83.3 49  86.0 324 89.0
                                89.7 28    93.3 47  85.5 330 91.2
Paraphrasing and quoting 506    90.8 28    93.3 50  89.3 336 92.1

Grammar       516

Organization  518               92.0 28    93.3 52  91.2 335 93.3
                                93.6 29    96.7 55  98.2 343 94.5
Clarity of main idea 530        94.1 28    93.3 50  92.6 347 96.1
Incorporation of details 528    95.1 29    96.7 54  94.7 350 96.2
Understanding of the topic 540

158
                                                                                         Writing Intensively

elective. "Basic Skills" students are in WI sections which permit their enrollment
alongside students at higher English-language proficiency levels. While HEP
students may enroll in all WI courses, ESL and developmental students may
only enroll in those with pre- or co-requisites at the ESL/ENG 091/092 levels.

   In terms of student satisfaction, there appears to be little difference in
responses by composition course level. Approximately 83% of "Basic Skills"
students report improvements in overall writing as compared to 86% in
"Freshman Comp" and 89% who are "Post-ENG." Indeed, in many categories,
the "Basic Skills" respondents report greater improvements than the "Freshman
Comp" students with the "Post-ENG" group often reporting the highest levels
of satisfaction.

   While analysis of the questionnaires does not separate developmental and
ESL students, students do note their current English courses on the survey
instrument. A sampling of ESL student comments indicates the perceived
benefits of the WI course in which they were enrolled along with an indication
of the kinds of language difficulties students bring to these classes:

         It made my writing to get better. The professor allways [sic]
         was there to help me or explain the work. (EDU 116 Child
         Development)

         I had a great experience with this course. That is because I
         learned all with it. With this course I got a more concentrate
         in reordering and reading . .. (LIN 100 Introduction to
         Linguistics)

         I had taking [sic] 2 writing [sic] intensive classes already. This
         one had being the best ever. The professor is very professional
         and she could help any student to learn and improve their
         writing [sic]. (GERO 103 Introduction to Gerontology)

         This course helped me a lot because it has given me an idea
         how to do a lab report, citation, and researching skills. (CHE
         210 General Chemistry 1)

   The in-depth analysis of CHE 210 in Part II will demonstrate how the
syllabus was designed to further the various skills acknowledged by the student
in the last quote. The syllabi for the other WI sections referred to above share
many of the same characteristics that might account for student satisfaction and
success in these WI courses.

                                                                                                159
Hirsch

Assessing the WI Experience: Quantitative Results

   The survey instrument described above yields important information
regarding student satisfaction with WI courses. It is also designed to elicit
information as to the amount and kinds of writing that occur in the courses
including opportunities for revision, affording some insight as to what actually
takes place in the classroom regarding the implementation of WAC/RAC
practices. Yet useful as this information is, it is not sufficient to allow for a
comprehensive assessment of our program's success. With so little quantitative
data on the performance of students in WAC programs in general, it seemed
vital to try and gain an understanding of how ESL students perform in these WI
sections. As stated earlier, it would not be prudent to encourage them to enroll
in classes where their grades would suffer if alternatives (non-WI sections) were
available, and students would no doubt avoid these classes if possible. Table 6.2
compares the pass rates of ESL students in WI and non-WI sections of the same
courses:

   In analyzing these data, we were immediately struck by the small numbers of
ESL students enrolled in WI sections, reflecting their disinclination to enroll in
these sections even when they are available to them. Yet the figures also indicate
that ESL students in WI sections had a higher pass rate than their peers in non-
WI sections of the same courses: 86% vs. 75% as well as lower rates of course
withdrawal: 7% vs. 16%.

Table 6.2: ESL Pass/Fall rates in WI vs. non-WI sections          Percent

                                                          Number        86
                                                                         7
WWI Pass    24                                                           7
                                                                      100
     Fail   2                                                           75

     W      2                                                            9

     Total  28                                                          16

Non- Pass   43                                                        100

WI

     Fail   5

     W      9

     Total  57

160
                                                                                         Writing Intensively

   While it is impossible to know precisely the role and extent of writing in
non-WI sections, our experiences in collaborating with faculty to transform
non-WI sections into WIs provide a window into the pedagogical practices in
non-WI sections. Prior to eligibility for WI certification, these courses often
rely on multiple choice or short answer exams. Writing assignments in non-WI
sections most commonly consist of an end-of-semester 10-12 page term paper
which faculty frequently (and justifiably) complain is plagiarized. There is little
or no drafting or revision of the paper, and students are often referred to the
library for workshops on conducting research with little follow-up to see how
well they have grasped research practices. By contrast, WI syllabi reflect more
frequent opportunities for both formal and informal writing with a term paper
usually assigned as one of at least three other revised writing assignments. From
a student perspective, WI classes are more demanding and more difficult, so it
is encouraging to observe that ESL 091/092 students in WI courses received a
higher percentage of passing grades than ESL students in non-WI sections of
the same courses, as shown in Table 6.3, indicating that they are not putting
themselves at risk in taking these WIs, and they may actually be receiving
tangible benefits.

Table 6.3: ESL student grades in courses by WI and non-WI
enrollment for AY 2011

Grade  Number          WI   Number                         Non-WI
Group          4                    7
               2  Percent           4                       Percent
A              2     14.3           9                           12.2
A-             2       7.1          6                            7.0
B              3       7.1          8                           15.8
B+             2       7.1          2                           10.5
B-             6     10.7           4                           14.0
C+             2       7.1          2                            3.5
C              2     21.4           5                            7.0
D              1       7.2          1                            3.5
F              2       7.2          9                            8.8
INC                    3.6                                       1.7
W/WU          28       7.2         57                             16
Total                 100                                       100

                                                           161
Hirsch

   This determination of higher pass rates lends support to the benefit of engaging
ESL students in WAC/RAC principles and practices. Yet how well students do in
these classes is also important. Recognizing the importance of a student's GPA,
we further examined the actual grades ESL students receive in their WI classes as
compared with those of ESL students in non-WI sections of the same courses.

   Grade distributions , as shown in Table 6.3, reflect some of the difficulties
faced and successes earned by students in WI vs. non-WI sections. For example,
students who enrolled in WI sections received a somewhat higher percentage
of A's: 22% vs. 19% for those in non-WIs. But students in WIs received fewer
grades in the B range: 25% vs. 40% for those in non-WIs. ESL students in WI
sections also received a greater percentage of C grades. The average grade for the
two groups was a B- for those in non-WIs compared to a C+ for those in WIs, a
negligible difference. Yet, as noted previously, their percentage of failing grades
and withdrawals (W) was less than those of students in non-WI classes.

   Many faculty have expressed fears that ESL students will fail in WI classes,
but these concerns are not supported by Tables 6.2 and 6.3. While no firm
conclusions can be drawn from such small sample sizes, the trend indicates that
ESL students enrolled in WI sections can succeed. But the pass/fail grade analyses
reveal a more significant outcome and predictor of student success. The figures
suggest a greater retention rate for ESL students in WI sections. ESL students
are persisting in these classes, passing them, and not dropping out. While the
coursework of WIs may be more intense and difficult for a population still
acquiring language proficiencies, it may also be more interesting. It would seem
there are supports in place that enable L2 learners to persist and succeed, supports
which are absent in non-WI sections of the same course and in WI sections with
higher English-language pre/co-requisites. These very supports--the pedagogical
practices embedded in WIs accessible to ESL students which might account for
their success--will be examined in the review of syllabi in Part II.

   While the pass/fail rates and grade comparisons of ESL students in WI
sections compared to those in non-WI sections suggests student success in WIs,
we also wanted to know how mainstreamed ESL students fared in comparison to
their fellow students of varying English-language proficiency levels in the same
WI class.

   Table 6.4 outlines how ESL students performed in comparison to devel-
opmental students and students enrolled in either Freshman Comp I or 2
(ENG110/111) taking the same WI section. ESL students were enrolled in
WI sections of courses in Biology, Business, Chemistry, Community Health,
Education, Latin American & Caribbean Studies, Linguistics, Office Technol-
ogy, and Physics. Data has not been broken-down by discipline though this is
something that merits future research for all of our WI sections.

162
                                                          Writing Intensively

   We note that the number of developmental students (ENG 091/092)
reported here is too small on which to base any observations. While an
additional 18 developmental students were enrolled in other WI sections, these
sections did not enroll any ESL students for comparison purposes. There were
also students enrolled in the WI sections examined above who had already

Table 6.4: Comparing grades of ESL students/developmental
students/HEP students within WI classes AY 2011

Spring 2011: ESL 091/092 Students by WI Course Grade

          ESL091/092           ENG091/092             ENG110/111

WI Grade  ESL                  Developmental          HEP - Fresh Comp
Group
          Number      Percent  Number  Percent        Number  Percent
A         2           25       1       50             10      29
B         4           50       1       50             10      29
C         1           13       0       0              8       24
D         0           0        0       0              2       6
F         1           13       0       0              4       12
W         0           0        0       0              0       0
Total     8           100      2       100            34      100

Fall 2011: ESL 091/092 Students by WI Course Grade

          ESL091/092           ENG091/092             ENG110/111

WI Grade  ESL                  Developmental          HEP - Fresh Comp
Group     Number
          4           Percent  Number Percent         Number Percent
A         3           20
B         7           15       1       20             17      25
C         2           35
D         1           10       3       60             19      28
F         1           5
INC       2           5        1       20             13      19
W         20          10
Total                 100      0       0              3       4

                               0       0              7       10

                               0       0              1       1

                               0       0              9       13

                               5       100            69      100

                                                                        163
Hirsch

completed Freshman Comp, but since Freshman Comp is the level upon which
WI enrollment is often based, we have focused on the grades of this group in
our comparison to the ESL and ENG 091/092 students and not those students
who have already completed all English requirements.

   It is not surprising that the Freshman Comp group performed well. As
Table 6.4 indicates, they had a higher percentage of A grades (54% vs. 45%)
than ESL students. Their percentage of B grades was a bit lower--57% vs.
65%--though ESL students had a greater percentage of C grades--48% vs.
43%. HEP students also withdrew (13% vs. 10%) and failed (22% vs. 18%) at
slightly higher rates than ESL students.

   In addition to an analysis of student grades in WI and non-WI content
courses, our examination of the performance of ESL students revealed some
unanticipated information with significant implications for our WAC work.
Those students taking a WI course concurrently with their ESL course had a
greater pass rate in the ESL class, and thus moved onto Freshman Composition
more quickly than ESL students who were not taking a WI. Forty-one percent
of ESL students not taking a WI passed their ESL class compared to 52% of
those enrolled in a WI. While reiterating our earlier precaution about small
sample sizes, the data suggest that, if engagement with WAC principles and
practices in WI courses can improve student success in ESL classes enabling
them to move onto to more advanced levels of English and college-level courses,
then more WI classes should be made available to them--classes that contain
the supportive pedagogies discussed in the syllabi below.

PART II: ESL STUDENTS WRITERS IN THE
SCIENCES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES

   As we observed in our initial study published in 1986, multiple measures
can provide multiple perspectives with each insight building on and enhancing
the other. The comparison of grades and pass/fail rates provides a picture of
how student learning is evaluated in the college setting. Grades provide students
with a powerful signal as to what constitutes "successful" learning. The grade
comparisons discussed earlier offer an aspect of how students learn, but grades
do not tell us how these results were obtained. In what ways might a WI section
available to ESL students support their success in meeting course demands?
What strategies, techniques, and/or assignments are embedded within
the course that facilitate student learning and account for their success and
satisfaction? Below is an examination of two representative WI syllabi selected
from among the WIs which are available to advanced ESL and developmental

164
                                                                                         Writing Intensively

students that are designed to help them access and respond to discipline-specific
texts and concepts through both reading and writing. The strategies employed
here provide a good roadmap for supporting ESL students in mainstreamed WI
courses.

Writing Intensively in the Sciences: CHE 210 General Chemistry

   With faculty in the natural and physical sciences often resistant to
incorporating WAC principles and practices, it was a welcome surprise to find
faculty in these areas receptive not only to creating WI syllabi, but also to making
them accessible to L2 and developmental learners. The excerpts below, from a
WI syllabus for CHE 210, General Chemistry I created by Professors Nelson
Nunez-Rodriguez and Yoel Rodriguez in collaboration with CUNY graduate
student Writing Fellow Kate Wilson, point to the ways in which courses in the
STEM fields can utilize WAC strategies to improve the learning and literacy
needs of students representing a wide-range of language proficiencies. Rather
than relying on a lecture-mode delivery of material, a pedagogy of limited
success for L2 learners because of its reliance on student ability to comprehend
concepts orally and synthesize and paraphrase material quickly in order to take
effective notes (see Du [this volume] for more on the challenges ESL students
face when attempting to learn from lectures), this class makes frequent use of a
wide variety of informal writing assignments meant to help students improve
their conceptual understanding of course material. At the same time, it provides
an introduction to writing in the disciplines (WID) while helping students
bridge the use of discipline-specific language with that of language for a broader
audience.

Writing in CHE 210

   In this description, assignments and assignment passages have been copied
from the professor's syllabus, followed by a discussion of the pedagogical benefits.

         Informal writing
         Most of the informal writing will happen in the lecture
         component of this course through the Blackboard Discussion
         Board. A smaller part of the informal writing will be done in
         the laboratory.

         Informal writing in lecture
         Each week students will have the opportunity to choose from

                                                                                                165
Hirsch

         three prompt options posted by faculty on the Discussion
         Board. Two of these prompts remain the same throughout
         the semester with only the necessary thematic adjustments.

         Students are expected to respond to at least 12 Discussion
         Board exercises throughout the semester (Blackboard tallies
         student participation.)

   By being allowed to choose three prompts posted on the class discussion
board, students are actively engaged in the learning process and, crucially for
L2 learners, given the opportunity to use language to make meaning not only
for themselves, but also for an audience of teacher and peers. The instructions
for the Blackboard prompts highlight this further:

         Blackboard prompt
         Based on what you learn in Chapter "Atoms, Molecules, and
         Ions" (please note that the title will change weekly), craft
         your own exam question. You must justify why you consider
         this question should appear in the exam. For this, I suggest
         that you explain what skills are tested in the question you are
         crafting. For example: Is your question asking fellow students
         to remember valuable information? Is it asking to analyze
         information, or maybe apply knowledge, etc.? Any kind of
         question is accepted (multiple choice, true or false, short
         filling, short essay, etc.). In addition to crafting your own
         question you can also engage in dialogue with other students
         based on what they submit. You can give your opinion to
         support a previous posted question and/or you can add a
         comment to somebody else's opinion showing your support,
         agreement or disagreement with another student's comment
         regarding a question or the tested skill.

   The assignment above requires that students create their own exam questions
and comment on each other's questions. This opportunity to articulate material
in their own words with their own language resources is vital for L2 learners
(Hirsch, 1986). The assignment also allows students to make decisions as to
what is important or "test-worthy," thus demonstrating how much they have
understood of the class material and if their perceptions of what's important
match those of the professors.

166
                                                                                         Writing Intensively

         Connect the content of Chapter "Chemical formulas,
         Reactions, Equations, Stoichiometry" (please note that the
         title will change weekly) to your daily life. Have in mind that
         I am not asking for your opinion; I want you to think of an
         example of how the material we covered about "Chemical
         formulas, Reactions, Equations, Stoichiometry" relates to
         your daily life.

   Unable to rely on pre-coded experience with chemistry, students must be
helped to forge a link between new and existing material. Earlier research at
Hostos established the importance for learners of finding personal significance
or establishing a personal connection to the new subject matter (Hirsch, 1986).
Bransford (1999) defines the learner's task as activating previous knowledge
and bringing it into contact with new material, seeking the familiar in the
unfamiliar and vice versa. The assignment above asks students to make this
personal connection by relating the chapter's content to their daily lives. This
device to aid cognition and retention will reappear throughout the syllabus.

         Summary of articles
         An online scientific article for the lay public will be chosen
         (for example, from the science section of The New York
         Times or other scientific online publications) and posted
         on Blackboard for students to read. Summarize the three
         main points of the article adding a personal comment on the
         article, for instance, whether you find the article informative,
         if it is clear, if you agree with the argument presented, etc.

         Peer-reviewing a lab report
         Each student will have the opportunity to review in written
         form the draft of the formal laboratory report of another
         student. This will be done in class. (More about this activity
         in the "formal writing" section of this syllabus.) The professor
         will give feedback on the Discussion Board postings in class
         and, whenever possible, the professor will start the class by
         talking briefly about students' input on Blackboard.

   This low-stakes assignment to summarize articles allows students to
synthesize the science material in their own words. The addition of a "personal
comment" again allows them to make a personal connection to the material

                                                                                                167
Hirsch

bridging the new and the known. The lab report requires an initial non-graded
draft providing an opportunity for students to "try-on" this WID format, and,
through peer review, places students in the role of teacher/expert giving them
more control of their learning and letting them make active use of their own
language resources.

         Informal writing in the laboratory
         In order to prepare for a laboratory session, students will
         be asked to read the "Procedure" section and "translate" the
         essential information into a flowchart. Aside from preparing
         the student for the experiment to come, this assignment
         will train the student in how to synthesize information. The
         flowcharts should be presented at the beginning of each lab
         session and will count as participation but will not be graded.

         Sample of the assignment
         Read the "Procedure" section of your Lab manual. When
         you finish reading make a flowchart that synthesizes the
         information offered in the narrative. Keep in mind that your
         flowchart should function as a "recipe" for the experiment
         you are about to do. The instructor will discuss the flowchart
         mechanics and will model one on the board for the first two
         labs to help you produce your own for the following labs.
         Example:

         Experiment: Use of aqueous (aq) chlorine (Cl2(aq)) to
         identify iodide salts.
         Directions: In a small test tube, dissolve a small amount
         (about the size of a pea) of sodium iodide, NaI, in 1 mL of
         distilled water; add 5 drops of bleach. Note the color, then
         add several drops of mineral oil, shake, and allow to separate,
         which takes about 20 sec. Note that the mineral oil is the top
         layer. Record your observations on the report sheet.

   The language of the textbook and lab manual may be difficult for many of
the students due not only to the discipline-specific vocabulary but also because
of the "every day" and idiomatic vocabulary that might be unfamiliar to L2
and developmental students. By asking students to "translate" the Procedure
section of the lab manual from written form to a flow chart, students are
able to synthesize, re-conceptualize and re-visualize the material, in essence

168
                                                                                         Writing Intensively

making the text visible and providing them with another means to access
difficult text.

         Formal writing
         There will be nine lab reports in the course. Six of these
         reports will be reviewed and commented on by the professor
         in order to reinforce students' familiarity with the lab report
         format. Students are not required to submit a revised/
         rewritten version. Three lab reports will require revision and
         one of them will serve as the basis for an essay.
         In week 3 of the semester, students submit a draft of their
         first lab report for feedback and revision ensuring that they
         become familiar with lab report format early on in the
         semester. One of the lab reports will later become the basis
         for a larger writing project, described below:
         Consumer Information Pamphlet: "Chemicals in
         Everyday Life"
         This assignment starts in week 7 of the semester and

Figure 6.1 Flowchart

                                                                                                169
Hirsch

         continues until the end of the semester. You will use your
         lab on "Chemicals in Everyday Life" as the basis for a larger
         writing project: a "Consumer Information Pamphlet" about
         one chemical component frequently used in daily products.
         Write with a hypothetical audience in mind. Your written
         product should resemble a Consumer Information Pamphlet
         very much like those that accompany most medications.

         The goal of this assignment is to help you become familiar
         with common chemicals, their properties and relations with
         other chemicals.

   As evidenced above, the formal writing components of this class are scaffolded
and guide students through a variety of connected tasks. The lab reports provide an
introduction to writing in the disciplines. Support is provided through professor
feedback and opportunities for revision. As described above, one lab report will
become the basis for a new writing task, a "Consumer Information Pamphlet."
In order to write this pamphlet for a new, non-academic audience, students
will have to be thoroughly familiar with the material and be able to present
it in a way that mimics the voice and tone of these information booklets. The
instructor delineates the steps students will follow as they expand the lab report
and eventually reconfigure its information in a new genre. Steps include: 1) a lab
report on "Chemicals in Everyday Life" which receives instructor feedback; 2)
field research conducted in students' homes to identify the chemical components
of kitchen and bath products; 3) an informal reflective writing assignment
regarding the chemical products found in the home; 4) formal research that
begins with Wikipedia for general information and continues with articles from
a scientific peer-reviewed database; and 5) incorporation of information gathered
through observation and research into a first draft of a Consumer Information
Pamphlet. Students are instructed as to specific content and to write for a "lay
audience." Significantly, the instructor provides an example of the type of writing
associated with this genre. Feedback will be provided leading to submission of
the revised pamphlet on the last day of class.

   This carefully scaffolded assignment offers students feedback and support
and makes visible the processes they must undergo to successfully complete the
tasks. Students are actively engaged in the process moving from a representational
flowchart, to a written lab report, and then through research, reflection and
revision, to a transformation of the material studied into a new genre. All along
the way, from informal through formal assignments, students are permitted

170
                                                                                         Writing Intensively

and encouraged to make use of their own language resources to gain multiple
perspectives on the material. By semester's end, they will reinforce their
conceptual comprehension of this material by engaging in a "Peer Reviewed
Lab Report" in which they critique each other's work and make suggestions for
revision. A reliance on the textbook (written on a more advanced reading level)
and lecture would not provide L2 students with the support they need to access
and make sense of this material. Instead students are able to make connections
among the concepts introduced, find a personal connection to the material, and
become comfortable using the new language of a discipline while furthering
their comprehension of course material.

   Other ESL researchers have observed the success of these kinds of strategies.
Leki (1995), for example, notes how ESL students seek out models of writing
to help them with academic writing tasks, but their efforts are often thwarted by
selecting inappropriate examples. In contrast, the CHE 210 professors provide
students with models for writing an information pamphlet offering some
familiarity with the kind of discourse required. Fishman and McCarthy (2001)
observe the importance of peer interaction and talk for ESL students as a means
of making sense of the material. As described earlier, the Hostos WAC/RAC
Initiative draws on a learning model that employs principles of "language across
the curriculum." In CHE 210, students have frequent opportunities to meet
with peers and discuss the material. Talk, then, is central to the learning process
and, while theorists have applied these findings to native English speakers
(Martin, D'Arcy, Newton, & Parker, 1976), they are all the more relevant to
ESL students who are often unable to articulate what they have learned in
writing before they have had a an opportunity to orally "try on" the language
of the discipline. The WI syllabus for CHE 210 also employs principles of
active learning (Bruner, 1966, 1969; Fishman & McCarthy, 2001; Torbe &
Medway, 1981) in which students are actively engaged in the learning process.
For example, in CHE 210 students write their own exam questions, becoming
both teachers and learners as they focus on questions posed by themselves and
their classmates. The social science syllabus examined next echoes a number of
these same strategies.

Writing Intensively in the Social Sciences:
"Introduction to Community Health"

   A review of the syllabus for "Introduction to Community Health," designed
by Professor Iris Mercado in collaboration with CUNY Writing Fellow Dave
Pier reveals ways in which it too is designed to accommodate the language

                                                                                                171
Hirsch

needs of L2 and developmental students. There are a number of informal
assignments such as describing the resources provided by the Department of
Health Website; responding to student-selected newspaper or magazine articles
related to public and community health, including writing brief summaries;
and an analysis of an article on epidemiology supported by instructor prepared
study-guide questions. There are two formal writing assignments that require
writing for different audiences and purposes as well as student use of oral
language skills. While both formal assignments are carefully scaffolded, here
I describe in detail only the first one, a " Community Need Assessment and
Health Promotion Programming," which is completed in the following four
steps: 1) My Community Health Survey for which students are referred to a
government website to answer questions regarding the health profile of their
community; 2) My Neighborhood Mapping which requires students to assess
the needs and resources of one city block of their neighborhood and write a
two-page assessment of the health needs and resources of that block along with
a detailed map; 3) Community Interview for which students select a specific
health problem in their community and a target population and then identify
persons that match the health profile and interview them, following specific
instructions. This interview results in a two-page report; and 4) Letter of Intent
for a Health Promotion Program Grant Proposal in which students write a four-
page letter for a grant proposal application.

   This scaffolded assignment clearly supports student learning not only through
the series of steps provided but also through the additional support provided for
completing each of the steps. For example, the survey in step 1 helps students
gather the data they need. It assumes they are unfamiliar with designing survey
instruments, and so provides a template for them to follow. They are also given
specific questions to answer regarding their community based on their visit to
the government website including demographics and their effects on health
services. And, using these data, they are asked to discuss and present to the
class the potential interventions for the issues they identified along with their
community overview. To accomplish step 2, they are offered specific guidelines
to determine possible neighborhood health or safety problems. The professor
specifies how many causes and resources they need to use, instructs them to
"explore two blocks" if necessary, and prompts them to "Remember to look
up and down, as well as from side to side." They attach the map they sketched
when they have finished the walk and write a two-page assessment of the block.
Each of the remaining steps also provide guidelines; for example, the interview
requires students to describe prevention measures for the health problem they
selected and then interview a family member or friend about this problem,
resulting in a two-page report that includes a summary and suggestions for

172
                                                                                         Writing Intensively

further research. The grant proposal letter requires students to apply to a mock
foundation for funding of a project related to public health. A template and
model is provided to assist students in writing this proposal.

   As in the chemistry WI class, students are provided with meaningful
opportunities for writing throughout the community health WI, both to
increase their comprehension of the discipline and to experience writing
specific to the professional health care field. Both courses encourage students to
produce graphic representations of the material being learned--the chemistry
flow chart and the neighborhood map--a strategy that provides ESL students
with another avenue for processing information and expressing what they
know (Fu, 2007). For L2 learners specifically, the variety of both informal and
formal writing assignments, the guided procedures and steps to follow, the
oral interview encouraging active language use, the detailed scaffolding, and
the strategies for responding to written texts all enable ESL students to utilize
multiple resources as they try on the language of a discipline.

   This examination of the WI syllabi for General Chemistry and Community
Health demonstrates how WI classes can accommodate the needs of L2 learners
and developmental students. Each provides multiple pathways for students
to access new and difficult content material including formal and informal
assignments, scaffolding, models of writing, frequent feedback throughout the
process and opportunities for revision. These sections do not assume student
familiarity with modes of writing and recognize that students do not always bring
sufficient background knowledge to these tasks. In addition to strengthening
student writing proficiencies, the assignments also provide practice in oral
language development and allow students to use their oral language strengths
rather than rely solely on writing as a means of participating in the class and
obtaining information. This may be a particular benefit for generation 1.5
students who have attended US high schools or have lived in the US for a
number of years and have developed oral language proficiency (Reid, 2006). It
is interesting to note that the professors who created these ESL-accessible WI
sections for General Chemistry and Community Health are themselves non-
native speakers of English which may explain their sensitivity to the needs of L2
learners as well as their willingness to accept them into their classes.

   The WI courses examined above also acknowledge the connections between
reading and writing and provide students support in reading and responding
to written texts through strategies such as paraphrasing, summarizing and
reacting. This integration of reading and writing avoids what Leki (2001)
has termed "reading for no real reason" (p. 176) or the isolated teaching of
reading skills devoid of meaningful content. "Real reading," Leki argues, should
not be deferred until ESL students are deemed adequately prepared, but that

                                                                                                173
Hirsch

"plunging into the struggle with meaning" is in itself a means of preparation (p.
181) (For further discussions of the connections among writing and reading for
ESL students, see Center & Niestepski and Du [this volume]). The connections
between reading and writing and the interconnections between texts frame much
of our WAC work for all students but may have particular significance of L2
learners across disciplines. As part of our Hostos Reading Across the Curriculum
(RAC) component, students are encouraged to write before, during and/or
after reading, although a cross-section of our WI courses reveal these practices
occur in varying amounts. Hirvela (2004) underscores the value of "writing to
read" and "reading to write" and observes that writing about text helps students
engage it more directly. "The physical act of writing creates a kind of contact
point with the text and brings perceptions and impressions half-formed during
reading out of the shadows and into the light of emerging understanding" (p.
75) lending support to the use of "writing to read" in the college classroom
and its value in enabling L2 students to further their acquisition of academic
literacy. Hirvela highlights especially the benefits of summarizing, synthesizing
and responding to written texts, writing activities which help students focus on
the important features of a text, draw comparisons between texts and reflect on
their learning all the while revealing areas of disconnection between the reader
and text (see Du [this volume] for an examination of the role of summary
writing as a writing-to-read strategy for ESL students). It is therefore particularly
reassuring to see these strategies implemented in the syllabi presented here and
may account for the success of ESL learners in these classes.

INSIDE THE WI FOR STUDENTS WITH HIGHER
ENGLISH-LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY

   All of the WI classes that are open to ESL and developmental learners utilize many
of the strategies described above and most include assignments that are scaffolded.
While all WI sections require informal and formal writing and opportunities for
revision, those that are not available to ESL students and developmental learners
do not always provide the support seen in CHE 210 or HLT 110. In many WI
courses, for example, the assignments are not scaffolded. Frequently students are
merely instructed to write a research paper with little guidance compared to the
strategies for discourse negotiation provided in the sample syllabi reviewed here.
An assignment for the WI course HIS 4665: US History from Reconstruction to
the Present, for example, instructs students as follows:

         Using the documentary films we saw in class, primary

174
                                                                                         Writing Intensively

         documents and the textbook, write a paper that compares the
         two cases [Sacco-Vanzetti and Scottsboro] and the historical
         circumstances under which they took place. Your paper must
         explain:

         What are the cases about? Who did they involve? When and
         where did they take place? What were the charges against the
         defendants?

         What are the main differences and/or similarities between the
         cases? (emphasis should be on the meaning of the cases, not
         on petty details such as the different dates, different charges
         or different penalties)

         What is their overall significance? For example, what do
         they tell us about American society and politics in the 1920s
         and 1930s? What do they suggest about American attitudes
         toward class, race and immigration?

         What were the implications or impact of these cases on
         American society?

         What are the lessons we can draw from these two cases?

         Be sure to include a full bibliography. Below are some
         reading suggestions.

   Although students are provided with questions to consider, it is assumed
that they are prepared to undertake the steps necessary to write a research paper
and that they know how to conduct research, summarize and write compare/
contrast essays. While they are required to submit a draft, there is not much
scaffolding built into the assignment. Even students with higher English-
language proficiencies may struggle with this assignment, and it is obviously
not as "user-friendly" as the two previous WI syllabi which outline steps to
follow and include frequent feedback throughout the writing processes.

   Other sample WI assignments for HEP students had their own impediments
to ESL student success. Many were too broad, a common flaw in writing
assignments (Reid & Kroll, 2006) allowing for too few pages to accomplish
broadly conceived tasks that often also required advanced research and reading
skills. Some offered little assistance in selecting or developing topics. Others

                                                                                                175
Hirsch

failed to provide an audience and purpose, unlike the CHE 210 Consumer
Information Pamphlet or the HLT 110 Letter of Intent, leaving students
directionless as to how to frame information. But what all WI classes for HEP
students lacked was an instructor willing to address ESL language issues even
when their syllabi did contain many of the strategies which can lead to ESL
success.

CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS

   The research conducted at Hostos Community College in AY 2011 on
the role of WAC pedagogies in furthering ESL students' development in
writing and improving conceptual comprehension of course material provides
demonstrable benefits regarding their involvement in WAC programs and in
WIs carefully designed to address their needs. Though small numbers of ESL
091/092 students enrolled in the specially designed WI sections, their pass rates
were higher than ESL students in non-WI sections of the same course, they did
not withdraw, and of great significance, they had improved pass rates in the ESL
class, the gateway class to freshman composition and a host of additional college
programs. As noted earlier, however, the surprisingly small numbers of L2
learners (and developmental students) in available WI sections in 2011 seems
to indicate that most preferred to take non-WI sections presumably fearing
the greater linguistic demands of a WI section. Their reasons for avoiding WI
sections merit further study especially in light of the outcomes presented here.
It is possible that those who enrolled in WI sections were stronger and/or more
confident students, which could also explain their pass rates and good grades.

   The WAC pedagogical principles employed in the WI classes described
here are vital to all students, not just ESL students or developmental learners.
Though over 80% of students in Hostos WI classes are at the freshman
composition level or beyond, many of these students continue to struggle
with meeting the demands of writing in the disciplines. For example, a HEP
history student enrolled in Freshman Comp 1 still grapples with English-
language proficiency as evident in his written comments on the WI survey:
"Great expereince [sic] as the feedback and overall teaching method made my
writing; and comprehension improve since start [sic] of the semester." It is not
surprising that language problems persist since so many of our students begin
at the developmental or ESL levels. The spring 2011 analysis of students in WI
classes indicated that 20% of the HEP students enrolled in Freshman Comp 1
or 2, and 15% of those who had completed all English requirements had taken
at least one ESL course in their histories at Hostos. Other HEP students attend

176
                                                                                         Writing Intensively

part-time or take breaks over the course of their study resulting in regression of
language proficiency. A HEP nursing student observed, "This writing-intensive
class ... helped me to revisit my writing skills since I never took another English
course since 2008," reminding us that all students, even proficient ones, risk
skills degradation if they don't have opportunities to practice and reinforce their
written proficiencies (Roberts, 2008).

   Our review of WI syllabi presumed that writing assignments were written
out for students, a presumption WAC programs need to challenge. In many
instances, assignments in classes which were not designated as WI were
sketchily written (if at all) and often augmented by oral in-class amplification as
to instructor expectations. Writing Fellows working with students reported that
once out of class and pondering the assignments, students could no longer recall
the orally added information or weren't sure if they understood it, a problem
for many students, and especially L2 learners. Making sure students receive
written prompts is a WAC program priority and often the first step in faculty
professional development.

   The WI syllabi reviewed here have English-language pre/co-requisites that
make them available to advanced ESL students and developmental learners,
but more than available, they are accessible. Assignments are comprehensible,
scaffolded and reflect course objectives. They have well-designed prompts, clear
instructions and vocabulary and syntax appropriate to the task. They provide
opportunities for revision and instructor feedback. They also make frequent
use of a variety of informal "writing-to-learn" assignments drawing on the
relationship between reading and writing and permitting students to engage
material orally before writing.

   We are all writers. We write letters, poems, emails, memos, reports, text
messages, tweets and much more. Writing is an integral part of who we are
and how we express ourselves. For students for whom English is not a first
language, learning to write clearly and concisely is a tremendous challenge.
But what our data show is that it is not overcoming the challenge that is the
important part; it's accepting the challenge in the first place. The fact that
ESL students are choosing to stay in WI classes with their greater demands on
writing proficiencies and are passing these classes at a higher rate than their non-
WI counterparts indicates that participating in well-designed WI classes that
utilize the academic supports described in this chapter may be in and of itself
an academic benefit. The research reported here is only a beginning and more
is needed. As educators, we must keep the doors to education and opportunity
wide open, providing our students with the means to succeed. Perhaps the
WAC/RAC studies discussed here will encourage WAC programs to help ESL
students find their place across the curriculum.

                                                                                                177
Hirsch

NOTES

1. In this chapter I am using the terms English-as-a-Second Language (ESL)
and L2 (second language) learner to refer to students who are learning English
in addition to their native language. While they are all English language learners
(ELLs), the students studied here are enrolled in ESL programs, and that is how
they are identified in the college.
2. While each CUNY campus has developed its own WAC program responsive
to its needs, most share a common set of WAC principles and practices such as
the connections between writing and critical thinking, the value of "writing-to-
learn" and exploratory writing in the classroom, writing as a process including
revision, the importance of crafting assignments which are developmentally ap-
propriate and reflect course objectives and the need for appropriate assessment
of students' written work. Many use John Bean's Engaging Ideas as a primary
faculty development text.

REFERENCES

Bransford, J. (1979). Human cognition: Learning, understanding and remember-
   ing. New York: Wadsworth.

Bruner, J. (1966a). On knowing: Essays for the left hand. Cambridge, MA:
   Belknap Press.

Bruner, J. (1966b). Toward a theory of instruction. Cambridge, MA: Belknap
   Press.

City University of New York. (1999). Board of Trustees minutes of proceedings,
   January 25, 1999. Retrieved from http://policy.cuny.edu/board_meeting_
   minutes/1999/01-25/pdf/#Navigation_Location

Collier, V.P. (1995). Acquiring a second language for school. Directions in Lan-
   guage and Education, 1(4).

Cox, M. (2011). WAC: Closing doors or opening doors for second language
   writers? Across the Disciplines, 8 (4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
   atd/ell/cox.cfm

Fishman, S. M. & McCarthy, L. (2001). An ESL writer and her discipline-
   based professor: Making progress even when goals do not match. Written
   Communication, 18(2), 180-228.

Fu, D. (2007). Teaching writing to English language learners. In T. Newkirk &
   R. Kent (Eds.), Teaching the neglected "R": Rethinking writing instruction in
   secondary classrooms (pp. 225-243). New York: Heinnemann.

178
                                                                                         Writing Intensively

Gardner, C. (2010). Special issue: WAC at community colleges. Across the
   Disciplines, 7. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/community_
   colleges/

Hirsch, L. (1986). The use of expressive function talk and writing as learning
   tools with adult ESL students across the curriculum (Doctoral dissertation).
   New York University, New York City). Dissertation Abstracts International,
   47-08, 2927A.

Hirsch, L. (19988). Language across the curriculum: A model for ESL students
   in content courses. In S. Benesch (Ed.), Ending Remediation: Linking ESL
   and content in education (pp. 67-89). Washington, D.C., TESOL.

Hirsch, L. (1996). Mainstreaming ESL students: A counterintuitive perspec-
   tive. College ESL, 6(2) 12-26.

Hirsch, L. & Paoli, D. (2012). The City University of New York: The imple-
   mentation and impact of WAC/WID in a multi-campus urban university. In
   C.Thaiss, G. Braeuer, P. Carlino, L. Ganobcsik-Williams & A. Sinha, (Eds.),
   Writing programs worldwide: Profiles of academic writing in many places (pp.
   439-454). Fort Collins, CO: WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press. Re-
   trieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/books/wpww/

Hirvela, A. (2004). Connecting reading and writing. Ann Arbor, MI: University
   of Michigan Press.

Hostos Community College. (n.d.). Writing Across the Curriculum at Hostos
   Community College. http://commons.hostos.cuny.edu/wac/

Leki, I. (1995). Coping strategies of ESL students in writing tasks across the
   curriculum. TESOL Quarterly 29(2), 235-60.

Leki, I. (2001). Reciprocal themes in ESL reading and writing. In T. Silva & P.
   K. Matsuda (Eds.), Landmark essays on ESL writing (pp. 173-190). Mahwah,
   NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Martin, N., D'Arcy, P., Newton, B., & Parker, R. (1976). Writing and learning
   across the curriculum. London: Wardlock Educational.

Reid, J. (2006). "Eye" learners and "ear" learners: Identifying the language
   needs of international student and US resident writers. In P. K. Matsuda, M.
   Cox, J. Jordan, & C. Ortmeir-Hooper (Eds.), Second-language writing in the
   composition classroom (pp. 76-88). New York: Bedford/St. Martin's.

Reid, J. & Kroll, B. (2006). Designing and assessing effective classroom writing
   assignments for NES and ESL students. In P. K. Matsuda, M. Cox, J.Jordan,
   & C. Ortmeier-Hooper (Eds.), Second-language writing in the composition
   classroom (pp. 260-283). New York: Bedford/St.Martin's.

Roberts, L. (2008). An analysis of the National TYCA Research Initiative Sur-
   vey Section IV: Writing across the curriculum and writing centers in two-

                                                                                                179
Hirsch

   year college English programs. Teaching English in the Two-Year College,
   36(2), 138-153.
Thaiss, C. & Porter, T. (2010). The state of WAC/WID in 2010: Methods and
   results of the US survey of the international WAC/WID mapping project.
   College Composition and Communication, 61(3), 534-570.
Torbe, M. & Medway, P. (1981). The climate for learning. London: Wardlock
   Educational.
Zamel, V. (1995). Strangers in academia: The experiences of faculty and ESL
   students across the curriculum. College Composition and Communication,
   46(4), 506-521.
Zawacki, T. M. & Habib, A. (210). "Will our stories help teachers understand?"
   Multilingual students talk about identity, academic writing, and expectations
   across academic communities. In M. Cox, J. Jordan, C. Ortmeier-Hooper,
   & G. G. Schwartz (Eds.), Reinventing Identities in second language writing
   (pp. 54-74). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

180
                             SECTION II

    FACULTY CONCERNS AND
EXPECTATIONS FOR L2 WRITERS

                                                                                         181
CHAPTER 7

NEGOTIATING "ERRORS"
IN L2 WRITING: FACULTY
DISPOSITIONS AND LANGUAGE
DIFFERENCE

Terry Myers Zawacki and Anna Sophia Habib
George Mason University

This chapter reports on a study of faculty dispositions towards language
difference, including the ways they talk about second language writers
and the errors--actual and perceived--that they identify as well as
how willing, or not, they seem to be to engage in negotiations around
these errors. The authors describe the theory and research that moti-
vated and informed their study, their interview methods, and their
findings, which are organized by two primary concerns expressed by
the faculty informants: whether the students comprehend the material
they are writing about and whether L2 students are being fairly and
adequately prepared for other courses and the workplaces they will en-
ter if errors are not addressed.

My strength in Spanish is [my] personal style of how to write,
and that's something that people like, and my grammar and
vocabulary in Spanish are really good. In English, I would like
to have more vocabulary. When I don't know a word, I just try
to describe what I meant with [other words], so that makes my
sentences longer or hard to read. Not good.

                     --Diana, international student from Columbia

At some point, you are going to have to take a position on second
language writing errors. You can't give them special consideration,
but you can consider alternative ways to grade that are fair. I do
take points off for the writing in a paper, but, in ESL cases, for

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.07                        183
Zawacki and Habib

       example, I tend to look for persistent errors, [which] I'll take as
       just one case of a grammatical error. There's some room I think to
       work with that.

                                                     --Anthropology professor

       A translingual approach proclaims that writers can, do, and must
       negotiate standardized rules in light of the contexts of specific
       instances of writing. Against the common argument that students
       must learn "the standards" to meet demands by the dominant,
       a translingual approach recognizes that, to survive and thrive as
       active writers, students must understand how such demands are
       contingent and negotiable.

                         --Horner, Lu, Royster, & Trimbur, 2011 (p. 305)

   "Not good," Diana says about her efforts to compensate for not yet having
found the right words to write in the academic style--correct, concise,
appropriate vocabulary--she believes her US teachers expect, a style different
from what her Spanish readers seemed to enjoy. This perception of her own
limitations--a deficiency as she sees it--as a novice academic writer navigating
a new linguistic terrain is echoed by so many international and/or multilingual
students in study after study on English second language (L2) writers in
postsecondary institutions.1 Yet, despite this sense of their own perceived
shortcomings, we see these L2 students, like Diana, as actively negotiating
reader expectations for writing in a home language and writing in English in a
new academic context.

   For many faculty, there is "some room to work with that," as the anthropology
professor we quoted above suggests. Both he and Diana are attempting to
reconcile the "errors" that emerge in the translingual written product: she by
writing longer sentences; he by minimizing points off for persistent errors rather
than penalizing a student for repetition of the same error. While Diana, like
many L2 writers, recognizes that her lack of vocabulary is causing sentence and
syntax errors, many faculty may also be recognizing that linguistic struggle, just
as the anthropology professor does, by "taking a position on second-language
errors" that includes finding alternative ways to think about fair grading practices
for L2 writers. For both teacher and student, however, error is the focus of their
observations about L2 writing, just as it is for so many of the faculty and the L2
students we've encountered in our work as WAC and writing center directors
and in the interviews we conducted for the research we're reporting on here.

184
                                                                       Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing

   Admittedly we purposely selected these quotes on error to highlight what
we see as the most frequent and anxiety/frustration-producing point of contact
for faculty and students when it comes to second language writing at the
postsecondary level. While we endorse a translingual approach that sees "the
standards" as "contingent and negotiable" (Horner, Lu, Royster, & Trimbur,
2011), we also appreciate the dilemma faculty face in deciding what constitutes
an error and when and in what contexts it should be "counted" in evaluating
an L2 student's communicative competence. Horner, Lu, Royster, and Trimbur
(2011) believe that we--teachers and students--can take up a translingual
approach by "changing the kind of attention we pay to our language practices,
questioning the assumptions underlying our learned dispositions toward
difference in language, and engaging in critical inquiry on alternative dispositions
to take toward such differences in our reading and writing" (p. 313). In this
chapter, we're interested in what those faculty dispositions are towards language
difference, what kind of attention they pay to students' language practices,
and how willing--or not--they seem to be to engage in negotiations around
perceived and actual error2 in L2 student writing.

   We begin by describing our initial motivation for undertaking this research,
including an interest in the translingual theories and World Englishes research
that we'd been reading and that provide an underpinning for our work.
Next we describe our interview methods and how we coded the transcripts,
noting that "error" emerged as a recurring theme in the faculty interviews. To
present our findings on faculty dispositions towards error, we've organized the
data according to what errors seemed to be most disturbing to faculty in our
interviews, echoing Leki's (2007) description of the anxiety many L2 students
feel about writing for faculty already "disturbed" by their errors (p. 248)3. We
categorize our findings according to two primary concerns expressed by our
informants: Do the students understand the material and expectations for
writing in the course and the major? And, following from that concern, are they,
the faculty, adequately preparing students for their other courses and for the
workplace if the students are not able to meet their expectations for the writing?
For many, this latter concern was also bound up with a strong sense of fairness,
i.e. the need to be fair to the L2 student, whatever form that took in grading
the writing, as well as to be fair to the other students in giving equal grades for
equal work. Interestingly, but not surprisingly, as we'll explain, several teachers
mentioned reflective writing as a genre through which L2 writers experienced
the most success. We conclude with implications of this research for faculty and
writing program administrators to consider when deciding how to best serve
their multilingual students.

                                                                                                185
Zawacki and Habib

OUR STUDY: MOTIVATIONS AND
UNDERPINNING THEORY AND RESEARCH

   In previous articles on this research, we've reported on the experiences of
multilingual students with academic writing across the curriculum and the
attitudes expressed by cross-disciplinary faculty about reading and evaluating
the writing of these students. We undertook our initial investigation of second-
language student writers several years ago, motivated by a desire to more
deeply understand the students' concerns so that we could convey these in
faculty development and tutor training workshops. While neither of us has
a background in linguistics or TESL, we were becoming more interested in
the intersections between second-language writing and WAC/Writing Center
scholarship. At that time, Terry was directing the writing center, along with
WAC, and Anna4 was the associate director,5 so we asked four graduate and
undergraduate tutors, three of whom were multilingual themselves, to assist
with our study. We called our first report on the student research Valuing Written
Accents (Zawacki, Habib, Hajabbasi, Antram, & Das, 2007),6 echoing Tonka,
a student from Bulgaria, who was insistent about wanting her writing to reflect
who she is and where she comes from. Even as she defined "good writing"
as "grammar-responsible," "well-structured," and "good flow," characteristics
she'd no doubt learned from her US teachers, she finished her list with this
observation: "When you ultimately succeed in writing is when you have your
own accent." In our conclusion to the monograph, we expressed the hope
that our research would help teachers value the diverse written accents they
encountered in their students' papers and to see their L2 students as language
resources rather than as writing challenges.

   As a follow up to the student research, we began interviewing faculty across
the disciplines to hear their perspectives on L2 student writing in general and
to share the students' concerns, an action research project we'll say more about
shortly. At the same time, we were also following arguments in the literature
about the "English Only" bias implicit in writing instruction (Horner &
Trimbur, 2002; Matsuda, 2006) and the need for a new translingual paradigm
that sees "difference in language" not as error but rather as evidence of a writer
negotiating meaning across fluid and heterogeneous linguistic boundaries
(Canagarajah, 2002, 2006, 2007, 2009; Horner et al., 2011).7 This reframing
of "error" fit well with our appeal to faculty to value students' written accents,
as did a translingual approach that encourages teachers to ask "not whether the
language is standard but what the writers are doing with language and why"
and to read "with patience, respect for perceived differences within and across
languages, and an attitude of deliberative inquiry" (Horner et al., 2011, pp.

186
                                                                       Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing

304-305). In our interviews with faculty, we were interested in comparing what
they said about the "standards" and their expectations for "good" writing, in
general and in their disciplines, to the perceptions of good writing and teacher
expectations expressed by our multilingual student informants. But we were
also interested in the genres the faculty informants regularly assign; their sense
of the challenges, if any, that L2 students face with the assignments; and the
advice and assistance they might give to help students improve as writers.

   As we conducted the interviews, we noted that faculty kept coming back
to their concerns about the errors they saw in their "ESL" students' writing
and their inability to diagnose the cause of the errors or even explain how to
fix them. While most acknowledged that they couldn't be sure if a student was
ESL, they explained that the kinds of errors they saw in the papers and/or the
student's identity and accent generally led them to believe this was the case. The
issue of "error" thus emerged as a common theme throughout the interviews,
leading us to become interested in looking closely at the language the faculty
used to talk about L2 error and how open they seemed to an interpretation of
error as translingual code-meshing or, to use Canagarajah's (2006) formulation,
"the learner's active negotiation and exploration of choices and possibilities" (p.
593).

   Theoretically, we were interested in the wider contexts in which negotiations
around language difference occur. If error, in Canagarajah's terms, can,
depending on the context, be seen as a "refusal to negotiate,"8 we wondered
what the grounds for refusal might be when it comes to L2 students' academic
writing, along with who has a stake in the negotiations. We mapped out the
stakeholders present at the scene of writing, placing the L2 student writer and
the instructor at the center with each bringing his/her own individual, cultural,
and school writing lessons-learned to the rhetorical encounter. At the same time,
both the student writer and instructor are also influenced by and/or accountable
to the stakeholders in the background, actual or perceived, representing "the
standards"--other faculty and administrators, institutional policies, accrediting
bodies, and interested publics, including those driving mandates for writing
assessment. The negotiations, in other words, are never just between the student
and the instructor but include a whole host of interested others who populate the
contact zone where error is negotiated, with the student writer, whether English
L1 or L2, having the least power but the highest stake in the negotiations.9

   The classroom is a "powerful site of policy negotiation," Canagarajah (2006)
argues in his much-cited "The Place of World Englishes in Composition:
Pluralization Continued." In this space, "standard" English policies are
reconstructed from the "ground up" through the "pedagogies practiced and
texts produced" (p. 587). If we can see our way to allowing students to use

                                                                                                187
Zawacki and Habib

vernacular English or World Englishes, he argues, their and our academic texts
will be enriched. Yet, he also admits that he himself has been so "disciplined"
into using standard English in his own academic writing that he has trouble
extending his "pluralizing" argument into deeper structures of grammar and
syntax (pp. 612-613) where error is most often read. There is such a thing as
"error," Horner, Lu, Royster, and Trimbur (2011) agree, "[All] writers make
mistakes, and all writers are usually eager to remove mistakes from their writing"
(p. 310). Like Canagarajah, however, the authors urge teachers to "reserve" the
"possibility of error ... as an interpretation of last resort" (2006, p. 304) and to
be more humble about what constitutes a mistake (and about what constitutes
correctness) in writing, rather than assume that whatever fails to meet their
expectations, even in matters of spelling, punctuation, and syntax, must be an
error (p. 310).

   Given our own position on valuing students' written accents, we find these
translingual arguments theoretically persuasive, as we've said. Theoretical is the
operative word here, however. To enact theory, in our pedagogy and writing
program administration, we needed to first understand teachers' attitudes
towards L2 errors and the kinds of errors they described as most troublesome or
problematic or "disturbing." Without that understanding, it would be difficult,
not to mention presumptuous, to suggest that they consider other possible
interpretations of the mistakes they reported students making. We were not as
much interested, then, in looking at what errors they found most "disturbing,"
but rather how they described the errors and why they seemed to be "disturbed"
by particular kinds of errors. Based on what we were seeing as we analyzed the
faculty interview transcripts, we also wanted to consider other possible causes,
apart from the translingual explanations we've just described, for the errors they
said they noticed, including the difficulty L2 students face in learning to write
not only in English as an additional language but also in the unfamiliar genres
and discourses of a discipline.

   The complexity of learning to write in a discipline has been well documented
in both the L1 and L2 literature; to write like an insider, in addition to
knowing the subject matter, students need to acquire knowledge of the genres,
discourse conventions, and rhetorical contexts typical of the discipline, along
with effective composing and research processes (see models of discourse/genre
knowledge in Bean, 2001; Beaufort, 2007; Tardy, 2009). Whether they are
English monolingual or multilingual, students are bound to make missteps
and mistakes in the process of acquiring these skills and knowledges. With
experience and opportunities for practice in courses across the curriculum,
student writers will become more fluent in the target genres and also learn
appropriate voices and styles for the writing tasks. It is the accumulation of

188
                                                                       Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing

general writing process knowledge along with local knowledge of the genres
and conventions of the discipline that leads to fluency, Carter (1990) explains
in "The Idea of Expertise: An Exploration of Cognitive and Social Dimensions
of Writing." For second language writers, however, the acquisition of expertise
departs in significant ways from Carter's formulation, with writing processes
much more constrained and difficult for L2 writers as they search for the correct
and/or appropriate language with which to express what they know10 (see, for
example, Silva's (1993) "Toward an Understanding of the Distinct Nature of
L2 Writing: The ESL Research and Its Implications"). With sufficient writing
practice across the curriculum and time to acquire the necessary language skills
and genre and writing knowledge, however, L2 students will likewise develop
fluency and accuracy even though their writing may still be marked by some
language differences. (See, for instance, Phillips' [this volume] discussion of
the successes of a multilingual graduate student in an interdisciplinary master's
program despite enduring language proficiency concerns).

   In considering the intersections of language knowledge, writing expertise, and
genre knowledge in his review article, "A Biliteracy Agenda for Genre Research,"
Gentil (2011) adds "strategic competence" to Tardy's (2009) integrated model
of the components of L2 genre knowledge, which itself closely resembles
other L1 models (Bean, 2001; Beaufort, 2007). As Gentil explains, "strategic
competence" involves being able to evaluate the task or communicative situation
and the correctness or appropriateness of the response, deciding how to respond
and "what elements from language knowledge and background knowledge are
required," and "retrieving and organizing the appropriate elements" to carry out
the task (2011, p. 12). In short, he says, "What distinguishes so called skilled
and less-skilled writers is precisely this ability to assess the writing situation,
set goals in responding to it, harness language and conceptual resources, and
monitor their uses while composing" (2011, p. 13).

   A daunting task for most students, as we noted above, and even more
daunting for L2 writers for whom, as Leki (2007) found, writing was often a
process fraught with anxiety and fear that their "language deficiencies" would
be exposed to teacher audiences "already disturbed by them" (p. 248). In
Undergraduates in a Second Language, Leki (2007) notes that one of the "most
neglected" areas in the L2 research has to do with L2 students' interactions
with faculty, faculty attitudes towards these students, and the students'
perceptions of faculty attitudes and expectations.11 Similar to the faculty we
interviewed, her faculty informants generally expressed admiration for the L2
students' motivation to study in another language with some being willing to
accommodate the student learners and others not (pp. 270-274). As we looked
at our faculty interview transcripts, however, we could see that the language

                                                                                                189
Zawacki and Habib

a number of them used in talking about student error--which included such
phrases as "zero tolerance for error," "a `take no prisoners' approach," "blast
students on errors," "no broken English," and "no scatter shot writing, just one
bullet at the target"--seemed to belie their good intentions and also made us
think again about the aptness of the "contact zone" metaphor. While this kind
of language suggests that errors are non-negotiable--and will certainly inspire
fear in their students, whether English L1 or L2--we'll note that some of the
faculty using these expressions were among the most generous with their time
and attention to struggling L2 writers.

OUR METHODS

   For all of the reasons we've described above, in interviewing faculty across
disciplines we wanted to understand their experiences with L2 writers, their
perceptions of the writing challenges faced by these students, the kinds
of language differences in students' written work that they found most
troublesome or problematic, the kinds of errors they were willing to overlook in
a paper, and the strategies they used, if any, to help these students succeed (see
interview questions in Appendix A). We conducted hour-long semi-structured
interviews with eighteen full-time faculty from sixteen different disciplines. In
choosing faculty to interview, we focused, for the most part, on those teaching
required writing-intensive (WI) courses in majors enrolling the largest numbers
of international students, according to 2011-2012 George Mason Factbook:
engineering/computer science/IT, business (with largest numbers in accounting
and finance), economics, nursing and social work, and biology. We interviewed
four faculty from engineering (electrical, civil, systems, bioengineering); three
from business (marketing and management); two from sociology, and one
from each of the following: math, geology, psychology, economics, nursing,
social work, anthropology, art and visual technology, and English. Five of our
informants are English L2 writers themselves.

   One limitation of our research, as we noted earlier, is that our faculty
informants didn't know how many of the student writers they were describing
in their interviews were, in fact, second-language (or third, fourth, etc) writers
of English. While most assumed that the students with the most pronounced
language difficulties were L2 writers, they sometimes told us when they had
other ways of knowing the backgrounds of the students they were describing.
They didn't, however, always share with us these other identifying markers or
the racial or ethnic backgrounds of their students, so we don't know how those
identities may have contributed to their attitudes on error or why certain errors

190
                                                                       Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing

may have disturbed them. Some said that many of their struggling writers
were likely immigrant students given their idiomatic speech or writing, and
many also pointed out that some of the most error-filled writing was often
produced by their English L1 students. While faculty may not necessarily know
whether the students they are working with are L2 or immigrant students with
second-language needs, we do know that many of our institution's students are
multilingual and that they are often being sent to the university writing center
to "fix their errors" because faculty either do not know how to help them or do
not have the time to work with them individually.12

   With the exception of one joint interview with three faculty members
from business where the paper had been provided in advance for all of us to
look at, we did not read or have access to students' papers to see what kinds
of errors the teachers pointed out nor the feedback they gave to students
about those errors. While these limitations meant that we weren't able to do
any first-hand error analysis or an analysis of the teacher's written feedback,
we were, as we said, chiefly interested in their perceptions of L2 students'
errors and the language they used in talking about those errors and about
the L2 student writers themselves. The business teacher who sent us the
paper in advance, for example, wanted us "to see for ourselves" the kinds
of "frustrating" language errors she was "dealing with." (In our discussion
of our findings, we include a passage from the interview related to this
paper.) Regarding these limitations, L2 writing scholars have recognized the
complexity of defining error in student writing. Leki, Cumming, and Silva
(2008), for example, find in their synthesis of research on L2 error that "error"
is difficult "to define precisely, identify reliably, and relate directly to writing
or language development" because more fluent writers produce different types
of errors while "the perceived severity of errors varies by aspects of language
or texts as well as the situations or interests of people assessing them" (p. 84).
Ferris (2004) critiques studies on teacher response to error, finding that the
researchers frequently fail to operationalize what they are calling "error" or use
ambiguous or vague definitions.

   All of the interviews were transcribed by the student research assistants who
also participated with us in coding and analyzing the transcripts. While our
coding yielded a range of L2 writing themes around which we could organize
a research report, for this chapter we're going to focus on passages where they
seemed to be negotiating with language difference--or refusing to negotiate--
as they talked with us about the "errors" they noticed in the writing of their L2
students. We also noted the language they used in talking about the L2 writers/
writing and whether their dispositions toward error seemed to be related to
disciplinary contexts and/or to their own individual preferences and/or writing

                                                                                                191
Zawacki and Habib

and language backgrounds, a theme identified by Thaiss and Zawacki (2006) in
their faculty interviews.

   While one goal of this research is to contribute faculty and L2 student
perspectives to the scholarly conversation on translingual approaches to writing
and teaching with writing in US postsecondary institutions, our research, only
part of which is included here, also aims to help faculty appreciate the wealth
of linguistic diversity our students bring with them, a point which is sometimes
easy to forget when we're in the throes of grading papers. As one of our faculty
interviewees recalled,

         A student from Vietnam came to my office to rework
         something in her paper, and she burst into tears and
         said another teacher had written on a paper that she was
         linguistically deficient. And I said "How many languages
         do you speak?" and she said "Vietnamese and French."
         And I said, "And you've only been here six months and you
         already know so much English!" You are just the opposite of
         linguistically deficient.

   Still, we can't ignore the fact that this linguistic diversity, albeit enriching,
raises important questions for faculty about how best to evaluate L2 students'
writing and what is "fair" in relationship to the other students and to the L2
students themselves. By sharing our research with faculty, we hope to stimulate
conversations among them about what constitutes "good" writing as it mirrors
the conventions and genres of their disciplines and fits with the professional
goals of their students, the workplaces they want to enter, and the variety of
Englishes people are using there. In the process, we may all learn to hear and
value the written accents our L2 students bring to our classrooms.

OUR FINDINGS

Content-knowledge and Comprehension:
Does the Student Understand?

   For many faculty, as we could see in the interviews, decisions about whether
to ignore errors, correct them, take off points, or fail the paper became much
more complicated when the errors involved lexical choices that raised worrisome
questions about comprehension. These also tended to be the kinds of errors that
were most frustrating for the faculty we interviewed as well as, for some, non-

192
                                                                       Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing

negotiable. Our interview with the three business faculty who'd sent us the
student's paper in advance illustrates not only the frustration the faculty felt
about the mistakes but also their sense that the student "was missing the boat
entirely," as one complained.

   For this assignment, the students were asked to develop a "job recruitment
strategy," to incorporate a "sufficient overview of the job, including essential
duties, skills, knowledge, etc. and "evidence-value added research." We've
italicized the words "essential," "skills," and "research" since it appears the
student may have been echoing these words from the assignment without
having a clear sense of what they might mean in the context of a recruitment
strategy she was describing.

         Speaker 1: In the second paragraph, this is where I said,
         "What are they talking about? This student chose to recruit
         for a job as a singer in a restaurant, so the first sentence of the
         second paragraph says, "One of the research essential skills is
         an audition."

         Speaker 2: She's definitely a second language writer, and she's
         not using the right terms "research" or "essential" or "skills."

         Speaker 3: What she wants to say is that we would make
         candidates audition.

         Speaker 2: Or one of the essentials is ... I know what she
         wants to say but she's not using the right word. She wants to
         say part of the research in finding a good singer is to have an
         audition, you know if you think of research in that way ...
         which we don't.

         Speaker 1: No, the term research is not even close to being
         right. [Nor is] describing skills as an audition. The audition is
         the way to measure skills. I was so frustrated [by this paper]
         because I could see the ideas throughout were not completely
         bad [but] they are not doing their job if they can't explain
         this to me.

         Speaker 2: This is a perfect example [of a paper that] conveys
         a lack of understanding of what they think the audition is
         in regards to human resource management. It's like I'm just

                                                                                                193
Zawacki and Habib

         throwing words out there, but I don't really understand what
         I'm saying.

   Clearly, these teachers feel the student understands the material, even if
imperfectly--"I know what she's trying to say, but she's not using the right
words"--but were unwilling to negotiate with his/her wrong word choices.
Rather, as speaker 2 says, "It's like [the student] is just throwing words out
there" but doesn't understand what s/he is saying. And yet speaker 1 admits that
she could "see the ideas throughout were not completely bad" and both speaker
2 and 3 are able to rephrase the student's sentences ("what she wants to say,"
"she wants to say"). The problem, then, seems to be that, while the student may
generally understand what is being asked, s/he is expected to be able "to do the
job" by using the "right" words. Here we see an opportune learning moment
for the student and a place for negotiation for the faculty (after all, they are
negotiating the lexical errors in the passage above) if they are willing to spend
time talking with the student about the expected vocabulary and why the "right
words" matter to them and to others in the field.13

   What struck us about this discussion, however, is not only how obviously
concerned the faculty informants were about their student's misuse of the course
vocabulary, but also their own lack of a vocabulary to talk about the writing at
the sentence and word-choice level--at least as they analyzed the passage with
us--which, in turn, made them dismiss the writing as unacceptable. It seemed
to us, as we discussed the passage later, that, while the word choice errors they
pointed out might well be rooted in the student's difficulty in accessing the
content, it's also likely that the error is rooted in the student's lack of discourse
knowledge, that is, how to go about writing what seems to be the hybrid
genre of a "job recruitment strategy." Even English L1 undergraduate students
might be challenged by this assignment, given that it calls for a "social action"
(Miller, 1984) that seems quite specific to a particular course with even the
name sounding like a teacher's idiosyncratic phrasing rather than a writing task
that is an accepted "way of doing" (Carter, 2007) in the management major.
If the business faculty had a way of thinking about the cause(s) of the word
choice errors, they may have been more patient with the student and better able
to help him/her find the appropriate terminology to use. (See Lancaster [this
volume] for another possible explanation related to stance-taking as the cause
of the error and the teachers' reaction.)

   As students become more experienced with the genres and conventions of
their majors, their fluency and accuracy can be expected to improve. How long
it takes them to improve, however, often depends on how frequently they are
asked to write and whether they are writing in the same or quite similar genres

194
                                                                       Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing

or in widely variant, even idiosyncratic, genres, e.g. a "job recruitment strategy"
from course to course in the major. We know, for example, that students writing
in "template forms," as our psychology informant called the lab report, achieve
accuracy and fluency more quickly than those writing in varied forms to varied
audiences (see Leki, 2007; Tardy, 2009; also Thaiss & Zawacki, 2006). The
psychology professor we interviewed said that she finds all of her students "share
the same challenges" with the format of the scientific report, and once the L2
students learn the format, they generally do as well as the English L1 students in
presenting the content. If the conventionalized forms of the lab report are easier
to learn than, say, the socially negotiated genres students might encounter in
business, the scientific audiences for empirical research are also generally easier
to imagine than those diverse potential audiences for, say, a management report
or a marketing strategy. While English L1 students may also find it hard to
acquire the right voice and style to write for business professionals, L2 writers
have the added challenge of finding not only the right words to use but also the
culturally appropriate ways to address US business people in writing while also
figuring out what the teacher thinks is appropriate.

   While at the surface, students' wrong word choices might be overlooked
as part of a language acquisition process and not necessarily a lack of
comprehension, what the business faculty's discussion suggests is that it's not
always possible to differentiate between the two. If the teacher evaluating the
paper can't be sure if the student is getting the content and understanding the
writing expectations, s/he also can't be sure that the course objectives are being
met and is therefore at a loss for how to move forward with the grading. A
second language professor from bioengineering, a Brazilian with a doctoral
degree from a German institution who told us that she expects her students, no
matter what their first language is, to produce error-free writing, explained the
problem this way:

         I'm sort of upset by the grammatical mistakes, but, if I can't
         understand half of [what is written] I feel like I'm losing so
         much. I have to trust the writer completely understands and
         ... it's like watching TV, but half of the pixels are gone. So,
         if on this screen half the pixels are gone, you could see the
         image, but it's not clear. You could make some other image.
         [So] I cannot understand their study unless the channel is
         transparent.

   As an example of the problem, she pointed to a sentence from a student
report she had shown us: "`Since the concentration of NA which is sodium

                                                                                                195
Zawacki and Habib

increases it causes the brain to polarized'." "At that point," she said, "I don't even
know if it's right or wrong, you know, because I can't understand it." In this case,
it seems to us that the student writer has acquired the disciplinary lexicon, what
Johns (2001) calls the "bricks" but is struggling with the "mortar"--the syntax
and even the punctuation--that would hold the sentence together. With some
work on her part, the teacher might see that the sentence could be corrected
to read as follows: "Since the concentration of NA, which is sodium, increases,
it causes the brain to become polarized." Whether the point itself is correct,
we can't say; however, she would be able to comprehend what the student is
attempting to say once the correct syntax and punctuation are inserted.

   Another L2 faculty informant from geology told us about her process of
learning to write "correctly" for graduate school in the US. While she was able
to learn the scientific vocabulary and genres relatively quickly, she realized that
she was still using the constructions of a typical Italian sentence. "I go back
and review that," she said, "and now, when I read it with an English mindset,
it sometimes doesn't make sense even to myself." When she submitted the first
draft of her dissertation, her committee told her it sounded like she was telling
a story and that it was not scientific writing. And yet, she said, "No one ever
told me we don't understand what you're talking about." Instead, the comments
were on the style of the writing, and these helped her to negotiate her way
through to more standard sentence structures, syntax and word choices.

   While errors that disturb the sense of a sentence or the whole piece of
writing aren't easy to negotiate and certainly demand time and patience from
the reader, the geology and bioengineering professors, like a number of the
faculty we interviewed, are willing to spend extra time with the L2 student
writers to help them succeed. In reflecting on why she's so tough on errors,
especially in the writing of her L2 students, the bioengineering professor said,
"I frequently ask myself why is this bothering me so much? Is it because it's also
my mistake? This could be." Although her own L2 writing experiences may
be informing her expectations for correctness, she also seemed to feel a strong
sense of obligation to her multilingual students, meeting with them outside of
class on their papers, helping them to read course texts, and giving them the
books she herself read to acquire fluency, e.g. Great Expectations, and asking
them to summarize chapters and meet with her to discuss them. (We can't resist
pointing out the appropriateness of this title, if not the novel itself, for the
aspirations of most L2 writers.)

   With her, as with a number of our other informants, the goal was to push the
students to higher levels of accuracy, so that they would be better prepared for
their other classes and/or the workplace. The greatest challenge for L2 students,
the psychology professor told us, is not at the idea level, once they learn the

196
                                                                       Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing

expected format, but rather at the sentence and word choice level. So "it's not
correctness per se," she explained, "but those sorts of unwritten rules about the
words that are appropriate to convey a particular point. Maybe other words
would work, but they aren't conventional, and readers will have to stop and say
`What do you mean?' rather than flowing through the logic." Yet, she added,

         Personally, you know, I think that those mistakes are part
         of what makes the world so interesting. I don't see those
         as flaws. However, I worry for the students that that will
         prohibit them from succeeding in the [major] and the field.
         So there is a standard way of communicating and should they
         not learn and apply that standard then they'll have a harder
         time succeeding. And so ultimately that's sort of my concern
         for them.

Academic and Workplace Writing Expectations: What Is Fair?

   Concern about what would happen for their L2 students when they wrote
in other courses in the major or entered the workplace was repeated by a
number of the faculty we talked with.14 While many of the students' lexical and
discourse errors could potentially be negotiated, the faculty questioned what
might be an acceptable level of error, if any, in their discipline as well as what
was in the best interest of their L2 students. We know from much of the L2
research on response to student writing (see Ferris, 2003, for example) and
from our own interviews with L2 students that most students do want error
correction to help them acquire academic language proficiency.15 For both the
students and the faculty, then, there is a strong sense that L2 students need to
acquire communicative and strategic competence (Ferris, 2003; Gentil, 2011)
to succeed in the university and in their chosen fields. While we have been
arguing, based on our research, that determinations of "competence" are often
dependent on the context and readers' dispositions, the data we report in this
section indicate that these faculty felt that it would be remiss and unfair of them
to expect less of their L2 students than they do of their English L1 students.

   Careful, error-free writing is the key to success in systems engineering,
according to the professor we interviewed. For a requirements engineer, the
hardest part of the job, she said, "is finding out what everyone is doing and
getting the problem down accurately and correctly [so that] the user is happy.
The easy part is the quantitative stuff." Clear communication is critical, so, when
she grades the papers, she applies the same standards to everyone, although she,

                                                                                                197
Zawacki and Habib

like the bioengineering professor, spends a great deal of time working with all
of her students to help them meet the standards she sets. In grading papers,
she told us, she makes it a practice not to even look at the name of the writer
until she has given the grade because "No one's going to give them a break
when they're working because they're from wherever. You just get left behind,
so why not get told that now when you're a student rather than get hit in the
face with it when you get out there working." For much the same reason, faculty
and administrators in the School of Management expect all students to be able
to produce writing in standard English with few mistakes, based not only on
workplace expectations but also on the accreditation requirements for the field.
They are firmly supported by the dean who speaks and writes Spanish as his
first language.

   While questions about "fairness" emerged as a real concern for our faculty
informants (as it did for the faculty interviewed by Ives, Leahy, Leming, Pierce,
& Schwartz [this volume]), what's interesting is that the way they talked about
fairness didn't seem to revolve around being equitable in their grading, but
rather about doing all they can to best prepare their students for future success.
Although negotiating meaning may be their preferred approach, they feel
pressure, as we said, to help their students meet standards for writing academic
English. If the stakes are perceived to be high for L2 writers as students, there are
also real stakes around correct usage in the fields some of the students will enter.
A faculty member from social work, for example, explained that, although there
may be "minimal mistakes," if students

         are going into health care, they have to make sure that what
         they are writing is exactly what they are meaning to say;
         any case records that they do and any communication has
         to reflect exactly what they mean. So people aren't reading
         between the lines for those kinds of things.

   She also described, however, what we would consider a translingual
approach to negotiating meaning around the misuse of terms tied to cultural
differences. "I try not to be too hard on students," she said, "if they're using
words that we wouldn't necessarily use here, but the usage is based on their
culture." As an example, she mentioned the word "abuse," which, she said, is
sometimes "overused relative to what we mean by it here and what it means
in other countries where it can be perceived differently based on how children
are disciplined in other countries or how elderly people are treated in the US."
For that reason, she spends time in class talking about culturally different

198
                                                                       Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing

perceptions of key social work issues, while cautioning all of her students to take
great care in the choosing the terms they use to describe the social conditions
they're writing about given the diverse populations they will be working with if
they remain in the US.

   The math professor we interviewed provided a different kind of insight on
the reasons correct word choice is important in his field. "English allows for a
degree of vagueness, which is generally bad in communicating mathematical
ideas," he told us. In math, correct article usage is crucial, he said, even though,
as we noted to him, most language specialists would generally recommend not
spending too much time on this relatively minor grammatical feature. As he
pointed out, however,

         Math is a precise discipline, so if we say that there is "a"
         solution, we know that there may be another solution,
         but if we say "the" solution, that means there cannot be
         another solution. So in this case knowing the articles is very
         important and this goes back to how they translate their
         thinking to English.

   For the faculty we've described in this section, there is a strong sense of the
stakes involved in students being able to produce writing that is mostly free of
lexical errors and reflects an understanding of the importance of correct usage in
the fields and workplaces they plan to enter. While they do penalize students for
making errors, most are also willing to help students by conferencing with them
on their writing or by requiring them to go to the writing center. In contrast,
a civil engineering professor, also multilingual, told us that he takes off only
a small percentage for poor writing even though he cares about and expects
standard written English. In describing his reasons, he explained,

         I want to talk about engineering not writing. [As much as
         writing is important,] there's not much bang for the buck to
         work with undergraduate writing. They can learn on the job.
         They need a certain level of intellect to survive the rigors of
         engineering. An engineering major who can't write still has
         the job. The English major doesn't.

   For this professor, then, being fair to his students means preparing them to
be engineers, not writers. Worrying about errors in their writing takes attention
away from worrying about their ability to succeed as engineers.16

                                                                                                199
Zawacki and Habib

Readerly Dispositions and Reflective Writing

   In our interviews, several faculty mentioned assigning reflective writing
tasks, and it was interesting to hear how the reflection genre itself seemed to
evoke a different readerly disposition towards error on the part of the faculty we
talked to, generally because they saw the stakes involved as being very different
for students. As the management teacher explained, "It's not really like right
and wrong; it's more like a self-discovery process." As she described it, the goal
of the "non-academic" reflective paper she assigns is "to give students practice
thinking through a challenge or problem for which there is no easy answer,
[one that] is inherently meaningful to them ... and that might help them think
through an issue they're confronting right now or might confront in the future."
All of the students, including the L2 writers, generally do very well on this
assignment, she noted, partly because

         they definitely feel that the reigns are looser. I don't go in
         there with any expectations. And it's not such a technical
         piece, although some students are very technical, it can be
         very personal. I tell them I want to hear your voice come
         through if possible in this paper. I don't want it to be so
         formal.

   As we see it, the "looser reigns" seem to free up the space for the faculty
member to stop worrying about perceived external pressures and expectations,
and to focus on how the students are learning the material and on their
processes for writing about that learning. Teachers read with a different
disposition, in other words. The social work professor told us, for example,
that reflective writing is a regular part of social work assignments and noted
that students are even better at reflection than at their other writing, while
also adding "or at least [reflective writing] is easier for me to assess because I
don't worry about the grammar and sentence structure as much. And I think
because of that too, they're more free to just write what they're thinking."
She continued, however, that, while reflection is easier for students to write
and for her to grade, "it may be harder for ESL students in terms of language
translation." We're particularly interested in that observation given that
much of the second-language writing research indicates that drafting and free
writing may be painstaking for L2 students who are also struggling with word
choice and phrasing in English.

   And yet, just as with English L1 writers, reflection on learning and writing
plays an important role in L2 students' language and writing development. In

200
                                                                       Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing

discussing the components of specific-purpose language ability, Gentil (2011)
explains that learners need not only the ability to choose appropriate responses
for a task, but they must also be able to reflect on and evaluate their choices (p.
13). Tardy's (2009) model of genre knowledge includes "process knowledge,"
which involves not only the ability to use appropriate processes but also an
awareness of one's own and others' composing processes for written genres.
Still, the concept of reflection may feel foreign to many L2 students who may
be uncomfortable and even resistant to writing about themselves as learners,
writers, or as individuals with a literacy history to bring to their learning and
writing. For many, just as with English L1 students, reflective writing can also
appear to be a "waste of time," as Leki (2007) notes was the case for some of
the L2 undergraduates she studied (p. 247) and as we found in some of our L2
student interviews, suggesting, we think, that the students also understand the
stakes to be lower. They reason that if the work isn't going to be graded, then
why expend the effort? As with any writing assignment teachers give, students
need an explanation of the learning goals for the task and even, perhaps, an
opportunity to reflect on the value of reflection. Both the faculty and student
informants in our research, for example, commented on how the interview
itself had led them to reflect on themselves as teachers and writers in ways they
hadn't before.

CONCLUSION

   We opened our chapter with Diana's self-perceived deficiencies, her "not
good" feeling about her writing in English. This feeling is understandable when
multilingualism itself is perceived as a deficiency rather than a strength. We
must actively resist this perception by helping faculty learn how to read with
patience, respect for language difference, and a deliberative attitude (Horner et
al., 2011) that seeks to understand the causes for perceived error and is open
to the possibility of negotiation. As Shaughnessy reminds us, "English has been
robustly inventing itself for centuries--stretching and reshaping and enriching
itself with every language and dialect it has encountered," so this "battle" is
"worth waging" (1979, p. 13). Our goal in this translingual encounter should
be to move students from feeling "not good" to a place described by Ayesha, a
Pakistani student at the end of her undergraduate studies:

         When you are given a topic, the more you read about it, and
         the more research you do about it, the more it broadens your
         vision. And I really enjoy that everything is so new to me ....

                                                                                                201
Zawacki and Habib

         I get so excited. I'm like, okay, I am going to learn something
         new today .... And it feels so light when I have done my
         research properly and then I write something down. And I
         just feel so good.

   As we think about faculty expectations for their students' writing and their
attitudes towards errors, as well as students' expectations and attitudes, we're
reminded of Shaughnessy's (1979) words: "In a better world, it is true, readers
might be more generous with their energies, pausing to divine the meaning of
a writer or mentally to edit efforts, but it would be foolhardy to bank on that
kind of persistence except perhaps in English teachers or good friends" (p. 12).
While we found many of the faculty we interviewed to be generous with their
energies in helping L2 writers succeed and more than a few willing to try to
divine the students' meaning, we could also see that, for many, their expectation
of standard written English is driven by a strong sense of the stakes involved,
whether perceived or real, e.g. accrediting agencies, state mandates, future
job performance. When required to evaluate the students' comprehension
of the course content, our informants, like so many teachers, feel pulled in
two directions--wanting to respect the multilingual expression because they
recognize the challenge of writing about difficult material in a language still
being acquired, while simultaneously wanting to ensure that they are best
preparing their students for the perceived less-forgiving expectations of readers
in other contexts. Further, for many teachers, the possibility of negotiating with
lexical and domain-specific errors may not be practical if they don't also have
some understanding of the causes for the errors. When a teacher has to evaluate
a piece of writing and is faced with errors that could originate from a wide range
of possible causes, the diagnosis of the error becomes less important than a
consideration of how to give a grade that is fair to the student, fair to the system
of grading devised for all of the students in the class, and fair to stakeholders in
the courses and fields the students will be entering.

   As we see it, then, there is not so much a "refusal to negotiate" with
translingual writing on the part of faculty, at least those we talked to, but
rather that their willingness, or not, to negotiate derives from a complex
mix of motives, including their learning and writing goals for students, their
sense of what's fair to L2 students along with the other students, and their
understandings--and misunderstandings--of L2 error. WAC practitioners thus
emerge as stakeholders who can facilitate the process of negotiation through
informed faculty development, focusing on inclusive practices for teaching
with writing, including recognizing the strengths L2 students demonstrate in

202
                                                                       Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing

their writing and fairly evaluating the students' communicative and strategic
competencies. (See Lancaster [this volume] for an examination of stancetaking
in L2 writing--one element of writing that faculty often mistake as error--and
approaches for working with faculty to recognize it. See Cox [this volume] for
a range of strategies that can be used in faculty development workshops, on
websites, and in newsletters.)

   There should, of course, be institutional incentives for faculty who are
"generous with their energies" and willing to engage in inclusive pedagogies.
Haifeng from China, a student in public policy, noted that what helped him
learn to write according to the "American" conventions of his field was "getting
feedback on his writing and suddenly [understanding] that all my sentences
could be expressed in a better way." The professor who gave him this feedback
was

         very responsible and just [did] all the things he thinks can
         benefit [his students.] Besides grammar and writing mistakes
         and [highlighting] awkward English, he definitely [gave]
         us suggestions on topics. Before we start to write the paper,
         the professor tells us how to write an academic paper with
         the introduction, background, the methodology. He already
         showed us how to do this from scratch.

   The approach Haifeng's professor takes with his multilingual students is
time-consuming, but necessary if we want to be fair to all of the students who
enroll at our institutions. Here too WAC programs can serve an important
role not only as resources for faculty who strive to support multilingual writers
but also by working at the institutional level providing research, data and
evidence that allows universities to rethink resource distribution that supports
multilingual students. In addition to the kinds of funding often allotted to
international initiatives, i.e. funding for travel and classroom technologies,
institutions must reconsider how faculty are rewarded for engaging in inclusive
pedagogies that successfully retain and teach the international populations
being targeted. Faculty workloads might accommodate particular curricular
and pedagogical work; curriculum may be reconsidered in light of multilingual
support and the affordances such changes also bring to L1 students negotiating
an international future. In each case, the rewards will be tailored to the local
context, but that can only be realized if research, such as that engaged in here,
and as represented in other chapters in this collection, becomes part of the
institutional culture.

                                                                                                203
Zawacki and Habib

NOTES

1. In our interviews with second language writers, for example, in addition
to Diana, a student from Pakistan, Ayesha, lamented, "I do have ideas, and I
do want to put something down, but I am really short of words." Another, Sri,
who writes in Telugu and Hindi, told us, "It all comes down to vocabulary; it's
not your thought because everyone who does even a bit of schooling has some
thought in his or her chosen field ... but you have to know which words to use
to express your thoughts."
2. Not all errors are "invented" by readers, Bitchener and Ferris (2012) point
out; rather, linguists take a "theoretically and empirically grounded view of er-
ror," seeing errors in writing as "lexical, morphological, or syntactic deviations
from the intuitions of a literate adult native speaker of the language." Such
errors may be caused by "interlanguage" interference as well as L2 acquisition
stages of development (p. 42). Ferris and Roberts (2001) used the following er-
ror categories as codes in their research on actual errors teachers marked: verb
errors, noun ending errors, article errors, wrong word choice or word form,
and sentence structure, including sentence boundary errors, word order, omit-
ted words or phrases, unnecessary words or phrases, and other non-idiomatic
structures (pp. 161-84).
3. In their review of research of second language writing in English, Leki,
Cumming, and Silva (2008) show that, while faculty responses to L2 writing
vary according to a range of factors, e.g. age, gender, content area, the errors
that cause distraction, disrupt meaning, or seem "the most `foreign'" are apt to
elicit the most "irritation" or "cranky responses" (p. 30).
4. Anna's interest in this research also stems from her personal experience as
a multilingual writer and speaker herself from the post-colonial, multilingual
context of post-war Lebanon. After her family fled Beirut, she grew up as a refu-
gee in Cyprus where she attended a Lebanese school that followed the French
Lycee system and where English and Greek were taught as third and fourth
languages. Her personal experience as a code-mesher/switcher informed her
contributions to our linguistically inclusive research team.
5. During the course of our research, Anna became the interim writing center
director when Terry stepped down to devote full attention to directing WAC.
6. The full title of our short monograph is Valuing Written Accents: Non-native
Students Talk about Identity, Academic Writing, and Meeting Teachers' Expecta-
tions. The research was published under the auspices of the Office of University
Life and the Diversity Research Group. University Life subsequently funded the
creation of a website to present this research; it can be found at writtenaccents.
gmu.edu.

204
                                                                       Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing

7. In "Towards a Multilingual Composition Scholarship: From English Only
to a Translingual Norm," Horner, NeCamp, and Donahue (2011) explain how
a translingual model is different from both monolingual and traditional multi-
lingual models. A multilingual model, they argue, sees languages as "static" and
"discrete," with "fluency" determined by the user "achieving an `appropriate'
target," and with "bilingual" users "imagined as two monolinguals in one per-
son." In contrast, a translingual model opens up these language "confines" to see
languages as "fluctuating" and "in constant revision"; fluency as the ability to
code-switch, borrow, and blend; and "bilingual" as "a unique and shifting blend
of practical knowledge and language use." In this model, "mutual intelligibility"
is the goal, not appropriate usage in one language or another (p. 287).
8. The view of error as a "refusal to negotiate" comes up in much of Canaga-
rajah's work on Lingua Franca English (LFE), mainly in his research on the
professional writing of South Asian English writers/speakers. In "Lingua Franca
English, Multilingual Communities, and Language Acquisition" (2007), for
example, Canagarajah writes, "Breakdown in LFE communication is possible
only in rare cases of refusal to negotiate meanings--which is itself a form of
communication as it conveys the participant's desire to cut off the conversation"
(p. 929).
9. Here we're echoing Canagarajah, who takes up Pratt's idea of the contact
zone in much of his work on English Lingua Franca, recognizing the power
differences and unequal roles of those involved in negotiations around "na-
tive `norms'" and sociolinguistic change. See, for example, "The Place of World
Englishes in Composition: Pluralization Continued" (Canagarajah, 2006).
10. There is abundant L2 research (and debate) on cognitive, social, and aca-
demic processes involved in the acquisition of fluency and accuracy and most
effective approaches to teaching both. See, for example, Casanave's (2007)
chapter "Paths to Improvement" in Controversies in Second Language Writing,
Ferris's Treatment of Error in Second Language Student Writing (2002) and Re-
sponse to Student Writers: Implications for Second Language Students (2003).
11. She addresses that gap in the research in "Negotiating Socioacademic Rela-
tions: English Learners' Reception by and Reaction to College Faculty" (2006)
in which she looks at the kinds of accommodations, if any, faculty made for L2
students, their comments about L2 students, and the L2 students' comments
on their experiences with faculty.
12. Writing center usage data consistently indicate that almost half of all stu-
dents making appointments come from first-language backgrounds other than
English and that 60% of all users were referred to the writing center by a teacher.
13. The business teachers, in fact, talked about how they try to help multilingual
students negotiate unfamiliar terms on essay exams by giving them permission

                                                                                                205
Zawacki and Habib

to ask about idiomatic usage that is not specific to course concepts, e.g. "harness
energy," a word that one L2 student asked them to explain. At the same time,
the college has a "zero-tolerance" policy on errors, and, in the assessment rubric
they use for their accreditation, they spell out the numbers and kinds of errors
that are grounds for failure, which, as Terry has found in working with them, is
enormously problematic for a number of reasons, including their own failure to
agree on how serious certain errors really are or even to identify accurately the
errors they see or don't see, as the case may be.
14. While we would like to argue that teachers' concerns about what other
imagined readers and rhetorical contexts will require should be put aside to
focus on their own priorities and expectations for student writers, the responses
of many of our "take no prisoners" informants indicates that their concerns are
not unwarranted.
15. In her breakdown of academic language proficiency, Ferris (2009) includes,
among other proficiencies, sociolinguistic proficiency, i.e. an understanding of
register and the ability to carry out both social and academic tasks, and discourse
proficiency, i.e. how to introduce, conclude, and organize texts; how to present
and balance ideas in texts (p. 27).
16. His comment brings to mind Leki's critique in "Is Writing Overrated?"
of compositionists' assumptions about the role of writing in learning and the
arguments we make for requiring writing-intensive courses in the disciplines.

REFERENCES

Bean, J. C. (2001). Engaging ideas: The professor's guide to integrating writing,
   critical thinking, and active learning in the classroom. San Francisco, CA:
   Jossey Bass.

Beaufort, Anne. (2007). College writing and beyond: A new framework for uni-
   versity writing instruction. Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.

Bitchener, J. & Ferris, D. R. (2012) Written Corrective Feedback in Second Lan-
   guage Acquisition and Writing. NY: Routledge.

Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). Multilingual writers and the academic community:
   Towards a critical relationship. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1,
   29-44.

Canagarajah, A. S. (2006). The place of World Englishes in composition: Plural-
   ization continued. College Composition and Communication, 57(4), 586-619.

Canagarajah, A. S. (2007). Lingua franca English, multilingual communities,
   and language acquisition. The Modern Language Journal, 91, 923-939.

206
                                                                       Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing

Canagarajah, A. S. (2009). Multilingual strategies of negotiating English: From
   conversation to writing. Journal of Advanced Composition, 29(1-2), 17-48.

Carter, M. (1990). The idea of expertise: An exploration of cognitive and social
   dimensions of writing. College Composition and Communication, 41(3), 265-
   286.

Casanave, C. (2007). Controversies in second language writing: Dilemmas and
   decisions in research and instruction. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan
   Press.

Ferris, D. R. (2003). Response to student writing: Implications for second language
   students. New York: Routledge.

Ferris, D. R. (2004). The ``grammar correction'' debate in L2 writing: Where
   are we, and where do we go from here? (and what do we do in the meantime
   ...?). Journal of Second Language Writing, 13, 49-62.

Ferris, D. R. (2009). Teaching college writing to diverse student populations. Ann
   Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Ferris, D. R. & Roberts, B. (2001). Error feedback in L2 writing classes: How
   explicit does it need to be? Journal of Second Language Writing 10(3):161-84

Gentil. G. (2011). A biliteracy agenda for genre research. Journal of Second
   Language Writing, 20, 6-23.

George Mason University Factbook 2011-2012. Office of Institutional Re-
   search and Reporting. irr.gmu.edu/factbooks/1112/Factbook1112_Intro.pd

Horner, B. & Trimbur, J. (2002). English only and US college composition.
   College Composition and Communication, 53(4), 594-630.

Horner, B., Lu, M-Z, Royster, J. J., & Trimbur, J. (2011). Language difference
   in writing: Toward a translingual approach. College English, 73(3), 303-321.

Horner, B., NeCamp, S. & Donahue, C. (2011) Toward a multilingual compo-
   sition scholarship: From English only to a translingual norm. College Com-
   position and Communication, 63(2), 269-300.

Johns, A. M. (2001). ESL students and WAC programs: Varied populations
   and diverse needs. In S. H. McLeod, E. Miraglia, M. Soven, & C. Thaiss
   (Eds.), WAC for the new millennium: Strategies for continuing writing-across-
   the-curriculum programs (pp. 141-164). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Leki, I. (2003). A challenge to second language writing professionals: Is writ-
   ing overrated? In B. Kroll (Ed.), Exploring the dynamics of second language
   writing (pp. 315-332). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Leki, I. (2006). Negotiating socioacademic relations: English learners' reception
   by and reaction to college faculty. Journal of English for Academic Purposes 5,
   136-152.

Leki, I. (2007). Undergraduates in a second language: Challenges and complexities

                                                                                                207
Zawacki and Habib

   of academic literacy development. New York: Routledge.
Leki, I., Cumming, A., & Silva, T. (2008). A synthesis of research on second lan-

   guage writing in English. New York: Routledge.
Matsuda, P. K. (2006). The myth of linguistic homogeneity in US college com-

   position. College English, 68(6), 637-651.
Miller, C. (1984). Genre as social action. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 70, 151-

   167.
Shaughnessy, M. (1979). Errors and expectations: A guide for the teacher of basic

   writing. New York: Oxford University Press.
Silva, T. (1993) Toward an understanding of the distinct nature of L2 writing:

   The ESL research and its implications. TESOL Quarterly, 27(4), 657-677.
Tardy, C. (2009). Building genre knowledge: Writing L2. West Lafayette, IN:

   Parlor Press.
Tardy, C. (2011). Enacting and transforming local language policies. College

   Composition and Communication, 62(4), 634-661.
Thaiss, C. & Zawacki, T. M. (2006). Engaged writers and dynamic disciplines:

   Research on the academic writing life. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Zawacki, T., Habib, A., Hajabbasi, E., Antram, A., & Das, A. (2007). Valuing

   written accent:. International voices in the US academy. Retrieved from http://
   writtenaccents.gmu.edu

APPENDIX A: INVITATION TO FACULTY
PARTICIPANTS AND INTERVIEW QUESTIONS

   Terry Zawacki, director of George Mason University's Writing Across
the Curriculum (WAC) Program, Anna Habib, English and CISA faculty
member, and other WAC/writing center co-researchers, have been conducting
HSRB-approved research on the experiences of faculty when working with
second-language writers in courses across the disciplines. This research is
intended to add faculty perspectives to an earlier research study, also HSRB-
approved, on the experiences of international and immigrant students with
writing in the academic disciplines both in the US and in their countries
of origin. Our research findings will serve as a resource for both second-
language writers and for professionals interested in how best to teach or tutor
these writers.

   Following is a list of the questions that will be used to guide our semi-
structured interviews:

208
                                                                       Negotiating "Errors" in L2 Writing

Questions on disciplinary genres and the performance of L2 writers:

 What courses do you usually teach? Approximately, what percentage of
    your students are L2 writers as far as you can tell?

 What kinds of writing are most typical of your discipline? Do you expect
    undergraduates to be able to write in these typical ways?

 What genres of writing do you typically assign? What assignments do you
    typically give undergraduates? Do these differ depending upon the level of
    the course?

 What are your expectations for this writing in terms of general academic
    and more specific disciplinary standards? In your discipline, what things are
    valued in writing?

 What advice do you/would you give undergraduates about writing in your
    discipline?

 Do you require students to write in e-spaces? If so, how do you see L2
    students performing as writers in these spaces?

 Do you assign collaborative projects? If so, what, are your goals for writers?
    If you assign collaborative projects, what, if anything, have you noticed
    about L2 students' participation in these projects?

 What characterizes good and poor writing for students in your discipline?
 What are your principal concerns when grading the writing of non-native

    students?
 What similarities and/or differences, if any, do you see in the areas that

    need improvement in the writing of L1 and L2 students?
 In your experience, are there areas where L2 writers tend to have significantly

    more difficulty than L1 writers? Do you find that L2 students do better on
    some genres than on others? If yes, which of those areas are most significant
    to student learning or meeting your classroom objectives?
 How is credit given to sources in your discipline? What difficulties, if any,
    do you see L2 students having with citation and documentation?

Questions on faculty practices for teaching with writing:

 When giving feedback on student's papers do you tend to focus more on the
    global (i.e. thesis, conclusion, organization) or local (i.e. grammar) concerns
    in a paper? Is there a specific reason you focus on one over the other?

 How much error and what kinds of errors are too much error in your view?
 How do you respond to sentence level errors in the writing of your L2

    students?

                                                                                                209
Zawacki and Habib

 What, if any, kinds of adjustments have you made in your instruction and
    materials to address the needs of a diverse classroom?

 What advice would you/do you give to L2 students who are trying to learn
    to write in the major and/or your courses?

Questions on faculty reading and writing experiences:
 What is your native language? Can you read and write in that language?
 Do you speak, read, and/or write in a language (s) in addition to your

    native language? What language (s)?
 If yes, do you recall how you learned to write in English?

210
CHAPTER 8

"I DON'T KNOW IF THAT WAS
THE RIGHT THING TO DO":
CROSS-DISCIPLINARY/CROSS-
INSTITUTIONAL FACULTY
RESPONDTO L2 WRITING

Lindsey Ives
University of New Mexico

Elizabeth Leahy
University of Arizona

Anni Leming
Central New Mexico Community College

Tom Pierce
Central New Mexico Community College

Michael Schwartz
St. Cloud State University

This chapter investigates faculty expectations for student writing, spe-
cifically L2 writers of English, across disciplines at a flagship university
and an urban community college in the southwest. Drawing from a
faculty survey and follow-up interviews with faculty from various dis-
ciplines, the authors argue that study participants tend to hold multi-
lingual writers to a monolingual standard, but that they are conflicted
and/or ambivalent about this practice. The survey and interview data
show, first, that markers of nonnative speaker status or any features
that depart from Standard American Academic English often discour-
age and even preclude engagement with higher order concerns like
ideas and argument. Second, the data show that study participants
want native-like prose but do not necessarily expect it, despite what

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.08                            211
Ives et al.

       they may claim. Third, the data suggest that many faculty across disci-
       plines are open to discussions about language variety and working with
       multilingual writers.

   Matsuda (2006) observes that composition instructors often operate with
the assumption that all students who enroll in their classes are "native speakers
of a privileged variety of English" (p. 638), and that they come to class having
previously acquired Standard American Academic English (SAAE). Within the
framework of WAC, we extend Matsuda's "myth of linguistic homogeneity" by
investigating the experiences and expectations of faculty in the disciplines at a
local university and community college. In short, do these faculty assume and
demand a native speaker standard for their multilingual writers? Not only have
we seen some anecdotal evidence that this might be the case, but scholarship
in second language writing also suggests that such expectations are likely. For
instance, Ferris (2008) points out that

         While we language professionals may rest in our enlightened
         awareness that language acquisition takes time, and that
         progress and not perfection should be our objective, the
         realities and expectations of the world outside of our
         classrooms often pressure us to reach that unattainable goal.
         (p. 92)

Although our study was guided by many questions, this chapter focuses on two
of these: What do faculty across disciplines and college contexts expect from L2
student writing and how do these expectations shape the ways that they respond
to their multilingual students' writing?

   Hall (2009) argues that embracing the needs of multilingual writers
requires WAC to transform itself so that these needs are acknowledged and
addressed within the scope of the goals and mission of WAC programs. Cox
(2011) concurs, stating that "... WAC has increased emphasis on writing
across undergraduate programs without creating mechanisms that help
second language (L2) students succeed as writers and without creating faculty
development programs that offer training in working with L2 writers" (n.p.).
Our study responds in part to these calls for more articulation between second
language writing and WAC research, seeking to understand the ways in which
WAC and second language writing can complement each other in their
collective efforts to better serve the needs of faculty in the disciplines and
multilingual writers in those disciplines.

212
                                                                           Faculty Response to L2 Writing

   To investigate our study questions, we surveyed and conducted follow-
up interviews with tenured and tenure-track faculty, adjunct instructors, and
graduate teaching assistants across disciplines at two different institutions.
The themes that emerged from the data are somewhat contradictory, as we'll
explain. While some responses to the survey and follow-up interviews indicate
that faculty across disciplines expect unmarked SAAE from multilingual and
monolingual writers alike, other statements in the survey and interviews, often
from the same participants, indicate that this is not actually the case. Instructors
across disciplines do in fact expect language diversity to be reflected in their
students' writing but don't know how to address this diversity, resulting in
continued insistence on writing that meets a monolingual ideal, however this
is interpreted. Our data further indicate, however, that many faculty, like those
who participated in our study, are open to discussing new ways of addressing
language diversity in the classroom.

METHODS

   For all of us, the driving force behind this project was to become more
informed about the communicative situations that our students will face in
the future so that we, as teachers, can talk more knowledgeably with them in
pre-college writing courses and first-year composition (FYC) about what they
need to know to prepare to communicate effectively with a variety of academic
audiences. When this study began, we were all graduate students--Anni and
Michael in educational linguistics, Lindsey, Elizabeth, and Tom in rhetoric and
writing--who wanted to collaborate on this project because of a shared interest
in second language writing and WAC. At the time, Lindsey, Elizabeth, and
Michael were teaching at the university and Tom and Anni were teaching at
the community college less than a mile away, which is why we chose these two
locations as our research sites.

   Further, as even our small group of researchers indicates, there is much
overlap between our university and the neighboring community college.
Many graduate students in English, linguistics, and other disciplines support
themselves by teaching pre-college writing and FYC at the community college,
or by teaching some courses at the university and some at the community
college. Community college instructors in English and across the disciplines are
often alumni of graduate programs at the university and were trained to teach
there. Some university undergraduates choose, for financial reasons, to take
approved summer courses at the community college instead of the university.
Further, freshmen who have been admitted to the university but whose ACT

                                                                                                213
Ives et al.

scores are not high enough to place them into college-level composition must
first take pre-college writing courses that are provided through the community
college and staffed by community college instructors, but that are taught on the
university campus. While taking these community college writing courses (which
they don't necessarily know are community college courses), these students are
simultaneously enrolled in university courses in biology, psychology, and other
disciplines. That the two institutions have so much overlap contributed to our
decision to include both in our study.

   In addition, the two institutions where our study was conducted can be seen
as a microcosm of the growing multilingual population of the United States. As
Hall (2009) observes, multilingual learners are now part of the mainstream (p.
37), and this is certainly true for our institutions. Although language data are
not collected by the two institutions that are our study sites, they are located
in New Mexico, which is identified as a Minority-Majority state with many
cultures and languages represented. The most predominant language after
English is Spanish and its many varieties. Many Native American languages are
also spoken throughout the state, including Navajo, Keres, Tiwa, Towa, Tewa,
and Zuni. Additionally, many resident-immigrant languages are included in
the mix, such as Vietnamese, Tagalog, Mandarin, and Korean to name just
a few. Finally, both of the study institutions have large international student
populations, representing over 90 different countries. Given this diversity, it is
safe to assume that Hall's (2009) "Next America" is very much already present
in the institutions where our study was conducted.

   We want to note here that, while neither of the institutions we studied
has a formalized WAC program, we are currently making efforts at the
university to build a program informed by the Writing Across Communities
(WACommunities) philosophy. According to Kells (2007), a leader in this
movement, "A Writing Across Communities approach to WAC foregrounds the
dimensions of cultural and sociolinguistic diversity in university-wide writing
instruction" (p. 90), so WAC programs following this model are necessarily
informed and infused by scholarship in second-language writing.

   The first phase of our research was a faculty survey distributed through
surveymonkey.com. The survey asked respondents to report on several
different facets of writing in their classes, such as assignments, instructions,
the use of rubrics, and assessment. Additionally respondents were asked to
rate two paragraphs on the same topic--issues concerning poverty--that
were written as conclusions to an essay. The first paragraph, Passage 1, was
written by a multilingual writer from Hong Kong enrolled in an intermediate
writing course at an intensive English program in the United States. The
second paragraph, Passage 2, was a control paragraph, written by the research

214
                                                                           Faculty Response to L2 Writing

team to control for subject matter, content, organization, and surface-level
features.

         Passage 1 Non-native speaker of English
         In conclusion, poverty indeed creates some negative
         consequences for society, includes illiteracy,
         unemployment,crime rate, lack of science and technology,
         we know there is still some problems need to resolve. Due
         to this negative consequences, we supposed to pay more
         attention about third world countries; instead of ignoring the
         problem, we can make some decision to reduce the negative
         consequences and make these countries better.

         Passage 2 Control passage
         In conclusion, illiteracy, unemployment, crime rate, and
         lack of science and technology are negative effects of poverty.
         These problems can be resolved. We should do something to
         improve poor countries.

     Survey respondents were asked to rate each passage on three categories:
content, organization, and mechanics. The rating options for each category
were "exemplary," "above average," "average," and "substandard." In addition to
rating the passages, respondents were given the opportunity to provide qualita-
tive comments following each passage. While all the members of the research
team expected Passage 1 to be generally rated as "substandard" in the "mechan-
ics" category, the research team thought that the ideas expressed in Passage 1
were more complex than those in Passage 2, in which sentences were shortened
and edited. We also agreed, independently, that the organization of the control
passage, Passage 2, conformed more closely to the expectations of SAAE, but
thought that it transitioned less effectively from one idea to the next than did
Passage 1.

   A total of 104 faculty responded to the survey, with 72 coming from the
university and 31 coming from the community college (see Appendix A).
When asked about their language background, 96 of the respondents identified
as native speakers of English, while eight identified as nonnative speakers. Aside
from English, the respondents identified their native languages as Serbian,
Spanish, Tewa, Cherokee, Tagalog, Chinese, and Dutch.

   Survey respondents were invited to provide contact information if they were
interested in participating in an hour-long follow-up interview. We contacted
those who provided their information and interviewed them in a location of

                                                                                                215
Ives et al.

their choice. Roughly 11% of survey respondents participated in follow-up
interviews. The qualitative data we present here, however, include only eight
of the 12 interview participants since four interviews have yet to be transcribed
at the time of this writing (see Appendix B). The interview questions aimed at
giving us a more detailed picture of the participants' understanding of the role of
writing in their field, the relationship of that understanding to the writing they
assign, and how they respond to their students' writing. We also directly asked
"What are your expectations for multilingual writers?" since we were especially
interested in helping multilingual writers enter the discourse communities that
our participants represent. We expected that our participants would have had
some experience with multilingual students and that they would be able to
discuss those experiences. The interviews were recorded and transcribed. We
worked collaboratively to analyze the data, engaging in the process of discourse
analysis as conceptualized by Gee (1999) and Cameron (2001), by which we
sought to understand the construction of faculty roles and expectations of
student writing in the local community college and university. Further, we
allowed themes to emerge via open and axial coding processes (Creswell, 1998).

   While our team had previously heard anecdotal evidence that some instructors
at the university impose a rigorous monolingual standard for their multilingual
students, we did not assume that this would be the case with our interviewees.
Initially, however, some of us on the research team believed we would find
differences between the university and community college faculty regarding
expectations for their students in terms of academic writing, while others on
the research team anticipated relative uniformity between the faculty groups.
For example, Tom, Anni, and Michael's experiences at the community college
and the university led them toward an expectation that community college
faculty might be more likely to focus on sentence-level errors, while faculty at
the university might be more concerned about the content of ideas expressed.
While the data did not confirm this initial expectation, in our discussion of
our findings in this chapter, we are not going to make comparisons between
expectations for student writing at the community college and the university,
even though we think the comparative analysis is important. While there were
significant differences between community college and university participants
on some of the survey questions, we found no a significant difference in
the passage ratings, which are the focus of this chapter, between these two
demographics. In addition, delays with the community college Internal Review
Board shortened the amount of time that we had to conduct interviews at the
community college, so, as of this writing, we lacked enough interviews from
the community college to draw any conclusions about them in comparison
to the university interviews. Of the interviews that we have so far conducted

216
                                                                           Faculty Response to L2 Writing

with community college instructors, however, there is enough overlap in the
categories with which this article is concerned to discuss them together.

   In this chapter, we draw upon survey and interview data to argue, first, that
markers of nonnative speaker status or any features that depart from SAAE
discourage and even preclude faculty engagement with higher order concerns
like ideas and argument. Second, we argue that the faculty who participated in
our study want native-like prose but do not in fact expect it, despite what they
may claim. Third, we suggest that some of the interview responses indicate that
the faculty participants would be open to discussions about language variety
and working with multilingual writers.

OUR FINDINGS

Features Signaling English L2 Status Negatively Affect
Averall Perception of the Writing and the Writer

   The results, illustrated in Figures 8.1 through 8.3, show content for Passage
1 being rated as "substandard" by 44% of respondents as opposed to only 18%
for Passage 2. They show organization for Passage 1 being rated "substandard"
by 55% of respondents and for Passage 2 only 20%. Finally, they show, as we
expected, mechanics rated as "substandard" by 92% of respondents for Passage
1, and only 9% for Passage 2. The fact that Passage 1 was rated as "substandard"
in all three categories at a much higher rate than Passage 2, which tended to
be rated as "average," indicates that features signaling non-native speaker status
tend to negatively affect instructors' perceptions of student writing overall.
Survey participants were given the option of explaining their passage ratings,
and their explanations also support this interpretation, as do our interviews.

   Many of the respondents who rated Passage 1 as "substandard" overall
explained that the mechanical issues in this passage preclude comprehension.
An instructor in anthropology noted in the comment section for Passage 1 that
"This appears to be an ESL student's work, and if so, I would take that into
consideration in grading. However, it is so garbled as to be nearly incoherent."
An instructor in biology in the comment section agreed, saying "If the mechanics
are below average, I find it difficult to read the passage and make sense out of it.
If something is poorly written, the reader will get bogged down and it doesn't
matter how it is organized or what the content is."

   Both of these instructors indicate that, indeed, features signaling non-
native speaker status make it difficult, if not impossible, for them to respond to

                                                                                                217
Ives et al.

aspects of the student's writing beyond grammar and mechanics. While the first
instructor suggests that she takes language background into account in grading
for sentence-level issues, and, while she would like to respond to the content
and organization, she suggests that the passage departs so far from SAAE that
she cannot even do so. (This response aligns with the evaluations of L2 writing
that Zawacki and Habib [this volume] report from their faculty interviews
regarding concerns about their L2 students' comprehension of the material.)
The second instructor equates "poor writing" with "below average mechanics,"
seemingly reducing the meaning of writing to sentence-level concerns, placing
other elements like content and organization outside of the category "writing."
While the commentary on Passage 2 is also negative, it is important to note that
the respondents, seeing native-like usage, are more willing to address higher
order concerns in the student's writing.

    A few respondents directly compared Passage 2 favorably to Passage 1. An
instructor in biology said that Passage 2 "is better, but it doesn't flow very well."
An instructor in anthropology views Passage 2 as "Concise and with acceptable
grammar and spelling." Most of the comments about Passage 2 focus on the
passage's content and what it lacks. An instructor in biology advised that the
student "specify `improve WHAT in poor countries' and how ..." An instructor
in communication and journalism saw Passage 2 as characterized by:

Figure 8.1 Passage 1: Non-native Speaker

218
                                                                           Faculty Response to L2 Writing

         Substandard content, a low level of critical thought. Short
         and glib. No passion. The student is not struggling or
         highly engaged with the topic. They are writing to turn in a
         requirement. Clarity in organization. The brevity of course
         makes it easy to follow the flow of their ideas. This student
         is good at organizing their ideas, but not making an effort
         further than organization.
   An instructor in education explained that she would "object to the use of
`poor' in this passage because `poor' is frequently not within the power of a
country to change but is the place where that country is assigned by its neighbors
and world powers." Engagement with the student's thoughts and encouragement
to think more critically about the topic are evident in the comments about the
second passage. While such comments would also be valuable to the writer of
Passage 1, respondents offered almost none of such feedback to that passage,
focusing instead on grammar and mechanics.
   The questions about and implications of this division of commentary on
the two passages are too multiple and complex to address in detail here, but
it is worth considering some of the more obvious ones, i.e.: Does adherence
to SAAE facilitate instructor comprehension and therefore permit more

Figure 8.2 Passage 2: Control

                                                                                                219
Ives et al.

discipline-specific critical questioning? Does the lack of instructor comments
about higher-order concerns for a paper that does not follow SAAE conventions
hinder the student's cognitive development in that particular content area?
Does the instructor focus on sentence-level features rather than higher-order
questioning negatively influence a student, who may otherwise have a high level
of interest in the subject and whose perspective may provide useful and creative
insight?

   In a follow-up interview with an instructor in sustainability studies, she
told us that she marks all of her student papers for grammatical issues. "I mark
up their papers thoroughly every time. I give comments and suggestions in
terms of content and also in terms of grammar because sometimes I have a
hard time grading their work if I can't get past all of the grammatical issues,
so I try to work with them to the extent that I can." This response indicates
that, while she is committed to helping her students to write successfully in her
discipline, departures from SAAE at the sentence level make it difficult for her
to engage with other aspects of student writing, a position that echoes many of
the respondents' comments for Passage 1, the non-native speaker passage. Her
response suggests, then, that writing that does not adhere to the conventions of
SAAE invites sentence-level commentary rather than higher order commentary,
even when an instructor is committed to focusing on the content of the students'

Figure 8.3: Average Scores for Each Passage

220
                                                                           Faculty Response to L2 Writing

writing rather than being distracted by errors, as another interview participant
from linguistics explained. When asked what kinds of writing her students do,
the linguistics instructor talked at length about a final paper, explaining that she
tries "to weight it more heavily on content and not be distracted by the illiteracy
evident" in many of them. While this instructor expressed a commitment to
focusing on the content of her students' writing regardless of whether their
sentences conform to the standards SAAE, she said she does find departures
from SAAE distracting and tries to communicate that to her students:

         When they give me these answers on the tests I do correct
         the grammar on them. At the bottom of their test I will write
         "Boy you really need to work on that comma splice problem
         if you're going to continue in academic study." [...] You know
         if I can correct their grammar I will do it! [...] Agreement
         errors I also comment on, you know. Especially for nonnative
         speakers that's a toughy.

We also want to note that, while this instructor may appear to be understanding
of and attentive to the relationship between language background and student
writing, she equates sentence-level issues with illiteracy, which suggests to us
that she has little tolerance for other varieties of English that do not meet the
standard.

   The linguistics instructor's use of the word "illiteracy" to describe errors
in students' writing calls attention to another theme that emerged from the
interviews: that readers often make judgments about a writer's level of literacy
based on errors they see or perceive in the writing. That sentence-level errors
influence the decision-making process for gatekeepers, such as, for example,
potential employers and those who weigh admission to an institution and/
or program, is a well-documented fact (a fear also expressed by faculty
interviewed by Zawacki and Habib [this volume]). In a follow-up interview
with an instructor in physical therapy, he explained that only about 10% of all
applicants are accepted into the physical therapy program and that few of those
admitted are multilingual students. When asked why, he said, "I don't think we
have that issue as much. I think it's people that come in and English is their
first language. I think because our applicant pool is so rigorous, and we have
the luxury of taking the very high level people. The test scores and the people
who, you know, English is their second language don't obviously score as well
up front ... They have a tougher time getting in."

   His comments can be understood in multiple ways. One interpretation
might be that the winnowing process for admission, because of the sheer

                                                                                                221
Ives et al.

number of applicants, is warranted, even necessary for no other reason but
efficiency. Another may be that physical therapy is such a technical profession
that "highly sophisticated" English is a requisite for successfully completing
the program. Yet another interpretation of the admissions practices that the
instructor described, considering his exclusion of multilingual writers from
the pool of "high level people," may be that he has conflated intelligence
and cognitive ability with language skill, as Zamel (1995) has observed often
happens. We also considered whether the highly selective process could be
attributed to the profession requiring the ability to communicate health issues
or life threatening emergencies expertly, accurately, and efficiently. If this is the
case, then we wondered why, given our location, being multilingual and having
the ability to communicate effectively in, say, Spanish, Navajo, or Keres is not
as valuable, if not more so, than speaking and writing only in English?

   A similar gatekeeper position was reiterated in a follow-up interview with
a faculty member in communication and journalism, who recounted a story
about how an undergraduate from Bulgaria had asked her to write a letter of
recommendation for her as she was planning to apply to the graduate program
in communication and journalism. The instructor's response to the international
student, as she told us, was, "... you know what, I can't because you need to take
some intensive English courses that I'm not qualified to provide for you." The
instructor acknowledged that it was difficult for her to say this to the Bulgarian
student, but she also felt as if would be doing the student a disservice if she did
write a letter of recommendation for her. Here again surface-level features are
serving as a mechanism for preventing some L2 students from pursuing their
academic and career goals.

Faculty Want Native-like Prose but
They Do Not Really Expect It

   Our results indicate that the faculty we surveyed and interviewed want all of
their students to produce unmarked SAAE prose, but they do not really expect
it even though they might claim to. They do, in fact, expect language diversity
to be reflected in their students' writing; at the same time they don't know how
to address that diversity, which seems to lead to their continued insistence upon
writing that conforms to a monolingual standard.

   These contradictory views are evident in the survey passage ratings. Three
of the survey respondents remarked in the comments section of the survey
that Passage 1, the passage from the L2 writer, is average for students at their
institution, whether the community college or university. An instructor in
communication and journalism lamented, "Unfortunately if you are looking

222
                                                                           Faculty Response to L2 Writing

for `average' this reflects a lot of the writing that I receive. But it is substandard
to what I expect and require." An instructor in psychology wrote, "I personally
think this is awful overall, but it is about average for a [student at this
institution]. The grammar is particularly sub-standard however." Finally, an
instructor in communication and journalism reiterated the statements above,
going on, however, to qualify his/her assessment by stating that it is beyond the
purview of his/her responsibility to address surface level features, but that he/
she feels that this is something that must be done. Another instructor, quoted
below, focused her initial comments on the students' critical thinking skills and
content knowledge and then addressed the passage's surface level issues. That
the instructor first acknowledged the student's ability to critically analyze and
comment on the issue of poverty is worth noting.

         The student shows evidence of average content: critical
         thought on cause and effect and lists categories in their
         domain knowledge that I assume are summaries of content
         in their paper .... The organization is above average, in that
         the student attempts to create lists, associate cause and effect,
         and includes a call to action directed at the reader. Although
         the student is not accomplished in grammar, he/she makes
         an above average attempt to organize his/her thoughts.
         Mechanics, of course, are atrocious. But that's the type of
         student we have at our [institution]. It is not my role to teach
         grammar and sentence structure, but I do make strong levels
         of editing in the abstract and conclusion to show the student
         how to introduce and summarize their thoughts using the
         standards to which I hope they aspire. We work on a little
         bit of their writing together, the most important part, in
         mandatory one-on-one office meetings, but only one meeting
         per student is required. They can come back for seconds, and
         a few do return.

For this instructor, unlike the majority of survey respondents, sentence-level
departures from SAAE do not preclude focus on content or organization.
Although s/he is dissatisfied with the student's work at the sentence level, s/he
expressed understanding that levels of conformity to the prescribed standards of
SAAE will vary in linguistically diverse classrooms. S/he also seems somewhat
confident about working with linguistically diverse groups of students, but this
is not the case with many of her colleagues across disciplines. (The faculty's
recognition that the most important work on student writing happens during

                                                                                                223
Ives et al.

conferencing is affirmed by Chozin, the international graduate student featured
in Phillips [this volume]).

   The quality of writing, particularly at the sentence level, was quite obviously
at the forefront of many of the survey responses. And while the respondents
appeared to be highly critical of the quality of student writing they see in their
classes, the survey and follow-up interviews also show that faculty seem to be
conflicted about how to handle the variations to SAAE that they encounter
on a regular basis. During the follow up interviews, faculty participants were
asked if they had ever encountered papers that might reflect language issues. An
instructor from sustainability studies replied,

         You know, I haven't taken the time to pursue those sorts
         of things necessarily. Up until this point, I haven't given it
         special consideration. I try to grade people fairly and the
         same across the board, and I have rubrics. I don't think that's
         necessarily the right thing to do. However, when there are
         students that are having difficulties, I tell them to come to
         me.

Yet this same instructor, in a statement we quoted earlier, also said that she
holds all of her students to the same set of expectations as outlined in her rubric.
Still she struggles with this expectation, recognizing that holding multilingual
writers to the same standard in terms of SAAE as she does her native English
writers may not always be as fair and equitable as it seems. (This issue of fairness
also came up in many of the interviews Zawacki and Habib [this volume]
conducted.)

   An instructor from communication and journalism, when asked in an
interview about her expectations for multilingual writers, responded, "My
expectations for multilingual writers are the same as my expectations for native
speakers." Having said that, however, she immediately went on to say:

         However, I am willing to work with them on a one-on-one
         basis. I am encountering this in the graduate realm, where
         um, I strongly disagree with admission of students to this
         type of program who are not highly fluent in English because
         it's taught in English. I had a transfer student from Bulgaria
         and a visiting student from Spain, and the Bulgarian student
         was pretty fluent but the transfer student from Spain had a
         horrible time ...

224
                                                                           Faculty Response to L2 Writing

This statement indicates that this instructor, like the others we've quoted, does
not actually expect all of her students to have the native-like fluency in English
necessary to consistently produce unmarked SAAE in their writing. She wants
to be able to expect this, however, and thinks the placement of students who
cannot produce native-like SAAE into courses like hers is an injustice to them.
Further describing her experience with multilingual students, she said:

         And you know we have a problem. I have three Asian
         students who I'm working with now in a seminar. So I'm
         trying to help them with their writing. `Cause once you
         admit them I think you have a responsibility, and not
         everybody feels that way .... And it's not really the students'
         fault. They're being told if you want to go to the United
         States [passing the TOEFL] is what you have to do and this
         is how you do it. But then they get here and have trouble
         because they don't understand our system.

   The insistence on native-like SAAE even among an increasingly diverse
student population expressed by the faculty and instructors quoted above
supports Matsuda's (2006) point that "implicit in most teachers' definitions of
`writing well' is the ability to produce English that is unmarked in the eyes of
teachers who are custodians of privileged varieties of English" (p. 640). However,
as much as our study participants might want linguistic homogeneity, they are
acutely aware that this is not the situation in their classes. In fact, the majority
of the interview participants seemed genuinely concerned with the success of
all of their students, regardless of language background, even as they seem to be
at a loss as to how to work most effectively with non-native speakers of English.
This finding leads us to several implications.

Faculty Are Open to Conversations about
Language Variety in the Classroom

   The faculty who participated in our study, with a few notable exceptions,
seemed to be open to thinking more systematically about language diversity in
their classrooms and to having conversations, such as WAC promotes, about
how to work more effectively with multilingual writers. The need for such
conversations is most clearly indicated by the self-doubt two of the instructors
we quoted earlier expressed about working with multilingual students. One,
for example, concluded her remarks about a student whose organization and

                                                                                                225
Ives et al.

ideas were good but whose grammar "was atrocious," by saying, "I held him
to the same standard, and I don't know if that was the right thing to do." This
was the second time within just a few sentences that she had indicated doubt
as to whether holding multilingual students to a monolingual standard is the
best practice. Another questioned herself by saying, "I pass everybody. I'm
responsible for some of the problem, right?" indicating, presumably, that she
too is at fault for passing students who do not write in native-like SAAE by
the time the class is finished, thus allowing them to enter still other classes for
which they're not prepared to meet existing expectations.

   The doubt that both of these instructors express indicates that they want
to be fair and ethical in working with linguistically diverse students but may
not know how to do so while still sticking to the commonly held standards
for writing in their disciplines and institutions. The first question that comes
to mind, and perhaps the first question that we might raise with stakeholders
across disciplines, is whether and why writing standards have to be the same as
they were in a monolingual, idealized, and largely fictional past. As Horner and
Trimbur (2002) argue, standards and norms for academic writing have shifted
throughout the history of American higher education and should not remain
static now:

         While Bartholomae was being ironic in suggesting that
         students needed to "invent" the university in their writing,
         there is a real sense in which students, like all the rest of
         us writers, do participate in re-inventing--not simply
         reproducing but potentially altering--university language in
         each act of writing ... If we reject the reification of academic
         language and competence in it, we cannot use instances of
         students' language to deny them academic citizenship. (pp.
         620-621)

Cross-disciplinary, and even cross-institutional, conversations focusing on
the development of language standards that reflect our institutions' unique
regional location as well as the values of our individual disciplines would
be a productive response to the self-doubt that both of the instructors we
quoted express. (It is interesting to note that the students enrolled in a
mixed L1/L2/bilingual graduate writing workshop, described in Fredericksen
& Mangelsdorf [this volume], were open to working across languages and
cultures, which the authors attributed to the university's location near the
Texas/Mexican border).

226
                                                                           Faculty Response to L2 Writing

   A primary concern to address in these conversations should be how to grade
L2 students work in a way that is fair to all students. Several of our interview
participants explained how they negotiate this concern in their linguistically
diverse classes. One instructor said, for example,

         Some of them are just not ready to be in the class, but they're
         in there and you've got to work with that. And you give
         them a grade that reflects where they were when they came
         in and how much improvement they've made, rather than an
         absolute grading scale.

This instructor's explanation can lead to questions about what makes students
prepared or unprepared to be in a class. And is the grade reflecting improvement
applied to all aspects of all assignments, or just selected aspects of selected
assignments? And would a grade that reflects improvement be appropriate for
all students in a given class?

   In these conversations, faculty can also be asked to talk about whether and
why adherence to SAAE standards is important in grading. An instructor in
history, for example, said in his follow-up interview that, in his class,

         They, you know, really have to show that they know the
         subject material. And they have to show that they have some
         kind of argument .... Organization to me is very crucial, but
         I see it as tied in with argument .... You can't fail a paper for
         spelling and grammar and mechanics alone.

Here the instructor is asserting his view on which aspects of SAAE are
important to him and which are less so. Organization, presumably organization
fitting the typical Western pattern in academic writing of stating a thesis
at the beginning and relating each paragraph directly back to that thesis, is
important to the instructor because he sees this structure as integral to making
a convincing argument. However, that his students' grammar and mechanics
conform strictly to the standards of SAAE is less important to him. Questions
for further conversation in response to this point could include, for example:
What constitutes strong organization in a history paper? Why is this type of
organization necessary for a student to present a convincing argument? Is it
possible to make a convincing argument following organizational patterns from
other rhetorical traditions? When, if ever, should a paper be failed for grammar
and mechanics alone?

                                                                                                227
Ives et al.

   Even seemingly fair and reasonable grading approaches to departures from
SAAE standards in student writing can be problematic, as we could see in
our interview responses. An approach described by an instructor in math and
science, for example, seemed to embrace linguistic diversity:

         When I would grade anything that was written, I would look
         for the content. As long as the student ... as long as I could
         see that the student understood, then that would be good
         enough for me. The writing has to be good enough that I can
         discern that. If the writing is so poor that I can't .... then I
         can't read the student's mind.

While this instructor's practice may fit with a translingual approach, our study
suggests that it's also potentially problematic, since the faculty responses to
Passage 1 in our survey indicate that what is and is not considered understandable
can vary greatly from one reader to the next. Questions for further conversation,
then, might be: What departures from SAAE inhibit understanding for you? (See
Zawacki & Habib [this volume] for faculty responses to this same question.)
And where does the burden of communication lie?

   In this context, we find Lippi-Green's (2004) argument useful:

         When native speakers of USA English are confronted
         by an accent that is foreign to them or with a variety of
         English they dislike, they must first decide whether or not
         they are going to accept their responsibility in the act of
         communication. What can be demonstrated again and
         again is this: members of the dominant language groups feel
         perfectly empowered to reject their portion of the burden
         and demand that a person with an accent (that is, an accent
         that differs from their own accent) carry a disproportionate
         amount of the responsibility in the communicative act. (p.
         298)

   While Lippi-Green is referring here to oral communication, we argue that
the question of communicative burden can and should, in fact, be applied to
written communication, especially when a student is communicating in writing
to a teacher. After all, it is the instructor's job to help students become more
knowledgeable about their subject. As part of that responsibility, instructors
should expect that it will be necessary for them to help students to communicate
more effectively to audiences within their field, instead of expecting that

228
                                                                           Faculty Response to L2 Writing

students will be able to communicate seamlessly with them upon entering the
class. Such assistance also entails helping students to learn the content and ways
of knowing, doing, and writing in the discipline. And it may also entail helping
students to determine which sentence-level features require the most attention
when writing in that discipline.

   The question of who should bear the communicative burden can also
carry over into discussions that instructors have with their students. It could
be particularly beneficial for monolingual native speakers of English to begin
taking on the burden of understanding and communicating with L2 speakers/
writers because, as Canagarajah (2006) points out:

         There are online journals, discussion circles, and websites that
         anyone in the world can go to for information. But without
         a willingness to negotiate Englishes, we get little from these
         resources. Scholars studying transnational interactions in
         English show the creative strategies multilingual speakers use
         to negotiate their differences and effectively accomplish their
         purposes, often with no deference to native speaker norms
         .... ME/ monolingual speakers come off as relatively lacking
         in these negotiation skills in comparison with WE speakers
         ... with dire implications for their ability to succeed in such
         transactions. (pp. 590-591)

   Monolingual speakers who cannot or refuse to understand varieties of
English that depart from the norms to which they are accustomed are at a
distinct disadvantage when it comes to communicating in linguistically diverse
settings, even when English is the language of communication. Therefore,
shifting standards to allow for language variety in American classrooms and
clearly communicating that the burden of communications falls equally on all
parties, not primarily on L2 English writers (and those whose writing does not,
for whatever reason, conform strictly to the standards of SAAE), has potential
benefits for all students regardless of language background.

CONCLUSION

   Our findings--that instructors acknowledge their role in helping
multilingual students, but don't know how, that they recognize their role as
gatekeepers, and that they struggle with knowing the right thing to do in
responses to student writing--reiterate the need expressed in this volume and

                                                                                                229
Ives et al.

in the special WAC/L2 writing issue of Across the Disciplines to conduct faculty
development around WAC and second language writing. (See Cox [this volume]
for strategies for faculty development related to L2 writing). In our scholarship,
we should continue to investigate multilingual students' experiences as writers
in their disciplines along with their goals for their own writing, a project that
our research team is currently undertaking.

   Finally, returning to our overarching concern in this chapter and Matsuda's
and Hall's observations of the need to reconceptualize university and college
classrooms as being multilingual and to embrace the rhetorical traditions that
our multilingual students bring to the classroom, our study indicates a desire
by faculty in the disciplines to understand this shifting demographic, but
they still feel conflicted. Our data show that faculty are keenly aware of their
"gatekeeper" status. They want their students to succeed and view the ability to
communicate effectively, along with discipline-specific knowledge, as integrally
linked to success. This is where WAC, WACommunities initiatives, and Second
Language Writing scholars can and should intervene through departmental and
college level discussions, workshops, and colloquia, helping to redefine with
faculty in the disciplines what it means to communicate effectively. In a global
environment where L2 speakers of English outnumber L1 speakers of English
by nearly two to one (Saville-Troike, 2006), it is incumbent on all of us to re-
imagine the role of SAAE in the American academic tradition.

REFERENCES

Cameron, D. (2001). Working with spoken discourse. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
   Publications.

Canagarajah, A. S. (2006). The place of world Englishes in composition: Plural-
   ization continued. College Composition and Communication, 57(4), 586-619.

Cox, M. (2011). WAC: Closing doors or opening doors for second language
   writers? Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
   atd/ell/cox.cfm

Creswell, J. W. (1998). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among
   five traditions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Ferris, D. (2008). Myth 5: Students must learn to correct all their writing
   errors. In J. Reid (Ed.), Writing myths: Applying second language research to
   classroom teaching (pp. 90-114). Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michi-
   gan Press.

Gee, J. P. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method (2nd
   ed.). New York: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.

230
                                                                           Faculty Response to L2 Writing

Hall, J. (2009). WAC/WID in the next America: Redefining professional iden-
   tity in the age of multilingual majority. The WAC Journal, 20, 33-49.

Horner, B. & Trimbur, J. (2002). English only and US college composition.
   College Composition and Communication, 53(4), 594-630.

Kells, M. H. (2007). Writing across communities: Deliberation and the discur-
   sive possibilities of WAC. Reflections, 11(1), 87-108.

Lippi-Green, R. (2004). Language ideology and language prejudice. In Fin-
   egan, E. & Rickford, J. R. (Eds.) Language in the USA: Themes for the twenty-
   first century (pp. 289-304). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Matsuda, P. K. (2006). The myth of linguistic homogeneity in US college com-
   position. College English, 68(6), 637- 651.

Rose, M. (1985). The language of exclusion: Writing instruction at the univer-
   sity. College English, 47(4), 341-359.

Saville-Troike, M. (2006). Introducing second language acquisition. Cambridge,
   UK: Cambridge University Press.

Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic research settings. Cam-
   bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Zamel, V. (1995). Strangers in academia: The experiences of faculty and ESL
   students across the curriculum. College Composition and Communication,
   46(4), 506-521.

APPENDIX A

Survey Demographics

   A total of 104 respondents completed the survey, with 72 coming from
the university and 31 coming from the community college. One respondent
did not identify an institution. Twenty-two departments are represented in
the survey. The majority of our respondents, 62, identified as female, while
41 participants identified as male and one as transgender. When asked about
language background, 96 of the respondents identified as native speakers of
English, while eight identified as nonnative speakers. Aside from English,
the respondents identified their native languages as Serbian, Spanish, Tewa,
Cherokee, Tagalog, Chinese, and Dutch.

   The following table shows that a little over half of our respondents, 56,
identified as graduate assistants, teaching assistants, or part- time instructors,
while fewer than half, 40, identified as faculty (lecturer or professor), and
eight participants identified as other. The significant representation of
graduate instructors aligns with Hall's (2009) "Next America" theme, as these

                                                                                                231
Ives et al.

respondents are the faculty of the future, and their attitudes point toward the
writing expectations that future generations of college and university students
will face.

Please identify your position at your institution (n = 104)

Answer Options                          Response Percent  Response Count
Graduate Assistant/ Teaching Assistant  23.1%             24
Part-time Instructor/ Adjunct           30.8%             32
Lecturer                                5.8%              6
Assistant Professor                     7/7%              8
Associate Professor                     11.5%             12
Full Professor                          13.5%             14
Other                                   7.7%              8

Answered Question                                         104

Skipped Question                                          0

APPENDIX B

Interview Participants

Pseudonym          Discipline                Native Language
Dr. Carter         Law                       English
Dr. Anderson       Physical Therapy          English
Mr. Thompson       History                   English
Dr. Jacobs         Math                      English
Dr. Russelman      Sustainability            English
Ms. Mason          Anthropology/Linguistics  English
Dr. Smith          Communication             English
Dr. Bremmel        Math                      English

232
CHAPTER 9

LET'S SEE WHERE YOUR CHINESE
STUDENTS COME FROM: A
QUALITATIVE DESCRIPTIVE
STUDY OF WRITING IN THE
DISCIPLINES IN CHINA

Wu Dan
Xi'an International Studies University (XISU),
Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China

Written by a scholar in China who received her PhD in writing in the
US, this chapter reports on a study examining faculty perceptions of
the role of writing in learning and students' competence as writers and
speakers in the disciplines at their Chinese institutions. Wu introduces
the role of writing in China's higher education system with implica-
tions for those who work with Chinese students, and she argues that
WAC should be introduced into China to promote better faculty teach-
ing and student learning. Wu first provides a review of Chinese higher
education system with indigenous and imported historical heritages
from Confucianism, a Soviet higher education structure, and the US
higher education system. She then reports on the status of writing in
the disciplines in China based on interviews with ten faculty members
from six disciplines in four Chinese universities. Interview results indi-
cate that faculty believe that students' writing in the disciplines in both
Chinese and English is not satisfactory and that they are interested in
the potential for WAC to improve teaching and student learning and
writing. Suggestions to faculty in both Chinese and US universities
are provided to help them understand and assist their Chinese student
writers.

   According to Open Doors Report 2012 (Institute of International Education,
2012), China is the leading sender of students to US higher education, with a

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.09                           233
Wu Dan

majority of them being graduate students who completed their undergraduate
study in China. Various studies have been conducted to examine Chinese
students as second language (L2) writers in the US, and these studies have
provided suggestions to US professors and higher educational institutions to
enhance Chinese students' learning on different levels and in different disciplines.
The challenges for their academic study in the US have been reported to come
from students' lack of English proficiency (Berman & Cheng, 2001; Huang,
2005), their academic learning anxiety (Upton, 1989), and their perceptions
of learning cultures (Feng, 1991; Huang & Brown, 2009), among other issues.

   However, limited research has been done to study what current English
writing is like and especially how it is taught, or learned, in the disciplines in
Chinese higher education system, which has been feeding US higher education
institutions at all levels from first-time students to post-doctorate researchers.
And no previous research has been done on linking the needs of writers in
Chinese higher education to Writing Across the Curriculum (WAC). Once
these Chinese students begin writing in their courses at US institutions, they
may get comments like "awkward English" on their papers but still do not know
why they get these "awkward" comments nor how to improve. The help they
can receive from their professors or even writing center tutors is most of the
time limited as there is a lack of understanding of how English writing has been
used, taught, and practiced in China. Trying to help Chinese students in the US
without an understanding of where they come from in terms of English writing
costs more than wasted time or energy, but also precious learning opportunities
for these students.

   This study provides a snapshot of writing in the disciplines in China based
on interviews with ten faculty members from four Chinese universities and
six disciplines. The purpose of the study was to examine faculty perceptions
of the functions of writing and other communication competencies at their
institutions. One goal of the study was to introduce the role of writing in
China's higher education system, and the implications of that role, to those who
work with Chinese students. Although some of the interview questions asked
about other communication competencies, the focus of this chapter is on how
these faculty members perceive the functions of writing in the curriculum and
their expectations for students' writing. Students in Chinese higher education
still need more guidance and engagement in writing as faculty regard writing
as products rather than processes and perceive student writing quality in both
Chinese and English as unsatisfactory. This unsatisfactory status will remain
until Chinese higher education system accepts and adopts educational reforms
like WAC to help improve students' writing and learning.

234
                                                                      Writing in the Disciplines in China

   However, the Chinese higher education system, as higher education systems
in other countries, is complicated and comes with indigenous and imported
historical heritages from Confucianism, a Soviet higher education structure,
and the US higher education system. Therefore, it is necessary to provide an
introduction to this system before analyzing how faculty perceive and utilize
writing in their disciplines.

CHINESE HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEM

   Currently, the higher education system in China is the largest higher
education system in the world, surpassing the US in 2003 (Knight, 2006) as a
result of its six-fold increase in enrollment between 1997 and 2007. This system
consists of two thousand years of Chinese traditional education and more than
a hundred years of Western higher education influences (Min, 2004).

   Traditional Chinese higher education institutions were officially established
in the Han Dynasty (135 BCE). These institutions were set up to prepare
the elite class to work as government officials. Later, in order to recruit
students from the lower classes to address the lack of a qualified workforce
for the government (Lee, 2000), an imperial exam system was established and
continued to be used for about two thousand years. These exams were based
on the Four Books and Five Classics in the School of Confucius, and they
were the only avenue available for lower-class Chinese to gain access to the
upper class (Kirby, 2008). As the only evaluation tool was the students' writing
on these classic books, it was not surprise that Chinese people developed and
retained not only their worship for Confucianism, but also an appreciation for
good writing, which influenced China and many neighboring countries and
cultures (Altbach, 1998). This possibility of social mobility also created the
emphasis on education in Chinese families, which formed the underpinning
needs among Chinese people for better access to higher education in hope for
better jobs and higher social status. These needs helped in the decision-making
process of the very recent large scale enrollment expansion from 1998 to 2008
that not only increased access to higher education but also posed issues for an
education system that was designed for "elite education" but now faces "mass
education." Therefore, this indigenous tradition, even though it was interrupted
several times, has functioned as one of the forces for enrollment expansion,
and the appreciation for good writing still has its influences among Chinese
people, which sets up a solid but less obvious foundation for introducing WAC
pedagogies into China.

                                                                                                235
Wu Dan

   In the second half of the nineteenth century, universities modeled after
Western ones were established by the government and missionaries and
through other efforts. These new Western-style universities, together with the
indigenous Confucian traditions, laid the foundation for modern Chinese
higher education, forming an indispensable part of its tradition. Although the
Western-style universities were replaced by the Soviet model in the 1950s, these
"traditions and memories of excellence remained, and they have helped to fuel
more recent efforts" (Kirby, 2008, p. 140).

   In the Soviet model, higher education faculty and students were assigned to
specialized institutions, each focusing on one area, creating a planned workforce
to serve the planned economy (Mok, 2005). As the universities in this period
served the needs of their respective ministries, the Ministry of Education was
not the only one administering higher education. Other ministries, such as
the Ministry of the Coal Industry or the Ministry of the Machine Building
Industry, had their affiliated universities, setting their own enrollment plans
and assigning jobs to their graduates. Not only the enrollment but also the
curriculum, including course syllabi and textbooks, were determined by the
respective government units or agencies in charge throughout the country
(Mok, 2005). This structure made it difficult for different disciplines to
exchange pedagogical insights or share concerns. The Soviet model represented
not only a separation of the disciplines but also a centralization of knowledge
and a uniformity of thought (Hayhoe, 1989). Its far-reaching impact included
departmentalization, segmentation, overspecialization, and the separation of
teaching and research between the teaching institutions and research units (Min,
2004). As a result, there was no exchange between domestic and international
researchers (other than the Soviet scholars) or between teachers and researchers;
this lack of research and communication made it impossible for WAC concepts
or practices to be brought up in China during that time.

   The reform era begun in 1979 marked the beginning of improved, although
still limited, freedom (Zarrow, 2008). The Chinese higher education system
attempted to recover from the Cultural Revolution; however, resources and
attention were primarily focused on economic reform in the industrial sector
(Shirk, 1993) until after the 1997 Asian Economic Crisis. This crisis spurred the
government to increase domestic consumption, and family educational expenses
were added to the agenda (Xi, 1999). At the same time, the government had to
address market pressures for a highly educated workforce as the economy was
being transformed from labor-intensive to knowledge-based (State Department,
1999). This change resulted in the expansion reform, a strategy employed
by the government to address the needs of the labor market and the need to
stimulate domestic consumption for the "soft landing" of the economy needed

236
                                                                      Writing in the Disciplines in China

to maintain the double digit growth in the GDP (Bai, 2006). Therefore, higher
education, especially enrollment, attracted much attention.

   As a result of this attention, the total number of students increased from 3.2
million to 18.8 million from 1997 to 2007 (not including the institutions of
higher education for adults), while the number of faculty increased only from
0.4 million to 1.17 million. This difference resulted in a change in the student-
faculty ratio from 8:1 to 16:1. Although this 16:1 student-faculty ratio may
not seem problematic, this number does not reflect the reality. First, because of
the separation of research and teaching units (Hayhoe, 1989), researchers also
take faculty positions in the institutions but do not teach, so the faculty data do
not reflect the actual number of teaching faculty. In addition, as more Chinese
higher educational institutions strive to become research institutions, more
faculty members prefer not to teach undergraduate courses. Secondly, many
full-time faculty members in regular higher education institutions teach courses
in institutions for adults as the two are frequently affiliated (Yi & Li, 2004),
meaning these faculty member have an extra teaching load on top of what the
official statistics show. Third, the lack of qualified faculty remains a problem.
For example, a 2005 survey of 23 Shanghai higher education institutions
conducted by the Shanghai Institute of Educational Evaluation (Postiglione,
2005) found that only 39% of all professors teaching undergraduate courses
held master's degrees, and only 17% held doctoral degrees. Therefore, this 16:1
student-faculty ratio poses more challenges than the number indicates on the
surface.

   Although Chinese young people are now given more opportunities to
receive a higher education, the speed and the scale of this expansion have posed
problems for the Chinese higher education system, and university professors
in various disciplines have begun to look into the effects of this enrollment
increase, finding, for example, that the increased enrollment and the slow
reform of higher education concepts have made the mathematics education in
colleges less effective than before (Tang, 2007). In addition, English professors
have begun changing the training models, revising the national curriculum,
and updating textbooks to address the consequences of the "increased numbers
of students, a shortage of language teachers, the lack of teaching resources and
inadequate language training in larger classes" (Chang, 2006, p. 519). Various
researchers have also focused on the quality of teacher training (Jiang, 2005).

   The Chinese higher educational system has also been greatly influenced by
its political culture, especially in terms of English education. English is the
dominant language in international organizations, trade, and business. As a
result of the recent reforms in the Chinese educational system in the late 1980s,
English is required for almost all Chinese students from their third year in

                                                                                                237
Wu Dan

primary school or first year in middle school, equivalent to the seventh grade
in the US, through college. Students going on to graduate schools in China
have to take English exams for both master's and PhD programs. If they want
to study abroad, most need to take the TOEFL, EILTS, and/or GRE in order
to study in English-speaking countries. The emphasis now put on English in
the Chinese education system is further supported by the fact that students
have to pass a test of their English skills to move to the next educational level.
The combination of the indigenous Confucius emphasis on writing and the
recent prevalent emphasis on English education has contributed to the current
teaching and learning of English writing in the disciplines, which hasn't been
revealed much to the world.

   As this historical overview suggests, the Chinese higher education system
incorporates traditions from both indigenous Confucianism and Western
modern education. However, given its turbulent history, Chinese higher
education first had to recover in the 1980s after the Cultural Revolution. Then
in the 1990s, the system was put in the position of having to meet the economic
needs of producing a well-educated workforce. Thus, the focus of attention
in Chinese higher education has been on survival until the tension between
access and quality was drastically intensified by the recent fast, large-scale
growth (Hayhoe, 2000; Jiang, 2005; Li, Morgan & Ding, 2008; Lin, 2006;
Min, 2004; Mok, 2005; Postiglione, 2005). This focus on survival and recovery
has meant that the Chinese higher education system has centered on rebuilding
the institutions and restoring the social status of teaching and learning that
were destroyed during the ten years of the Cultural Revolution. Therefore,
institutions have not paid much attention to research on the effectiveness of
teaching and learning. Therefore, although students are writing in English in
various disciplines, China did not develop its own version of WAC or "import"
a WAC model from other countries to guide the development of writing
instruction in English. However, recent reforms and their resulting impact on
Chinese higher education have redirected attention to the quality of teaching
and learning, and this change in focus shows promise for introducing WAC
into China.

   Still, there has been limited research attention to students' writing in both
English and Chinese in the disciplines, as the teaching and learning of writing
have remained as a training process in the foreign language courses they take
in college. This study was designed with the goal of probing the feasibility
of introducing WAC theory and practice into China, although the broader
purpose was to gather faculty members' perspectives on the goals for higher
education, the learning outcomes for college students, the students' written
and oral communication abilities, and their expectations on these aspects of

238
                                                                      Writing in the Disciplines in China

communication modalities. During the interviews, WAC was introduced to the
interviewees, and the faculty participants were asked whether similar programs
were feasible in Chinese higher education, what they saw as the possible
obstacles, and what were their own concerns.

METHODOLOGY

   Ten face-to-face faculty interviews were conducted in China in 2009. All
interviewees were contacted as a result of a personal relationship network. Two
of the interviewees were suggested by earlier interviewees, reflecting snowball
sampling. These interviews varied in length from 22 to 48 minutes, with the
average being 35 minutes. After the interviews were completed, they were
transcribed by a college student in China. To ensure their accuracy, a second
Chinese college student reviewed the transcriptions. These students highlighted
any unfamiliar words and phrases, most of which were English terms used by
the Chinese interviewees, marking the recording time to allow me, the principal
investigator, to verify the words and spelling. The transcription of the ten
interviews in the faculty group contains 64,705 Chinese characters (47 single-
spaced pages, 11 point font size). The standard conversion ratio for Chinese
characters to English words is 2:1, meaning the transcriptions of the Chinese
interviews result in approximately 130,000 English words.

   The ten faculty interviewees ranged in age from 26 to 58, with the average age
being 37. They are from four universities and six disciplines, including business
administration, computer science, English, journalism, law, and medicine. Five
of these faculty members are female and five male, four having doctorates and
six master's degrees. Similar to the US, there is a faculty track in Chinese higher
education, but the difference is that the Chinese faculty track includes lecturers,
and there is no such rank as assistant professor. Therefore, this track has the
ranks of lecturer, associate professor, and full professor. All of those interviewed
were on the faculty track, with seven of them being lecturers, two associate
professors, and one full professor. Their average teaching experience in higher
education ranged from one to 18 years, with the average being seven. Six had
overseas higher education experiences: one completed his MBA at a British
university in Malaysia, one had a master's degree from Australia, and the other
four had conducted research at overseas universities.

   The interview questions were divided into two sections. The first section
focused on demographic information, and asked about interviewee's affiliation,
age, gender, highest degree, rank of professorship and administrative role
(if available), teaching experiences and major courses, and overseas study

                                                                                                239
Wu Dan

or research experience. The second section focused on writing instruction
and included questions about faculty members' opinions on the quality of
students'writing in both Chinese and English, their motivations in assigning
writing tasks, their perceptions of the importance of writing in learning, their
willingness to participate in programs like WAC or programs that have WAC
components, and reasons for possible difficulties and challenges in doing so.
All interviews were done in Chinese, and the questions were translated from
English to Chinese as the study was designed in English and implemented in
Chinese. The findings in the analysis of this study were coded according to the
interviewees' answers to the questions. If more than 50% of the interviewees
agreed on one answer, then that answer became a finding. Then the eleven
findings were grouped into the following four themes, with findings on similar
topics being put together under one theme.

   Theme One: While faculty are integrating writing into their courses, they
believe that the quality of Chinese students' writing in both Chinese and
English is not satisfactory.

   Theme Two: While the faculty found the writing unsatisfactory, they believe
the students' Chinese and English speaking and presentation competencies are
satisfactory for the university, if not the workplace.

   Theme Three: Communication is important and has been integrated into the
curriculum for assessment and preparation for future jobs.

   Theme Four: Faculty are willing to participate in WAC programs, but
workload is the biggest disincentive.

   Implications of these findings are discussed at the end of each thematic
section. At the end of this chapter, implications for introducing WAC into
Chinese universities are also discussed. The findings may help readers understand
that Chinese international students who are going to study in the US have a
very different orientation to writing in the disciplines. However, as WAC takes
hold in China, the students who come to the US to study should be more
confident in, and adapt more easily to, their academic writing.

THEMES AND RESULTS

   The data analysis of the ten interviews resulted in the following four central
themes. These four central themes can be used to understand Chinese college
students' writing quality and faculty's expectations. Each theme is followed by
findings from questions that are related to that theme and then by a discussion
of the implications of that theme for WAC in China.

240
                                                                      Writing in the Disciplines in China

Theme One: While faculty are integrating writing into their
courses, they believe that the quality of Chinese students'
writing in both Chinese and English is not satisfactory.

Finding 1: Communication practices and skills are important for student
learning.

   The first finding under Theme One emerged from the responses to two
closely related questions on the relationship between student communication
competencies and their learning and job performance after graduation. The two
questions were: Do you have a desire to integrate communication components into
your course? and To what degree do you think integrating communication into your
courses will enhance your students' learning of the subject? All of these interviewees
answered that they had already integrated communication components into
their courses and agreed that this integration enhanced the learning of their
students. These responses indicate that these faculty members agree on the
importance of teaching communication skills in universities. However, one
of them mentioned that although many faculty members are integrating
communication components, some of these were just end-of-semester papers
or oral presentations with very limited guidance because, with huge numbers
of students and heavy teaching loads, professors cannot spend too much time
with specific training regarding writing, speaking and other communication
modalities in class. Although some interviewees said that they integrated
writing and speaking into their course because they hope this could make
students more active learners, they also said that these kinds of assignments are
not as effective because students do not get comments back for their end-of-
semester papers or oral presentations. However, they believed it is important to
have these components in the courses, and some writing is always better than
nothing.

Finding 2: The quality of Chinese writing is thought to be unsatisfactory.

   Among the 10 faculty, 80% said they read students' Chinese writing, and
only one, a journalism professor, said she was satisfied with its quality. Forty
percent said the writing they read was not good, and 30% indicated that it
varied according to students' attitudes, their disciplines, or their experiences as
student leaders. According to a computer science professor, the quality of an
individual student's work may vary from writing task to writing task depending
on his/her attitude. If the writing task tends to be an interesting topic to the

                                                                                                241
Wu Dan

student, s/he might spend more time and work on it, which can be clearly
shown in the final draft submitted to the professor. According to a journalism
professor, students in the humanities write better than those in science and
engineering. She also said that student organization leaders also write better
than the rest. This professor believed the reason was that student organization
leaders got more chances to use and practice writing. She also explained that,
most of the time, those students who apply to work as leaders and those who
choose to major in humanities tend to be stronger writers in high school and
would not worry about being challenged too much in the related tasks in the
organizations or the majors.

Finding 3: The quality of the English writing is thought to be unsatisfactory.

   Seventy percent of the faculty members said that they read English writing
from students. Among them, 71% did not think the quality was satisfactory.
The one professor who said that students' English writing was adequate was an
English professor teaching English majors, the faculty member adding that her
students were able to produce grammatically correct essays but had problems
such as using Chinese styles in English writing or choosing inappropriate words
to express the meaning. This comment supports Li's (2003) research on the
influence of Chinese writing styles on students' English writing. When asked
what were the problems in students' English writing, faculty interviewees did
not really focus on the grammatical mistakes the students made, but talked
more about expressing theideas by using proper words and expressions so that
their sentences can "make sense." This echoes the "awkward English" comment
mentioned at the beginning of this chapter that Chinese students see written
on their papers in the US (as well as those reported by Zawacki & Habib and
Ives et al. [this volume] from faculty teaching at the US institutions that were
the sites of their investigations into attitudes about and expectations for their
L2 student writers). However, most of the professors said that they did not have
enough time or proper methods to help students' English writing. Some of
them even said that their own English writing needs to be helped for publishing
internationally.

Finding 4: Strengthening communication skills should be a critical focus in
Chinese higher education.

   All of the interviewees agreed that strengthening writing and other
communication skills should be a critical focus area in higher education. The
responses generating this finding also relate to Finding 1 reflecting the impact

242
                                                                      Writing in the Disciplines in China

of communication on student learning and job performance. When asked why
they thought communication skills should be a critical focus, many said that
these are basic competencies in all disciplines and will determine students'
chances at key intersections in their lives. An English professor pointed out
that these competencies "will benefit students for their whole life and would
never expire." Knowledge and skills are represented through communication
competencies in all disciplines. A mass media professor said that the lack of
these skills are like "a short board" or even a "bottleneck" for students, affecting
both the "input" and "output" of knowledge and training. Communication
skills determine students' chances at key intersections in their life. A medical
professor said that every key intersection students experience in their lives after
college, including job hunting, promotions, and personal relationships, requires
them to present themselves to others. Therefore, when we prepare student for
their future, we should help strengthen their writing and other communication
skills. Apparently, though, working on communication skills has not been a
critical focus in Chinese higher education, as curricular goals are not set by
faculty but rather from the top down, so it was interesting that all faculty
interviewed in this study agreed on this point.

   As shown by the four findings described above, we could say that Chinese
professors do have high expectations for their students' writing in both Chinese
and English and are disappointed by the writing they get from their students.
They also realize that writing is important, but they could not provide much
guidance due to the time constraints and the lack of proper preparations
provided to faculty themselves on writing and teaching writing. Although
all college students should have passed their English test and Chinese test in
the college entrance examination, that test result cannot tell us much about
their writing. Therefore, faculty's answers have pointed out the urgent need
to help students write and help faculty teach how to write. This urgent need
might appear to be familiar to those who know the history of development of
WAC in the United States. It was faculty's realization of these needs that helped
start grassroots WAC programs and initiatives in American higher education
institutions in the 1970s. Now we have this realization in China, and this could
serve as the starting point for introducing WAC into China.

   For now, however, the perceived poor quality of students' Chinese and
English writing does pose problems when they go abroad to study. This does not
mean that their grammar or vocabulary are not good enough, but this touches
the communication functions of English, which makes it difficult for them to
follow others' ideas and express their own. When taking tests like the GRE or
TOEFL, these Chinese students can achieve high scores, but they are able to
score high because they spend a lot time and energy in test preparations. They

                                                                                                243
Wu Dan

are able to pass the writing components in these tests, but their writing skills
are only trained to cope with the tests but not "real world" needs in academia.
Therefore, once they get into US universities, their professors might find the
gap between the language test scores and the writing and speaking quality of
the students.

Theme Two: While the faculty found the writing
unsatisfactory, they believe the students' Chinese and
English speaking and presentation competencies are
satisfactory for the university if not the workplace.

Finding 5: The overall speaking competency was thought to be satisfactory.

   The faculty group was the most positive when asked to comment on students'
speaking competency, with 100% of them indicating that it was satisfactory,
although some provided additional comments. One faculty member said that
the students' speaking abilities were generally better than their writing. Two
faculty members said that students had the potential to do a better job if they
received proper training in both speaking skills and critical thinking so that
they could "make a breakthrough on both personal and social limitations." The
two professors who said that their students speaking competency was excellent
taught communication studies. Fifty percent of the interviewees pointed out
that they wanted their students to be articulate when speaking, and 40% said
that students should be proactive, taking advantage of every opportunity in
class to practice so that they could get immediate feedback from the professor
and their peers.

Finding 6: Presentation competencies were thought to be satisfactory in uni-
versities but not in the workplace.

   When asked their expectations for presentations, 50% of the interviewees
commented that they should be clear, to the point and within the time
allowed, and that the tools used for presentations should "serve the purpose
of the presentation well." Sixty percent of the interviewees were satisfied
with students' presentation competencies, especially when they used software
like PowerPoint to do presentations. Two professors even commented that
students were sometimes better than the faculty themselves and could offer
technical help. The two communication studies professors from one of the top
two universities in China said that their students' performances when giving
presentations sometimes exceeded their expectations and predictions. This

244
                                                                      Writing in the Disciplines in China

was not mentioned by faculty from other universities or disciplines. However
those who said that their students' speaking was excellent said this is because
their students are mostly journalism majors who have received better and more
training in speaking than students in other disciplines. Furthermore, because
they teach in one of the top two universities in China, the students are selected
with higher standards.

   Although speaking and oral presentations are two communication
competencies that are not the focus of this chapter, this second central finding
explains that students' speaking and presentations are better rated than their
writing by faculty. When professors in the US try to understand how well their
Chinese students can speak and present, they probably need to speak to the
students themselves to find out if the quality fits their demands, as test scores,
once again, cannot tell much about the students' competencies.

   It was also interesting that many faculty members, when asked about
presentations, refered to PowerPoint presentations immediately. They did not
mention any other forms of presentations, such as prepared or unprepared
speeches, or poster presentations. They almost equate presentations to
PowerPoint presentations. However, the styles used and preferred in Chinese
classroom PowerPoint presentations are quite different from those in the US.
The presentations slides tend to be more flashy, more colorful, and use more
animations and art words in order to show the technical knowledge of the
students in using the software. Although this is just a personal observation
that has not been supported by data yet, the fact that only 30% of the faculty
mentioned that the tools used for presentations should "serve the purpose of
the presentation well" might have echoed this observation. Therefore, this
satisfactory status for students' presentation skills in China might not translate
into the same evaluation in the US.

Theme Three: Communication is important and

has been integrated into the curriculum for

assessment and preparation for future jobs.

Finding 7: International and intercultural communication is considered im-
portant for college students.

   When asked whether it's important for college students to have some
knowledge and skills in international/intercultural communication in today's
global economy, only one faculty member said that it depended on the discipline
the students were in or the kinds of jobs they wanted in the future; however,
80% of the faculty also said they had already integrated international and

                                                                                                245
Wu Dan

intercultural communication into their courses. The primary major approaches
used included bilingual courses, exchange study programs, invited speakers,
and specialized courses for English and communication majors. Bilingual
courses are courses taught in both Chinese and English, which demand faculty
to be prepared for teaching certain courses in their disciplines in English, as
all courses were previously only taught in Chinese. Therefore, students taking
these bilingual courses also need to complete assignments in English, including
writing.

   However, the respondents indicated that these approaches were not
effective. Bilingual courses, the most frequently mentioned method, had not
been as effective as expected because 1) they involved no actual communication
situations and tasks, and 2) many faculty members were not prepared to teach in
English. One faculty member said that the academic exchanges students could
be exposed to were far more "tolerant" than workplace communication tasks.
In the academic exchanges, there was no punishment for making mistakes,
and sometimes errors were not even pointed out to the students by faculty or
foreign experts. This situation is quite different from workplace intercultural
and international communication expectations, especially in the discipline of
business management. Errors in workplace might result in a huge loss to the
company and cannot really be tolerated so easily. Therefore, these simulated
tasks and visiting international scholars cannot give students a real "sense" of
what is required. Actually, the students cannot know the proper ways to handle
communication tasks, if they are not corrected in simulated tasks in class or by
kind-hearted foreign experts.

Finding 8: Communication modalities have been integrated into university
courses.

   All of the faculty members interviewed assigned writing in the courses they
taught, with 20% of them assigning only English writing assignments and 30%
only Chinese; 50% of the faculty members in management, computer science,
law, and medicine indicated they had integrated multiple communication
modalities into their courses, asking students to complete tasks by writing,
speaking, presenting, and using digital educational technologies in both Chinese
and English. These responses indicate a faculty buy-in and a realization of the
importance of integrating these components, supporting the introduction
of WAC into China. However, as indicated in Finding 7, the integration of
communication tasks into courses did not always lead to satisfactory results,
suggesting it is time to review the how and why of this integration process. The
quantity of integrated courses does not guarantee the quality of this integration.

246
                                                                      Writing in the Disciplines in China

Professional research and support should be provided so that this faculty buy-
in does not lose momentum and become an obstacle for introducing WAC
programs.

Finding 9: The two major motivations for engaging students in writing are as-
sessment and preparation for study in the disciplines or work in related fields.

   Seventy percent of the interviewees clearly stated that one of the motivations
for engaging students in writing was assessment of students' learning of the
course contents. The assessment mentioned by these faculty members refers
to using writing tasks for grades assigned in their courses, with most of the
tasks being term papers. Students' writing in these tasks directly influences
their final grade for the courses, making these high-stakes writing tasks. Fifty
percent of the interviewees also mentioned the importance of the writing
tasks they assign to their students' future study in their disciplines or the
workplace. The computer science professor said that all the documents she
required students to write in the course, such as PRD (Product Requirements
Documents), DD (Design Documents), and TD (Test Documents), were
similar to the types of documents her students would be required to write in
the workplace as computer science engineers. Two business professors gave
similar reasons for assigning writing, saying that in their field of study there
often were no right or wrong answers, so the writing the students did could
reveal their entire thinking process on a topic, something that could never
be seen in standardized tests that have only multiple choice questions. As the
higher education system in China has been more discipline-specific and there
are limited number of requirements for general education courses, students
do get trained to write in the disciplines if they are given writing assignments
or writing tasks. However, there is no top-down requirement on how much
and how often students should write, so this kind of training really depends
on how much faculty members would like to try to explore by themselves.
With the big class sizes and teaching loads since enrollment expansion, it does
take some courage to assign writing tasks to the students. The importance of
writing and other communication competencies has been stated by the faculty
members interviewed in this study. However, none of the faculty interviewees
mentioned "writing to learn," a key concept in WAC in the US. They only
focus on grading students' writing or the documents their students are to
encounter in future. Therefore, if WAC is to be introduced into China, it is
important to let faculty understand "writing-to-learn" pedagogy so they do not
think that writing tasks are only for "learning to write." By doing so, students
may also learn to understand writing as process, not only product.

                                                                                                247
Wu Dan

Theme Four: Faculty are willing to participate in WAC
programs, but workload is the biggest disincentive.

Finding 10: Faculty members are willing to participate in WAC programs.

   "What is your level of desire to participate in such an initiative to integrate
writing, communication, and digital technologies for learning into your
courses?" was the last question asked of all interviewees, and all of them
expressed great interest in participating in WAC. When WAC was introduced
to them in the interviews, the name "WAC" was not emphasized at all as the
concept does not mean much to Chinese professors. The concept of WAC was
explained to them as helping faculty and students learn to write and write to
learn so that students not only practice writing but also learn more and better
in courses with well-designed writing components. After stating their interest,
almost everyone added a "but" and explained the conditions they would want
to be met before committing themselves into programs like WAC.

   Rewards from both a sense of accomplishment and compensation are
important to these faculty. One faculty member was very straightforward,
saying that the reward system had to recognize the faculty effort involved in
participating in the workshops and incorporating WAC pedagogies; in addition,
it was also a prerequisite that the pedagogies had to be worth the effort and
time commitment, and, as a result, student learning had to be enhanced. If
attending workshops becomes an added obligation, they probably would not
choose to participate. Regular meetings appear to be a burden. As a result, some
suggested online webinars or podcasts so that faculty can participate whenever
and wherever they want to. Further, the quality of the workshops has to be
guaranteed. One professor pointed out that the workshop facilitators had to
have a good understanding of the disciplines and be able to provide concrete
suggestions for courses, or it becomes a waste of time. Although faculty
development is provided through the university, most of it is related to teaching
technologies rather than methodology. There is also a tendency that older
professors do not appear to be interested in workshops designed for faculty
development as they think these are for younger professors or novice teachers.

Finding 11: Workload is the biggest disincentive for faculty assigning students
writing tasks.

   While 30% of the faculty denied there was any disincentive for assigning
writing tasks, 57% of the remaining faculty stated that workload was one. They
said that they already have a heavy workload due to the enrollment expansion

248
                                                                      Writing in the Disciplines in China

which caused student-faculty ratio to increase from 8:1 to 16:1, and they
have found through experience that it takes much more time to grade writing
assignments than standardized tests. Why would they want to increase their
own burden? Therefore, this workload issue should be considered as a challenge
for initiating WAC in China. However, some professors did not think this was
a good enough reason for not assigning writing. A law professor, whose average
teaching load per week is 12-14 hours, said, "It is much easier for me if I do
not assign writing assignments to my students, but our goal should not be to
make things easy for ourselves but to make sure students can learn things in our
courses." Other interviewees said their students might complain about more
work caused by writing assignments, which might cause some bad students
evaluations at the end of the semester. Some worried they might experience
failures in trying to realize learning outcomes through writing. Some pointed
out that they would be considered to be "showing off their teaching" by their
peers, so there is peer pressure from other professors who do not use much
writing in their courses.

   From this last central point, we can know that faculty do have an interest
in helping students learn by learning themselves how to design and use writing
components in their courses, but they would not want to devote extra energy or
time if they will not be rewarded or if their already heavy workloads are made
even worse.

IMPLICATIONS

   From the four central themes and eleven findings described above, we know
that Chinese college students or graduates need to improve their writing in
both Chinese and English. Most Chinese college graduates have experience
dealing with written assignments in both Chinese and English, although the
guidance they receive is not sufficient or to the point. Therefore, there are
certain implications for higher education professionals who work with Chinese
students on writing, speaking or other communication modalities in China or
the US or in any other country.

   The quality of students' Chinese writing is not considered very satisfactory
by the faculty interviewed, even by Chinese standards. As pointed out by
Chinese professors, this is the general status with exceptions of limited
types of students and majors. Therefore, high expectations cannot be met.
As research has shown that first language literacy facilitates second language
literacy (Durgunoglu, 1998; Lanauze and Snow, 1989), students' unsatisfactory
Chinese writing can be said to lead somewhat to their unsatisfactory English

                                                                                                249
Wu Dan

writing. It is then easier to understand why some Chinese students' papers were
marked "awkward English" by their professors after they enter graduate schools
in English-speaking countries.

   The poor quality of writing does not mean that there is a corresponding
poor quality in other Chinese or English language skills since, when it comes to
their student writing, faculty members interviewed admitted that they cannot
spare too much time reading or commenting on students' writing due to the
workload and also lack of recognition in the reward system. Some of them did
not even have the confidence to help students with their English writing. If
provided time and faculty patience, Chinese students can improve their writing
as they learn to use their grammar and vocabulary by following the norms in
their disciplines.

   Students are also more used to writing tasks as assessment rather than as
learning processes. They have been evaluated in the Chinese higher education
system by using writing, so they have actually been treating their writing
assignments as products rather than processes. Therefore, they might find it
quite difficult to understand or to handle comments they may get in courses at
institutions in other countries, as they have previously only known numbers as
grades.

   This dissatisfactory status of writing instruction in China has been and
will remain with Chinese students for a while because the effects of college
expansion are still pervasive. Although faculty rated the importance of
different modalities of communication, they do not have the time, energy or
support needed to make these improvements as they have been busy dealing
with student numbers. It is hoped this can gradually improve as expansion has
slowed down since 2008.

   In order to help with the current quality problems in Chinese higher
education, it is feasible that WAC could be effectively introduced. Faculty
interest in WAC concepts and programs is quite obvious from the results of
this study. We could even say that WID is already practiced in the disciplines,
but we would need more research to describe the practice. However, this faculty
interest in WAC could easily be turned into faculty resistance if no theoretical
and pedagogical support is provided to the faculty members who have been
integrating or want to integrate communication components into their courses.
The workload is also a big challenge for WAC or similar programs as the
problematic student-faculty ratio will probably stay longer than we want. While
WAC could be feasible in Chinese universities, the results of this study further
point out the opportunities and potential challenges. Chinese higher education
system has one of two indispensable components for starting WAC programs--
faculty interest. And with proper connection, it is reasonable to believe that the

250
                                                                      Writing in the Disciplines in China

second indispensable component--support of the high-level administrators--
can also be obtained.

   Hopefully, understanding the history and the current issues in Chinese
higher education can also help understanding Chinese college students so
that proper assistance can be provided to support their academic success, in
both Chinese universities and universities abroad (for another study on the
educational backgrounds on international students in the US, see Fernandes
[this volume], who examines the curriculum at for-profit English language
programs, which many international students attend before entering US colleges
and universities). What the 10 faculty members from different disciplines have
shared in the interviews cannot provide a whole picture of the status of writing
or communication practice in Chinese higher education, but at least this study
peeks into this area and attempts to initiate the conversation. Future research
might focus on the links between WAC and the existing writing centers or
writing programs in Chinese higher education institutions. Longitudinal
qualitative studies can be conducted on those students who were helped in
writing centers or took courses with WAC components to see how well these
might help them if they go to the US to study.

   WAC can be introduced into Chinese universities, but it will take quite some
time and efforts before we can translate this US-originated idea into a Chinese
one. This introduction of WAC into China has the potential to contribute to
the overall development of students' writing, which will help both domestic
students and those students who go to study in the US face fewer challenges
and obstacles in coping with the writing tasks in their courses. Hopefully, they
will also become more confident and adapt with less difficulty to writing to
learn and learning to write pedagogies, whether in a US or Chinese higher
education institution.

REFERENCES

Altbach, P. G. (1998). Comparative higher education: Knowledge, the university,
   and development. Westport, CT: Ablex Publishing.

Bai, L. (2006). Graduate unemployment: Dilemmas and challenges in China's
   move to mass higher education. The China Quarterly, 185(1), 128-144.

Berman, R. & Cheng, L. (2001). English academic language skills: Perceived
   difficulties by undergraduate and graduate students and their academic
   achievement. Canadian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 4(1), 25-40.

Chang, J. (2006). Globalization and English in Chinese higher education.
   World Englishes, 25(3), 513-525.

                                                                                                251
Wu Dan

Durgunoglu, A. Y. (1998). Acquiring literacy in English and Spanish in the
   United States. In A.Y. Durgunoglu & L. Verhoeven (Eds.). Literacy develop-
   ment in a multilingual context: Crosscultural perspectives (pp. 135-146). Mah-
   wah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Feng, J. H. (1991). The adaptation of students from the People's Republic of
   China to an American academic culture. (ERIC Document Reproduction
   Service No. ED 329 833).

Hayhoe, R. (1989). China's university and the open door. Armonk, NY: M.E.
   Sharpe.

Hayhoe, R. (2000). Redeeming modernity. Comparative Education Review,
   44(4), 423-439.

Huang, J. (2005). Challenges of academic listening in English: Reports by Chi-
   nese students. College Student Journal, 39(3), 553-569.

Huang, J., & Brown, K. (2009). Cultural factors affecting Chinese ESL stu-
   dents' academic learning. Education, 129(4), 643-653.

Institute of International Education. (2013). Open doors 2012 fast facts. Open
   Doors Report on International Educational Exchange. Retrieved from http://
   www.iie.org/Research-and-Publications/Open-Doors/Data/Fast-Facts

Jiang, W. (2005). Creating a quality higher education teacher base and mea-
   sures for undertaking reforms. Chinese Education and Society, 38(6), 7-16.

Kirby, W. (2008). On Chinese, European & American universities. Ddalus,
   (Summer), 139-146.

Knight, J. (2006). Higher education crossing borders: A guide to the implications of
   the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) for cross-border education.
   Retrieved from http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0014/001473/147363e.pdf

Lanauze, M., & Snow, C. E. (1989). The relation between first- and second-
   language skills: Evidence from Puerto Rican elementary school children in
   bilingual programs. Linguistics and Education, 1, 323-340.

Lee, T. H. C. (2000). Education in traditional China: A history. Leiden, NL;
   New York; and Koln, DE: E. J. Brill.

Li, F., Morgan, W. J., and Ding, X. (2008). The expansion of higher education,
   employment and over-education in China. International Journal of Educa-
   tional Development, 28, 687-697.

Li, X. (2003). Track (dis)connecting: Chinese high school and university writ-
   ing in a time of change. In D. Foster &, D. R. Russell (Eds.), Writing and
   learning in cross-national perspective: Transitions from secondary to higher edu-
   cation (pp. 49-87). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Lin, A. (2006). Quality of higher education and evaluation of colleges and uni-
   versities. Higher Education of Sciences, 4, 339-350.

252
                                                                      Writing in the Disciplines in China

Min, W. (2004). The legacy of the past and the context of the future. In P.
   Altbach, & T. Umakoshi (Eds.), Asian universities: Historical perspectives and
   contemporary challenges (pp. 53-84). Baltimore, MD: The John Hopkins
   University Press.

Mok, K. (2005). Globalization and educational restructuring: University merg-
   ing and changing governance in China. Higher Education, 50, 57-88.

Postiglione, G. (2005). Higher education in China: Perils and promises for a
   new century. Harvard China Review, 1, 138-143.

Shirk, S. (1993). The political logic of economic reform in China. Berkeley, CA:
   University of California Press.

State Department. (1999, June). Resolution on the further development of educa-
   tional reform and quality education working meeting on 13 June 1999.

Tang, J. (2007). The popularization of China's higher education and its influ-
   ence on university mathematics education. Educational Studies in Mathemat-
   ics, 66(1), 77-82.

Upton, T. A. (1989). Chinese students, American universities, and cultural
   confrontation. MinneTESOL Journal, 7, 9-28.

Xi, M. (1999). Market confronts education reform. Beijing Review, 42(44), 21-
   34.

Yi, C., & Li, C. (2004). The five key points in the quality control of Chinese
   adult higher education. Journal of Adult Education College of Hubei Univer-
   sity, 22(5), 239-254.

Zarrow. P. (2008). Social and political developments: The making of the twen-
   tieth-century Chinese state. In K. Louie (Ed.), The Cambridge companion to
   modern Chinese culture (pp. 20-45). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
   Press.

APPENDIX

Interview Questions

Demographic Section:
1. Institution 
2. Age 
3. Gender 
4. Highest Degree Earned 
5. Rank of Professorship 
6. Administrative Role 

                                                                                                253
Wu Dan

7. Years of Teaching in Higher Education ____
8. Major Teaching Areas and Courses 
9. Overseas Study or Working Experiences (time, type of study/work, purpose,

    countries) 
    

Information Section
10. What are your primary course goals for teaching the subject (science,

    engineering, economics, business management...)? 
    
11. Have you recently read any students' writings in Chinese? If yes, how
    would you assess the quality of your students' Chinese writing? 
    
    
12. Have you recently read any students' writings in English? If yes, how would
    you assess the quality of your students' English writing? 
    
    
13. What are your major motivations for having your students engage in
    writing assignments? 
14. What are your major disincentives for having your students engage in
    writing assignments? 
    
15. Comment on your students' communication competencies in speaking.
    Do you have expectations for these? If yes, what are they? 
    
    
16. Comment on your students' communication competencies on presenting.
    Do you have expectations for these? If yes, what are they? 
    
    ?
17. Comment on your students' competencies on using digital technologies.
    Do you have expectations for these? If yes, what are they? 
    
    
18. What do you see as the major overall objectives for higher education? 
    
19. Do you think that strengthening writing, other communication skills such
    as speaking and presenting, and the use of technologies should be a critical
    focus area for educators in higher education? Why or why not? 

254
                                                                      Writing in the Disciplines in China

    
    
    ?
20. Do you have a desire to integrate communication components into your
    course? 
    
21. To what degree do you think integrating communication into your courses
    will enhance your students' learning of the subject? 
    
    
22. Is it important for college students to have some knowledge and skill in
    international/intercultural communication in today's global economy? If
    yes, how could it be integrated into your course? 
    
    
    
23. Please talk about the effects of the Five-Year-Circle Evaluation on your
    teaching. To what degree do you think integrating communication into
    your courses may help you on preparations for the evaluation? 
    
    
24. To what extent would a campus-wide writing and communication initiative
    contribute to the overall objectives for higher education? 
    
    
    
25. Is a campus-wide, holistic, writing and/or communication initiative the
    best way to enhance student communication skills? 
    
    
26. What other ways would you suggest? 
27. What is your level of desire to participate in such an initiative to integrate
    writing, communication, and digital technologies for learning into your
    courses? 
    
    

                                                                                                255
CHAPTER 10

ENGLISH IS NOT A SPECTATOR
SPORT: PRIVILEGED SECOND
LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND THE
FOR-PROFIT ESOL CLASSROOM

Marino Fernandes
University of New Hampshire

This chapter argues that students of the global elite who attend for-
profit language schools may have power, but they do not have access
to classroom writing experiences that lead them to develop a feeling
of agency and control over language. Curricula at for-profit language
schools are focused on imparting academic language skills with an eye
to improving things like SAT and TOEFL scores. In contrast, second
language learners in college writing classrooms are asked to position
themselves in relation to the world they are writing in and out of, thus
experiencing a classroom that admits of real consequences. At the same
time that this kind of classroom experience creates vulnerability, it also
helps to generate agency. I suggest that a redesigned curriculum may be
one way to help students understand that agency is a crucial element
of power.

   On February 11, 1994, my brother and sisters and I arrived in this country
for the first time. My mother and father, already in the US, met us at John F.
Kennedy Inernational Airport. I was fourteen years old. My parents asked me,
the best English speaker in the family, to find out where we might find a taxi
or a shuttle to drive us to Boston, but every time I opened my mouth to say
"Where can I find a taxi?" I got the stock response: "I can't hear you." I asked
louder, but, still, they couldn't hear me. When I told my parents that no one
could hear me they asked me if I was sure I was saying it right. This was my
first of many experiences with the disconnect between learning a language in
the safe confines of a classroom and using a language to communicate in the
world.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.10                          257
Fernandes

   I have spent over two thirds of my life learning a new language. Born in
Portugal, I moved to my father's home country of Cape Verde as a boy, where
I needed to quickly learn Kriolu. Then, at fourteen, my family moved to the
United States where I learned English. I was the oldest of four children, and,
as often happens, I quickly became the translator of language and culture and
custom to my entire family.

   There is little doubt that these experiences have led me to develop a great
interest in the study of languages and the complexity of learning them; further,
they have greatly affected how I approach the teaching of English in the ESOL
classroom. Having come to teach ESOL as a second-language learner myself,
my charge in my classroom was colored by the idea that English was something
that unlocked doors for me and my family, and I was finally going to be able
to pass that on to my students. As I began to focus more on the teaching of
writing at my school--a for-profit school that contracts out space from a
major university in the Northeast but is not connected to or governed by the
university--I began to notice that my own experiences learning English were
quite different from the population I was working with: economically elite,
second- or other-language learners from all over the world for whom learning
English seems to be more of a trophy than an act of survival as it was for me.

   Teaching these "trophy" students is most often happening in a for-profit
setting. The traditional writing curricula used in this setting, I will argue, does
not and cannot support a richer context for learning English because, instead
of engaging students in their learning and writing in English, it engenders
a spectator attitude. This chapter--based on a "Scholars of the Dream"
presentation I gave at the 2012 convention of the Conference on College
Composition and Communication--examines the "global elite" language
learner and looks into the curricula at a private, for-profit ESOL school. I argue
for a curriculum infused with elements that draw from the process approaches
English L1 (first language) composition classroom, despite the critique of such
classrooms by Horowitz (1990), Matsuda (1997) and Silva (1993) as effective
learning experiences for the English L2 (second language) learner.

FOR-PROFIT LANGUAGE SCHOOLS AND
THE PRIVILEGED L2 LEARNER

   Many composition classrooms ask that students position themselves in
relation to the world they are writing in and out of. The fact that they are asked
to define and position themselves in a way that admits of real consequences
creates vulnerability, but also can generate a feeling of agency and control over

258
                                                                          English is Not a Spectator Sport

language. Second language learners in these settings also have access to this
kind of writing experience. Language learning in this setting is, therefore, high
stakes; not having dominion over a language denies second language learners
(as it denies any student) very real and tangible opportunities and experiences.

   On the other hand, curricula at for-profit language schools are focused on
imparting academic language skills with an eye to improving things like SAT
and TOEFL scores. The writing curriculum for students in these programs has
correctness and standard formulaic production of writing as its goals. And most
students attending these programs desire little else by way of writing instruction,
as I have seen and as Vandrick (2010) describes in her essay "Social Class Privilege
among ESOL Writing Student," in which she looks at the way membership in
a privileged social class shapes the identity of some second language learners,
those that she calls "students of the new global elite." She examines the ways
that these students behave differently than other second language learners and
how that behavior affects, in turn, the behavior of instructors who teach them.
For-profit language schools are almost exclusively attended by the students
Vandrick describes. While the global elite students enrolled in these programs
report that English writing proficiency gives them access to better jobs, academic
opportunities, increased (geographical) mobility, these same students have also
remarked to me that failing to achieve proficiency is not dangerous in any way
because they have their own lives back in their respective countries. The cloak of
privilege that Vandrick talks about is clear in how these students see the role of
ESOL writing in their lives. During a class discussion in an advanced integrated
skills class at my for-profit school, for example, one student said, "It is good for
me if I can write well, but I can live in my country without it."

   To better understand the subset of students I am talking about, I will tell
you a little about the school's curriculum. It is important to note here that,
though this curriculum is not the same for every for-profit school out there,
it is true of my institution that operates at an international level and occupies
a significant portion of the market worldwide. The classes at the particular
for-profit school where I teach ran in cycles of ten weeks per proficiency level
with students coming in and out after passing a multiple choice level test. Any
particular class could have a student in her tenth week with that teacher and
three students in their second and third weeks. Following the curriculum, these
classes tended to shape in one-week arcs at best. Though it is prescribed in the
curriculum, students don't have to stay for ten weeks, but they do have to get A's
for eight weeks straight in order to be allowed to take the level test early. Once
students find out about this option almost everyone asks to take the level test
early. Students often say that they need their certificate of graduation to indicate
that they passed the highest level possible. An A in the class means scoring a

                                                                                                259
Fernandes

90% on a 30-question grammar test, a 30-question listening and speaking test,
and a 30-question reading and writing test which asks general comprehension
questions that make use of the grammar points and vocabulary of the week.
There is no weekly writing assignment given at this particular school. Most
important is that teachers keep strict records of student attendance to make sure
they are in compliance with federal visa regulations.

   Classes meet for three hours a day, five days a week for ten weeks per level.
Each day the instructor is expected to cover four areas: listening, speaking,
reading, and writing. Many teachers' manuals that we used at the school
suggested that the students spend a few minutes discussing something related
to a topic, read the text in class, and, finally, answer 10 or 15 comprehension
questions, either alone or in groups. Students also work out of skills books that
introduces them to one grammatical principle for the week and one aspect
of writing that will ultimately contribute to the formation of a five-paragraph
essay.

   The students at my school tended to manipulate the structure of the
curriculum in a way that fit their goals. Some students raced through the
curriculum in order to attend classes at one of the area universities or to be able
to return home and report that they had reached a certain level. Other students,
on a kind of language-learning holiday, prolonged their stay in a particular level
if they liked the teacher or their classmates. One student from France whose
parents had sent him to the program as a finishing touch before going into the
family business stayed in my class for 28 weeks. This student had no reason to
speed through the curriculum--or even to finish it. Simply attending fulfilled
his and his family's expectations. Despite my respect and good feelings for this
student, this, in my mind, struck me as an instance of low-risk spectating, even
though nothing in his performance was in conflict with the existing curriculum,
which largely follows what many TESOL scholars suggest should happen in the
ESOL classroom.

   In Critical Academic Writing, TESOL scholar Canagarajah (2002) helps us
understand the disparity between the ESOL writing instruction and instructors
and L1 Composition while seemingly critiquing both:

         It is true that ESOL writing teachers sometimes conceive
         of their task as a pragmatic one of teaching value-free
         grammatical features or form-related aspects of essays to their
         students. Rhetorical and ideological issues are considered
         irrelevant to the students' practical needs of learning
         another language for utilitarian purposes in educational and
         professional life. While L1 [English as first language] Comp

260
                                                                          English is Not a Spectator Sport

         teachers have found it fashionable to indulge in theoretically
         and politically sophisticated discourse on writing, ESOL
         teachers have confined themselves to clinically circumscribed
         classroom-based empirical research on their students'
         linguistic and cognitive development. (p. 25)

While Canagarajah is talking here about the state of the TESOL discipline, the
same tendencies are reflected in implementation at the classroom level. The
ESOL students' in-class time is managed toward the "practical needs of learning
another language," whereas in L1 composition classrooms students more often
engage in discussions around higher order concerns in the text or about the text.

   Despite the limitations of TESOL goals for L2 learners in a writing classroom,
composition studies does not immediately suggest a clear alternative. I am not
unaware that there are critics of English L1 composition classrooms for L2
learners. Tony Silva (1993) cautions us that L1 and L2 writing and writers are
very different from one another and that L2 writers would be at a disadvantage
if one treated their writing process as one would L1. Silva's findings show that
while L1 and L2 writers had basically the same composing process, the L2
writing was more constrained, less fluent and less effective. He goes on to say
that L2 writers planned less, had more trouble setting goals and organizing
materials, and reviewed, reread, and reflected on their work less than their L1
counterparts. Thus, Silva and other scholars caution against assuming the value
of L1 composition instruction for the L2 learner.

OFFERING A DEEPER LEARNING
AND WRITING EXPERIENCE

   But the problem of the for-profit classroom remains and requires new
thinking about TESOL instructional goals and those of the L1 composition
classroom when it comes to international students. In her argument, Vandrick
(2010) notes the dearth of research on the role of social class in second language
learning and, in particular, the role of privileged social class. This absence of
research is only compounded for the for-profit classroom--the site (sometimes
the only site) where many of these students experience the second language
writing classroom.

   Students of the global elite often have economic power but no rhetorical
agency; a redesigned curriculum is one way they may find their way to that
agency. I want to argue that the unique limbo created by privilege that elite
second language writers find themselves in would benefit from an infusion of

                                                                                                261
Fernandes

process elements most often valued in L1 composition classrooms. Contrastive
rhetoric scholars like Kaplan (1966) made us aware of a variety of rhetorical
organizations different writing cultures use. Since many L2 writers are writing
from different cultural and rhetorical understandings, it stands to reason that,
without some instruction and time for practice, they wouldn't be able to write
using the rhetorical conventions that are expected in the American composition
classroom. Students are often surprised that writing done in some US classrooms
places the responsibility on the writer, and not so heavily on the reader. "You
mean you want us to write so that the reader doesn't have to do any work?" one
student asked in my composition course.

   A redesigned curriculum would pay attention to the nuances of contrastive
rhetoric and value different processes and rhetorical approaches so that students
can be aware of these differences and, at the same time, understand what
processes and rhetorical styles are valued by US readers. A redesigned curriculum
would put this kind of work at the forefront of the students' experience. To
address the pragmatic concerns that Horowitz (1990) and Silva (1993) have
for these students, I argue that assignments that engage in rhetorical analysis of
US forms of argumentation, for example, in comparison to their own writing
culture's forms of argumentation are vital, and not simply to help them do well
in an American composition classroom. Rather, it is important for instructors
who teach these students to understand that this kind of assignment is not
simply academic: it asks students to be more thoughtful about their own lives
and decisions. An awareness of rhetorical differences, including the shapes of
written arguments, is right next door to an awareness of those same kinds of
differences outside of the classroom.

   If these students do choose to stay for college in the US, the for-profit ESOL
classroom can prepare ESOL students by exposing them to American styles
of argumentation, but, if they don't, and they typically won't (although this is
changing very quickly), what the composition classroom has to offer to students
who are not going to stay here are opportunities to make critical arguments, to
engage in critical reading in English, which is often presented in a structure that
they are not familiar with, and to engage in an analysis of self (for example, in
the personal essay) in relation to these arguments.

   Students also need to be given time to engage substantially in their reading
by talking and writing about the texts. Some teachers' manuals in for-profit
ESOL schools often suggest that students take 45 minutes to read a text in
class and then answer a set of 10 or 15 comprehension questions about the
reading. An activity like this can take the better part of an hour in a class of
beginning-advanced or advanced students. That hour is then not spent talking
about choices the writer made and the reasons he or she made them, nor does it

262
                                                                          English is Not a Spectator Sport

allow for time to talk about the issues addressed in the text. If you are spending
a full hour on reading in a class, you aren't spending that time in the writing
and thinking and discussion exercises that will allow students to make use of the
language they are there to learn in the first place; that is, language and writing
that enables them to communicate important ideas that matter to an audience.

   In the hope for more substantial engagement with reading, I borrowed
from the first year composition classroom. I copied readings and gave students
questions to answer as they read the text at home. Students came to class
with short written "reader's notes" that we could use as a basis for our in-class
conversation. This isn't some crazy, new-fangled assignment, I know, but it is
a vastly different assignment than is typically required in my for-profit school.
In addition to not having to spend that class time reading, the students had
prolonged exposure to the text, which then made it possible for us to have in-
class discussions and analyses of the higher-order aspects of the texts as they
intersected with their lives. Though most students complained about this work
at the beginning of their time in my classroom, many came to actually appreciate
the experience. One student in my advanced integrated skills class told me at
the end of her time there that she felt that the writing allowed her to "really talk
about something that was happening in my life or in the community at that
time," and she felt like her ideas and her thinking mattered because they were
out there--being talked about in class, validated or disagreed with. In this and
the other assignments I'll describe next, ideas were being made real in (our piece
of ) the world through the students' use of written language. Many students said
that this was a way they could really use the language they were learning to talk
about real things, not the kinds of broad, empty topics the textbooks we were
using had them read about: internet and cell phone addiction or "the media."

   Another notable difference between the kind of reading and writing the
textbooks typically asked for and the reading and writing I asked students to
do in my classes was that I asked, really required, students to engage with the
argument and ideas of a reading personally. I wanted to know what they thought
and what experiences in their lives influenced how they read and understood
the text. One assignment asked that students write about a feature of their
home culture that they thought would not survive if they were to move to
the US permanently, and examine why that feature would not survive. This
prompt also asked them to use their native status in their culture to examine
what about that feature was particularly symbolic of their culture. To provide
a fuller response, students had to answer questions such as What is particularly
Korean [for example] about this behavior?, What are the cultural values reflected in
and through this behavior?", and Why would these behaviors/attitudes/values not
survive in American society?

                                                                                                263
Fernandes

   This was a very difficult assignment in the beginning for the students because
what they had been taught to write were "compare and contrast" essays, which
meant that their essays were little more than lists of behaviors people have in
each country. "In my country, we kiss cheeks and here people shake hands" and
so on. Working in the process model allowed us to refine and give weight to the
theses of their papers. Students had to spend some time thinking about how
their home countries had shaped them and, by putting their culture in conflict
with American culture, many of them came to identify some causes of confusion
or culture shock. Their writing moved beyond just a list of characteristics, and,
instead, attempted to get at what it meant to them to be Korean or Saudi or
Chinese. For many, this was a positive experience that validated their sense of
their own national identity; for others, it was a moment for them to seriously
consider what it meant to be a representative of their culture living in the US
(even if for only a short time).

   Another assignment I gave required students to research the platforms of the
possible candidates for the 2012 US presidential election with respect to their
own countries' interests and to persuade voters to vote for one candidate over all
of the others. After many trips to the library, one student became visibly angry
with all of the possible candidates: "As a Chinese, this was difficult for me to
write, because no one had any good words for us." The title of her essay ended
up being "Of the Two Evils, Choose the Lesser." This student was pointing
at the fact that none of the platforms she had examined depicted China in a
very positive light. Suddenly, in this moment, the rosy lens with which she
saw her experience in the US disappeared because of her new understanding
of how she must have been viewed as a Chinese National by the US citizens
and students around her. (For more examples of writing assignments that ask
L2 students to think and write critically about international issues, see Siczek
& Shapiro's [this volume] description of a course model focused on world
Englishes.)

   A for-profit ESOL writing class would benefit from exercises in topic
generation, brainstorming, organization of ideas, prioritization, revisions (all
things Silva's study suggests these students could use some work on), along
with discussions of the rhetorical patterns each of the students adopts in his
or her writing and assignments calling for a personal investment in learning to
write in English. (Hirsch's [this volume] analysis of effective writing curricula
for L2 students also finds that this type of scaffolding leads to L2 student
success). These process-focused activities are beginning to show up in some
for-profit curricula, but, as Terry Santos (1992) points out, just because they
show up there doesn't mean that these activities actually make their way into
the classroom. One major reason for this is that instructors at for-profit schools

264
                                                                          English is Not a Spectator Sport

aren't paid for the many hours it takes to read essays. Many of my colleagues
also admitted that they didn't feel confident in their training to teach writing
with a focus on the process approach.

   The American composition classroom has been understood for over thirty
years as a place where process and product are emphasized, but that is not the
case in the for-profit second language classroom. Though a call for process in
the for-profit classroom might seem less than revolutionary, the results of such
an infusion could be. I am calling for genuine engagement in the experience of
process. This is not a complete revamping of the for-profit ESOL curriculum but
a suggestion that the for-profit ESOL classroom would benefit from an infusion
of pedagogical tools from the composition classroom. The strategies and kinds
of assignments I mention above are not original or particularly innovative. Of
greater importance here is the that these strategies and assignments ask students
to engage in the process of writing, reading, and thinking rather than simply
produce brief, uniform products and short essay responses.

ENGAGED WRITING FOR AGENCY

   Writing, when there is not much at stake, becomes an exercise in low-risk
spectating --just another ride the student can take while on his/her language
journey. Social privilege along with the current curriculum design at for-profit
schools affords students who are able to take a year leave to perfect their English
a certain distance between themselves and the material they are being asked to
engage with at a personal level. They are spectators and not participants. The
kinds of writing and methods of teaching writing I describe here demand an
active engagement that requires visiting and revisiting the ideas and the writer's
relationship to them.

   Considering the assignments that I've described, it can't come as any
surprise when I say that another thing that the for-profit ESOL classroom
could take from the field of rhetoric and composition is a good dose of critical
pedagogy. Vandrick (1995) made this same recommendation in an early article
on this ESOL elite population, "Privileged ESL University Students." Critical
pedagogy is inspired by the teaching and scholarship of Paulo Freire and asks
teachers and students alike to consider their relationship to power in and out
of the classroom. Critical pedagogy is often understood as a way to empower
the otherwise disenfranchised. ESOL students, especially those we see in
public schools, are often members of those disenfranchised groups that critical
pedagogy aims to empower and usually the group of students we most often
identify with the label "ESL."

                                                                                                265
Fernandes

   But I would suggest that it is equally important to engage students on
the other end of the power divide in critical pedagogy classrooms. David
Nuremberg (2011) discusses Freire's (1974) influence in his own teaching at
a "high-powered, affluent, suburban public high school." Referencing Freire,
Nuremburg argues that

         it is impossible to humanly exist without assuming the right
         and the duty to opt, to decide, to struggle, to be political
         and therefore the teacher has some responsibility and duty to
         help students become aware of and empowered by their own
         ability to make these choices. Teaching inevitably involves
         calling students' attention to social issues as matters of ethical
         choice and not merely as the result of societal determinism.
         Therefore, Freire says, teachers should work to help students
         make concrete connections between what they have read
         and what is happening in the world, country, or the local
         community. (p. 34)

   Despite the fact that for some of my students' power can sometimes feel
"socially determined," they cannot be said to have agency if their actions are not
accompanied by reflection and a more complete articulation of their reasons for
acting. What has become clear to me is that while these students have power,
they do not necessarily have agency because they don't know in what ways they
are powerful. They don't know that the consequence of being a member of this
global elite is that they could come to make decisions that could affect large
numbers of individuals in the world.

   Having power but no agency is just as crippling as having no power at all.
Even those who are socially and economically privileged can't go through doors
they don't know exist. These students still need for someone to show them how
to pass through those doors. Given the potential power that the students at
these schools are likely to inherit or come to exert in the world, more attention
should be given to how private for-profit ESOL curricula are designed and
taught.

REFERENCES

Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). Critical academic writing. Ann Arbor, MI: The
   University of Michigan Press.

266
                                                                          English is Not a Spectator Sport

Freire, P. (1974, 1998). Pedagogy of freedom: Ethics, democracy and civic courage.
   Lanham, MD: Lanham, Rowman & Littlefield.

Horowitz, D. (1990). Fiction and nonfiction in the ESL/EFL classroom:
   Does the difference make a difference?. In T. Silva & P. K. Matsuda
   (Eds.), Landmark Essays on ESL Writing. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Kaplan, R. (1966). Cultural thought patterns in intercultural education. Language
   Learning, 16, 1-20.

Matsuda, P. K. (1997). Contrastive rhetoric in context: A dynamic model of L2
   writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 6, 45-60.

Nuremberg, D. (2011). What does injustice have to do with me? A pedagogy of
   the privileged. Harvard Educational Review, 81(1), 50-63.

Santos, T. (1992). Ideology in composition: L1 and ESL. In T. Silva & P. K.
   Matsuda (Eds.), Landmark Essays on ESL Writing. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
   Erlbaum Associates.

Silva, T. (1993). Toward an understanding of the distinct nature of second
   language writing: The ESL research and its implications. TESOL
   Quarterly, 27, 657-677.

Vandrick, S. (1995). Privileged ESL university students. TESOL Quarterly, 29(2),
   375-381.

Vandrick, S. (2010). Social class privilege among ESOL writing students. In
   M. Cox, J. Jordan, C. Ortmeier-Hooper, & G. Schwartz (Eds.), Reinventing
   Identities in Second Language Writing (pp. 257-272). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

                                                                                                267
CHAPTER 11

MAKING STANCE EXPLICIT FOR
SECOND LANGUAGE WRITERS
IN THE DISCIPLINES: WHAT
FACULTY NEED TO KNOW ABOUT
THE LANGUAGE OF STANCE-
TAKING

Zak Lancaster
Wake Forest University

Expressing an authorial stance in contextually valued ways may be
especially challenging for English as a Second Language (L2) writers
(in addition, certainly, to many L1 writers), as the subtle ways that
writers in the disciplines go about evaluating evidence and positioning
the reader toward their views are largely tacit and therefore not often
made explicit to students. In response to this problem, this chapter dis-
cusses ways that writing specialists can assist faculty in the disciplines to
become explicitly aware of stance expressions in their students' writing.
Drawing on analysis of student writing in two disciplinary contexts
(political theory and economics) as well as interviews with the course
instructors, I offer examples of stance features that appear to be valued
in these two contexts even though they run below the instructors' fully
conscious awareness. I then discuss ways that disciplinary faculty can
be assisted to identify these features explicitly. The larger goal of this
chapter is to argue for a way of reading students' disciplinary writing
that is sensitive to the details of stance-taking and to the language-
related problems that many students experience when writing in the
disciplines.

   Students in upper-level writing in the disciplines contexts are expected,
often implicitly, to construct stances in their writing in ways that are recognized
by readers as appropriate and authoritative--i.e., assertive, knowledgeable,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.11                             269
Lancaster

critically distant, and aligned with a specific disciplinary culture. To meet these
stance expectations, writers must use language in specialized ways, as revealed
by linguistic analyses of specific disciplinary discourses (see, e.g., Charles,
2003; Hyland, 2004, 2005; Macken-Horarik & Morgan, 2011; Schleppegrell,
2004; Soliday, 2011). These specialized ways of using language, however, are
not typically recognized as such by faculty in the disciplines, due largely to
assumptions about the transparency of academic discourses (Turner, 1999). In
particular, there is not often conscious awareness of the ways that disciplinary
stances are accomplished through language, for example through wordings that
subtly foreground valued epistemologies, construct a critical reader-in-the-text,
or otherwise index the stance of a student who is engaged with the disciplinary
discourse.

   As brief illustration, consider the following two texts written by students in
an advanced economics course.

         (1a) Using an ex post analysis of share prices and product
         prices, I was able to show that the Supreme Court decision
         had negligible effects on the industry, and therefore a better
         outcome could have been achieved. (Eric)

         (1b) Using my personal opinion to analyze the remedies used
         in this case, I determined the District Court was correct in
         allowing the merger to proceed. (Nancy)

   These texts are from students' final essays in the course. One difference
between them, as suggested by just these concluding sentences, is that Eric
adopts a contrastive stance toward the reasoning of Supreme Court, while
Nancy adopts a stance of agreement (the District Court was correct). Subtler
differences can be found in the details of the language. Eric's text, for instance,
thematizes (or linguistically foregrounds)1 the analytic framework that he uses
to reach his judgment (Using ex post analysis of share prices and product prices),
while Nancy's text thematizes the subjective basis of her judgment (Using my
personal opinion to analyze the remedies used in this case). Through these and other
language resources, Eric's text conveys more critical distance and authority.

   It is unlikely that many faculty think in such explicit terms about stance when
evaluating student work. This lack of explicit attention may not cause problems
for students who have learned "organically" how to construct valued stances in
their writing, i.e., through trial and error and unconscious noticing of patterns
in genre exemplars. It can present problems, however, for students who have
difficulty meeting implicit stance expectations, due either to limited exposure

270
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

to academic registers and genres or to a variety of linguistic, socio-cultural, and
individual factors. To provide meaningful support for these students, it would
be useful for faculty to be aware of the various linguistic means through which
valued stances are realized in their discourse contexts. With such awareness,
they could learn to read student work in new ways and provide feedback that
takes into account the complexities involved in taking on a disciplinary stance.

   Recent research shows that stance-related challenges may be especially acute
for English as a Second Language (L2) writers (Chang, 2010; Feak, 2008;
Hyland & Milton, 1997; Lancaster, 2011; Schleppegrell, 2004; Tardy, 2009).
When L2 writers' styles of stance-taking are not explicit enough, inconsistent
in evaluative position, not measured enough, too measured, or otherwise
subtly off the mark, the students can be judged as having vague "language" or
"grammar" problems and thus directed to the campus writing center, where
writing specialists who are likely untrained in the disciplinary context may or
may not be able to help (Feak, 2008). Students can also be judged in a very
different way as having problems comprehending the subject matter (Lancaster,
2011). Specifically, faculty may interpret what are actually problems in linguistic
expression of stance as problems with thinking, understanding, or even effort.
(See Zawacki & Habib [this volume] for similar faculty explanations of L2
student error, many of which could be attributed to inappropriate stance-
taking.) For instance, in some disciplinary genres, inconsistent use of "hedges"
(e.g., perhaps, research suggests, it appears/seems that) may contribute toward the
impression that the writer has not engaged in sufficiently cautious reasoning.
In other disciplinary genres, foregrounding of personal opinion, as in Nancy's
text, may be perceived as insufficient "analytic rigor." Evidence that stance does
matter can be found in research that reveals connections between the types of
stances students project and their grades or scores (Barton, 1993; Coffin, 2002;
Lancaster, 2012; Soliday, 2004; Wu, 2007).

   That adopting an effective stance in disciplinary writing comes with linguistic
challenges presents a conundrum for writing instruction, one well known
to writing scholars. The conundrum is that, while faculty in the disciplines
best understand the close text-context interrelations in the disciplinary genres
that they themselves have mastered and are asking their students to engage
with, they typically feel ill-equipped, under-prepared, or under-motivated to
deal with "language" in their classroom instruction. While linguistic issues in
writing may fall under the expertise of writing specialists, discipline-specific
ways of using language are best understood (at least potentially) by experts in
the respective disciplines.

   In response to this knotty and long-standing problem, I suggest ways in this
chapter that writing specialists can work with faculty in the disciplines to become

                                                                                                271
Lancaster

explicitly aware of stance expressions in student writing. My main suggestion
is that, if faculty are to develop strategies for reading and commenting on their
students' papers in ways that are sensitive to expression of stance, they need to
be able to identify textual patterns in their students' writing that are more and
less related to valued disciplinary stances. The capacity to identify patterns of
stance in students' texts, furthermore, requires a meaningful metalanguage (or
language about language), one that potentially can be used to assist students to
recognize how valued stances are realized through language.

   I begin by clarifying what I mean by "stance." I then offer examples of
patterns in stance-taking that faculty could be assisted to identify. My examples
are pulled from two distinct disciplinary contexts, an upper-level course on
economic regulation and antitrust policy (henceforth Econ 432) and an upper-
level course on twentieth century political theory (henceforth PolSci 409). In
the larger research project from which my examples are taken, I used appraisal
theory from systemic functional linguistics (Martin and White, 2005) to
analyze argumentative essays written by consistently high- and low-performing
students. I also interviewed the course instructors about their goals and values
for student writing in order to interpret how patterns of stance were related
to valued meanings in the contexts. I describe these methods more fully in
Lancaster (2012). After discussing relevant patterns in example texts, I finally
turn to specific strategies for assisting faculty to read student work in terms of
stance-taking.

STANCE: WHAT IS IT AND WHY IS IT SO TRICKY?

   Stance is a slippery concept that faculty across the disciplines, including
writing faculty, have difficultly discussing with their students in clear terms.
As Soliday (2011) points out, students are frequently advised to "take your
own position" and offer judgments, but to avoid sounding "biased" (p. 39-40).
Similarly, they are expected to show commitment to their arguments and even
"passion" for their topics, but also to remain "objective" or critically distant.
Other potentially contradictory messages that students may hear include:
Use your own words, your own "voice," but don't be colloquial in your use
of language; use "I" in your writing, but not too frequently; write assertively
and with authority, but don't forget you're a student and lack expertise; engage
with others' views and voices, but don't just summarize what others have said;
display understanding of the target material, but don't just reel off facts; try new
things, experiment with new ways of thinking and arguing, but be sure to write
clearly and concisely. The cumulative effect of these apparently contradictory

272
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

instructions can lead students to the (not unreasonable) conclusion that every
instructor wants something different: Instructors have their own idiosyncratic
tastes for what counts as an effective style of stance taking.

   Stance has been hard for linguists to pin down, too, as suggested by the
wide range of definitions that have been offered (see, e.g., Engelbretson, 2007;
Hyland, 2005; Jaffe, 2009; Martin & White, 2005). Furthermore, in some
traditions of applied linguistics, stance has been treated as nearly or completely
synonymous with the construct of voice. Hyland (2011), for instance, equates
the two constructs when he explains that "stance refers to the writer's textual
`voice' or community recognized personality" (p. 197).

   In this chapter, I am using the term stance rather than voice because I examine
how writers' interpersonal moves (like use of counterargument strategies) relate
to issues of reader positioning. Expressing stance is both a writer-oriented and
reader-oriented concept, a point that is reflected in Johnstone's (2009) definition
of stance as "the methods, linguistic and other, by which interactants create
and signal relationships with the propositions they utter and with the people
they interact with" (p. 30-31). I am, in fact, equally comfortable referring to
the linguistic construction of an "authoritative voice" as I am an "authoritative
stance," but other textual qualities that I discuss below, like contrastiveness, have
to do with the signaling of relationships with others' views and voices. Thus a
"contrastive stance"--or adopting a stance of contrast towards others' views--
makes more intuitive sense than a "contrastive voice." Likewise a dialogically
expansive or contractive stance (as explained in White, 2003, and discussed
below) makes more intuitive sense than a dialogically expansive or contractive
voice.

   Stance, then, refers to the ways that writers--as they go about analyzing and
evaluating things, making assertions and recommendations, providing evidence
and justifications and so forth--project an authorial presence in their texts, one
that conveys attitudes and feelings and that interacts with the imagined readers
by recognizing their views, identifying points of shared knowledge, conceding
limitations, and otherwise positioning them as aligned with or resistant to the
views being advanced in the text. According to this expansive definition, stance
expressions are pervasive throughout disciplinary genres, including ones often
thought of as objective and "faceless" like research articles and lab reports. (See
the Appendix for examples of stance moves from various disciplinary contexts.)

   As suggested by the discussion so far, expressing stance in academic writing
requires more complex decision-making than whether or not to adopt a formal
tone or use the active voice or the pronoun "I." It requires making decisions
(usually tacitly) about such matters as when to tune up or down one's level of
commitment to assertions; whether and how to comment on the significance

                                                                                                273
Lancaster

of evidence; when and how to engage with alternative perspectives; how
to construct a text that engages with the imagined reader; and many other
interpersonal considerations that can vary widely according to genre and
disciplinary context (Hyland, 2004; 2005). These subtle interpersonal moves
can be highly challenging for both L1 and L2 student writers. They can also be
difficult for experienced writers to think about consciously and to identify in
discourse explicitly, as they tend to be so deeply embedded within their social
knowledge of genre.

   In terms of my own difficulties as a writing specialist, I can only go so far in
conjecturing whether or not certain stance features, such as the ones I identified
in Eric's and Nancy's texts above, are valued or not in their contexts, as I am
not trained in economics or political theory. Eric's stance is both more "critical"
(or contrastive) and critically distant than Nancy's. Through my analysis (in
Lancaster, 2012), I showed that these and other qualities do correlate with
students' grades in the courses. That is, the high-performers more consistently
adopt stances marked by contrastiveness and critical distance, among other
qualities. The difficulty for me lies in pinpointing why a particular pattern or
type of wording might be valued, either with regard to the pedagogical purposes
of the assignment or the epistemological values of the disciplinary culture--or
a combination of the two. Is the stance that Nancy projects not as effective
as the one that Eric projects? If so, is this because it is in agreement with the
District Court's reasoning and thus is not "critical"? Or is it because her text
foregrounds the subjective basis of her reasoning? I can, of course, speculate
that foregrounding personal opinion is not the most effective way to go about
recommending a course of action in the context of an economically-driven
public policy analysis. But the person who is in the best position to comment
on these meanings, and perhaps connect them to other important meanings
in the context that I have not identified, is the course professor. This is why it
would be ideal for him and other faculty in the disciplines to gain experience
in identifying patterns of stance that are more and less valued in their own
students' writing.

EXAMPLES OF LINGUISTIC PATTERNS THAT
REQUIRE INSTRUCTIONAL ATTENTION

   In this section I focus in more detail on types of language use that my research
suggests warrant close attention, especially in disciplinary contexts that call for
evidence-based arguments. I begin with the case of Econ 432. My analysis of
high-and low-graded papers in this course revealed that the wordings in bold

274
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

italics in the sentences below are instances of a larger pattern of language use
that can present particular difficulties for L2 writers.

         (2a) Of the defendants involved in Utah Pie Company's case
         only one seems to have emerged as exceptionally successful.
         Continental, now known as Morton Frozen Foods Division,
         had a 13, 11, and 13th percentage share of the market in
         1974, 1975 and 1976 respectively (see table 1).

         (2b) It appears that maximum price fixing does the greatest
         harm when set below a competitive level.

         (2c) The rise of Mrs. Smith's, fall of Utah Pie, and relative
         success of Continental in the resulting time frame suggest
         internal management, and not the Supreme Court, played
         the most significant role in market performance and conduct.

These highlighted wordings appear significantly more frequently in the high-
performing students' writing in the course, and for this reason they may warrant
instructional attention. Given that, how can they be discussed?

   Often referred to in the applied linguistics literature as hedges (see Hyland,
2004; 2005), these devices are used to weaken authorial commitment to
claims and signal openness to alternative views. In the specific sentences above,
hedging is realized through appearance-based evidential verbs (appears, seems,
and suggest), which highlight the evidence-based nature of the reasoning and
represent the writers' judgments as "based on plausible reasoning rather than
certain knowledge" (Hyland, 2005, p. 179). Hedging can also be realized
through low-probability modal expressions (e.g., could, might, may, perhaps,
possibly, I think)--in addition to a variety of other lexical and grammatical
means for expressing a claim as a possibility rather than fact or pronouncement.

   In the case of genres that require evidence-based argumentation, it is useful
to distinguish between two sub-types of hedging: evidentializing (e.g., the
research suggests; based on these facts it appears/seems) and conjecturing (e.g.,
perhaps; it is likely/possible that; in my view), which are terms that I borrow
from Tang (2009). Both are instances of hedging, with the difference being
that evidentializing expresses sustained consideration of evidence--a process
that shifts focus somewhat away from the immediate subjective experience
of the writer--while conjecturing expresses an internalized process grounded
in the subjectivity of the authorial voice. My analysis of Econ 432 papers
revealed that high-graded papers used more instances of evidentializing, while

                                                                                                275
Lancaster

the lower-graded papers used more instances of personalized conjecturing (or
"personalizing"), for example it seems to me and in my view. As I discuss below,
this differential pattern does not hold for the case of PolSci 409 writing because
this context calls for a different kind of evidence-based writing.

   In Econ 432, the specific pattern of evidentializing that was revealed as
especially valuable, because it works to construct an authoritative stance, involves
three elements. These comprise an initial presentation of facts, which are either
categorically asserted or strongly boosted, followed by a hedged judgment of the
evidence, and finally a statement of recommendation. This sequencing strategy
allows the writers to adopt a stance marked by cautious evaluation of evidence.
Examples are provided below. (Key wordings are in bold italics.)

(3a) From Ken's high-graded essay

Presentation of Evidence  As shown in a recent survey of physician satisfaction
(boosted)                 by Harvard Medical School, physician autonomy and
                          the ability to provide high-quality care, not income, are
Judgment (hedged)         strongly associated with changes in job satisfaction.

Recommendation (hedged)   Thus, it seems reasonable to assume that health care
                          providers would take advantage of the greater bargaining
                          power to improve the quality of care.

                          Such measures might take the form of measures included
                          in many state patient protection bills ...

(3b) From Luis's high-graded essay

Presentation of Evidence  Clearly, Von's did not accomplish what it set out to
(boosted)                 achieve: countless subsequent antitrust cases have
                          completely ignored the reasoning set forth by the Court.

Judgment (hedged)         It would seem, then, the Von's decision was a failure. This
Recommendation (hedged)   statement leads to a natural question: if the Court got
                          it wrong in Von's, what might the correct decision have
                          been?

                          For several reasons, the Supreme Court should have ...

In these excerpts, Ken and Luis are moving from analysis to recommendations.
To accomplish this move in an authoritative manner, they ramp up persuasive
effort through strategic use of hedging and boosting.

   Boosters (see, e.g., Hyland, 2005; Perales-Escudero & Swales, 2011) are
something of a counterpart to hedges in that they increase authorial commitment
while closing down discursive space for other views. Analyzed as resources of

276
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

high-force graduation in Martin and White (2005), boosters express the writer's
involvement with the topic. They also draw attention to the importance of the
ideas, persuading the reader to accept the proposition being put forth. Instances
of boosting are seen in 3a and 3b in the stance expressions strongly, clearly,
countless, and completely. Cooperating with these boosters is the verb shown and
the explicit denials (not). Like boosters, these latter devices--endorsements and
denials--work to shut down space for alternative views (White, 2003). Ken
could have chosen less committed wordings like as suggested or indicated in,
but instead he chose as shown in, which expresses a stronger endorsement of
the survey results. He further closes down room for negotiation in this phase
of discourse by directly denying a possible alternative view (not income). The
result of these maneuvers is a highly committed stance. However, when offering
his most general judgment, Ken reduces authorial commitment and opens up
the discursive space by hedging (seems reasonable to assume). The wording here
expresses a very different kind of stance than if Ken were to have written It is
therefore obvious/certain/clear that. The use of hedging enables him to express a
carefully reasoned stance, which may be rhetorically useful before proceeding
to offer recommendations.

   In general, the movement from boosting to hedging in Ken's and Luis's
texts creates the impression of highly involved but cautious analysts. Such
a stance is likely to be valued in academic genres calling for evidence-based
recommendations. It is also likely to be one that is difficult to construct and
sustain for many L2 writers (as well as many L1 writers), especially those who
have not had prior training in working with academic registers.

   Hedges are used somewhat differently by the high-performing writers in
the political theory course (PolSci 409). This is an important point to make
because the differences in use suggest that faculty must go further than simply
telling their students that hedges are valuable; they also need to understand
whether, where, and how hedges are used to create valued meanings in their
contexts. In the PolSci 409 essay, which requires interpretation, explanation,
elaboration, and critical juxtaposition of theoretical arguments, hedges are used
less to convey cautious consideration of evidence and more to mitigate the force
of critical challenges to others' arguments.

   Offering challenges to texts by the likes of Michel Foucault, John Rawls,
Nancy Fraser, and others assigned in the class is a delicate procedure, especially
for student writers. Abruptly executed problematization moves can project a
stance marked by brashness or under-appreciation of the assigned readings.
When using the rhetorical strategy of problematization, which involves
"showing that a prevailing assumption, idea, view, or situation needs reexamina-
tion, reconceptualization, or reevaluation of some kind" (Barton, 1993, p.

                                                                                                277
Lancaster

748), hedges are often useful to suggest a stance of openness and willingness
to negotiate critical positions. This dialogically open stance can be seen in 4a
and 4b.

         (4a) In this sense, the trial somewhat contradicts Foucault's
         theory of the modern exercise of power. In modernity
         (according to Foucault), power is diffused so much as to
         make it impossible to locate the source of power. In the trial,
         however, the source of power is clearly identifiable; therefore,
         the trial seems to be more in line with Foucault's pre-modern
         concept of justice and power. (Maria)

         (4b) Fraser prefers the transformation strategy, which would
         reconfigure the social structure by eliminating the groups as
         such. While this method may be more decisive in eliminating
         the injustice, it appears to have the drawback of not being
         in the immediate interests of any group, as they would stand
         to lose their identities. Therefore, while Fraser's matrix may
         help soften there distributive-recognition dilemma, it doesn't
         offer any obvious solutions to the problem of recognition in
         modern society. (Ethan)

   Problematization is a highly valued argumentative practice in academia
(Barton, 1993; Wu, 2006), and it may be implicitly expected across academic
discourse contexts. Even if students are aware of the need to be "critical" in this
way, however, many struggle to do so in genre-appropriate ways, for example by
maintaining a carefully-reasoned or critically distant stance. In an interview, the
professor of PolSci 409 praised one of the top essays in the class for being, in his
words, both "critical" and "sympathetic" toward the main text under analysis.
Both Maria's and Ethan's texts are examples of how hedging can be used to
bring these two potentially contradictory stances together.

   In contrast to these two writers, two of the self-identified L2 writers in
PolSci 409, Victor and Ryan, had trouble with this stance of critical sympathy,
but for different reasons. Victor's writing suggests that he was not aware of
the implicit expectation to adopt a critical or contrastive stance when carrying
out the assignment. His essay, in fact, was one of the few that did not use
problematization strategies at all. Consider, as illustration, the different ways
that Ethan (the high-performing writer of 4b above) and Victor respond to the
same essay prompt in their introductory paragraphs. The prompt is reproduced
here, and key stance differences in the students' writing are in bold italics.

278
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

   Prompt: Nancy Fraser argues that conventional "distributive" theories
of justice cannot address contemporary problems related to the politics of
"recognition." Explain and elaborate on Fraser's argument. Then consider how
Rawls or Nussbaum would respond to Fraser's view.

   (5a) from Ethan's introduction (high-graded) ...

         ... Fraser's proposal posits that "the remedy for cultural
         injustice ... is some sort of cultural or symbolic change." She
         calls this cultural change "recognition." Rawlsian theory,
         however, disputes Fraser's sharp division between socioeco-
         nomic and cultural injustice. In fact, Rawls would respond
         to Fraser by saying that his theory fairly addresses cultural in-
         justice, and her attempt to redress cultural injustice through
         recognition may actually lead to unjust outcomes.

   (5b) from Victor's introduction (low-graded) ...

         ... Both Fraser and Nussbaum put forward ideas on how
         to eliminate social and economic inequalities and provide
         justice to people, although Fraser is more concerned with
         the means of bringing justice to people who need it, whereas
         Nussbaum looks at the ends by which we can evaluate if
         justice is provide or not. Therefore, in my opinion their
         views complement each other by providing suggestions on
         two aspects of the same problem: how to provide social and
         economic justice and the grounds on which we can judge if
         this goal is accomplished.

   Ethan's text in 5a assumes a contrastive stance by positioning Rawls in a
critical relationship with Fraser. Ethan maintains this stance throughout his essay
by engaging in frequent problematization moves. Victor's stance, in contrast,
is focused on complementarity. Throughout the course, in fact, his writing
displays a desire to locate points of agreement among different thinkers' views
(and possibly a reluctance to problematize). Partly for this reason, his writing
elicits such feedback from the professor as "simple compare and contrast" and
"you've done a good job summarizing, but you haven't developed an argument."
Victor's stance of assumed agreement seems to have caused his difficulty in
critically juxtaposing texts in specific ways.2

   Victor's writing, then, suggests that he may not have been aware of the
implicit expectation to place the texts under analysis in a critical relationship

                                                                                                279
Lancaster

with one another. In contrast, another L2 writer in the course, Ryan,3 had
difficulty executing problematization moves in genre appropriate ways. In
example 6, Ryan attempts to problematize an aspect of Foucault's argument as
a way to transition into a discussion of Walzer. But he realizes this move in a
way that reflects lack of critical distance. (Wordings that I discuss below are in
bold italics.)

         (6) One thing that Foucault doesn't address, not saying that
         he should have because it isn't one of his ideas, is whether
         the old form of public executions and the new form of pun-
         ishment is an act of dirty hands or not. According to Wal-
         zer's argument I think the act of public executions would
         definitely be an unjustified act of dirty hands, but what
         about the new forms of punishment such as jail time? Giving
         someone jail time for a crime that they've committed seems
         to be completely necessary, but is there a better way of taking
         care of the problem? (Ryan)

   As indicated in this excerpt, Ryan seems to be aware of the expectation to
assume a critical stance and to negotiate positions with the reader. But his prose
does not demonstrate control over that critical stance. It is at times difficult to
tease apart material he is attributing to others from his own assertions, as seen
in the second sentence (According to Walzer's argument I think). In addition, the
imagined reader that Ryan projects in his text appears to be the course professor
rather than a peer discussant. This is seen in the quick personal aside that
qualifies the problematization of Foucault (not saying that he should have because
it isn't one of his ideas), his personalizing move (I think), and conversational
register (e.g., one thing, definitely, but what about). These features reflect a tenor
marked by closeness and familiarity. Ryan could learn to mitigate the force of
his problematization moves in a more critically distant way through the use of
register-congruent hedges, such as those used above in examples 4a and 4b.

   To sum up, there appear to be at least two different reasons why L2 writers
experience difficulty constructing an authoritative stance in their writing.
Students like Victor, may not see the educational stakes in adopting a critical
stance or may even resist doing so. Then there are students like Ryan who may
be aware of the value in adopting a certain kind of stance but do not command
the discursive resources needed to project an authoritative stance in their texts.

   There is research evidence that this second difficulty may be more common.
Hyland and Milton (1997), for instance, found that the English L2 writers
in their study tended to respond to the implicit expectation to project an

280
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

authoritative stance in research report writing by repeatedly expressing their
views in direct and highly committed forms (e.g., it is certain that; this will
definitely)--which can result in a hasty or ill-considered stance--instead of by
strategically modulating between doubt and certainty. Similar problems among
L2 writers in controlling valued linguistic resources for expressing stance are
reported in Schleppegrell (2004) and Wu (2007). In light of this research,
simply advising students in abstract terms to adopt an authoritative (or critical,
critically distant, measured, etc.) stance would be insufficient for assisting them
to project these stances in their texts and to make choices about the types of
stances they wish to convey. Many students need help in identifying the stance
moves that are prototypical and valued in samples of the discourse they are
being asked to write. They could be supported in this effort by faculty who are
aware of the complexities involved in constructing interpersonal meanings in
academic writing, ones that more often than not go unnamed and therefore
unnoticed by students.

ARGUMENTS FOR AN EXPLICIT STANCE-
FOCUSED METALANGUAGE

   When pointing out valued stances and rhetorical strategies to students,
should specific stance-related terms like hedging, evidentializing, conjecturing,
boosting, and problematizing be used? Behind this question are at least three
more pointed pedagogical questions:

   Is it necessary or beneficial to draw students' attention to fine-grained levels of
textual detail (or sentence-level strategies) when discussing stance in disciplinary
writing?

   Is a specific analytic terminology or metalanguage useful for faculty and students,
or could it be burdensome or distracting?

   How can faculty who are untrained in text analysis be assisted to read students'
texts for fine-grained expressions of stance and to develop a vocabulary that connects
micro-level textual choices to epistemological values in the discipline?

   In terms of the first question, the research and examples discussed above
suggest that L2 writers (in addition, certainly, to many L1 writers) need to
be shown instances in texts--possibly their own texts--in which abstract
rhetorical effects like an authoritative stance are achieved. They also need ample
opportunity to reflect on the discursive resources that are available to them for
realizing important stances in their writing. Class activities that can help achieve
these aims include instructor-led discussions with students about what sorts
of "critical" stances are valued in certain disciplinary genres; tasks that require

                                                                                                281
Lancaster

students to rewrite excerpts from students' papers that they find problematic
in terms of stance and reader-positioning; and tasks that require that students
reflect explicitly on their own stance-taking strategies while writing, for example
by inserting meta-reflective comments in the margins of their papers. See
Lancaster (2011) for more detailed discussion of these activities.

   In terms of whether or not to use a specific metalanguage with students,
there is now good evidence that use of a meaning-based (rather than traditional
grammar-based) metalanguage can assist students to gain conscious awareness
of valued linguistic resources and patterns in the genres with which they are
engaging. Such affordances have been documented by scholars working in the
tradition of systemic functional linguistics (SFL), as well as in other traditions
of applied linguistics. For example, the use of a meaning-based metalanguage
has been shown to help learners to identify subtle patterns of evaluation in
political opinion texts and thus improve their capacities for critical reading
(Perales-Escudero, 2011). It has also been shown to help teachers of history
identify language areas that create problems for their students in learning to
read history discourse (Schleppegrell & de Oliveira, 2006). For both secondary-
and tertiary-level student writing, direct instruction in use of metadiscoursal
strategies has been shown to assist students to improve their writing. For
instance, Cheng & Steffensen (1996) found through interviews and analysis of
pre- and post-test writing samples that first year composition students improved
both in their rhetorical awareness and use of metadiscoursal strategies in their
writing, including reader engagement devices like one may expect and attitude
markers like surprisingly. Focusing on the writing of twelfth grade Chilean
students, Concha and Paratore (2011) likewise found through text analysis
and think-aloud protocols that students who learned an explicit metalanguage
for reflecting on issues of local coherence (LC)--which the authors define as
"the relationship between adjacent propositions in text" (p. 37)--improved in
their ability to think and talk about LC and to control language resources for
constructing LC in their own writing.

   Robust frameworks for talking about linguistic choices in rhetorical terms
are offered by, among others, Graff and Birkenstein (2006), Hunston and
Thompson (2000), Hyland (2005), Martin and Rose (2007), Martin and
White (2005), Swales and Feak (2012), and Thompson (2001). Depending
on the context, the linguistic concepts identified in these studies can be used
in focused ways to raise instructors' conscious awareness of the ways language
creates important meanings in their disciplinary discourses and their students'
writing. For example, in the context of empirically-based research arguments,
instructors can learn to identify how evidentializing (or hedging that is based
in sustained consideration of evidence) can contribute to a more authoritative

282
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

stance than conjecturing (or hedging that is grounded in the subjectivity of
the authorial voice). (See the Appendix for further examples of both types
of hedging.) In general, a meaningful metalanguage about the sentence-level
details of stance is needed if faculty in the disciplines are to come to notice
how language is working more and less effectively in their students' writing to
project valued interpersonal meanings.

   The third question above--how can faculty be assisted to read students'
writing in terms of stance?--is knottier. Given the inevitable time constraints
in a busy academic year and the lack of linguistic/rhetorical training among
most faculty in the disciplines, one natural objection to this chapter's argument
is that use of a specific metalanguage, while ideal, is unrealistic. It is unduly
burdensome. A second objection is that patterns of language use can be identified
more informally, without employing a specific metalanguage. I respond to the
first objection below in detail. To the second one, I would suggest that many
linguistic features of texts cannot be recognized, at least consciously and explicitly,
without some kind of underlying concept. The accompanying terminology like
hedges and boosters may appear "jargony" because the concept is unfamiliar, or,
perhaps more accurately, because the concept is regarded as such a transparent
part of the discourse that explicit identification appears unnecessary.

   Continuing with this point just a bit, it is true that authors like Graff and
Birkenstein (2006), whose textbook They Say / I Say: The Moves That Matter in
Academic Writing has been used successfully with both L2 and L1 writers, use
non-specialized terminology to identify "the moves that matter in academic
writing." To refer to attributions, for instance, they use the descriptive phrases
"introducing what `they say'" (p. 163), "introducing `standard views'" (p.
163), and "capturing authorial action" (p. 165). Below each strategy, they list
wordings or templates associated with each function. The sorts of strategies
they identify could be very useful for student-writers who are struggling with
basic discoursal resources for reviewing others' arguments and taking a stance.
However, by keeping the description of language at the very general level that
they do, the authors do not discuss patterns of language that operate at more
specific levels of discourse (often below writers' fully conscious awareness) and
that create valued meanings in particular discourse contexts, such as the strategic
uses of hedging in genres calling for evidence-based recommendations. The
authors' use of what could be referred to as a "commonsense" metalanguage for
describing academic moves, that is, may be more useful for first year writing
courses and other general introductions to academic discourse and less useful
for advanced disciplinary contexts, such as Econ 432 and PolSci 409, where
a more specialized metalanguage may be needed to identify subtly valued
disciplinary moves.

                                                                                                283
Lancaster

   As an example of where a more specific metalanguage could be useful,
consider the following examples from Graff and Birkenstein's textbook. The
authors offer these examples when discussing the importance of "entertaining
objections" (p. 78; 170) in academic writing.

         (7a) Yet some readers may challenge the view that ...

         (7b) Of course, many will probably disagree with the
         assertion that ...

         (Graff & Birkenstein, 2006, p. 170-171)

   In light of hedging patterns discussed above, these examples are interesting
because of the second layer of "entertaining" brought into play through the
hedges may and probably. Unacknowledged by the authors, these hedges subtly
entertain objections to the claims that there are objections. That is, some readers
may challenge the view, but they may not. In projecting this second layer of
"entertaining," these texts convey a more measured stance than if they were
worded in a more committed manner, as in Undoubtedly, many readers will
challenge the view that ... or Of course, many will most certainly disagree with
the assertion that ... The decision to hedge rather than boost the assertion is
important in terms of the resulting authorial stance. Also unacknowledged are
the counter (Yet) and concede move (Of course). The authors do not explain
how these resources, which could trigger important interpersonal meanings
depending on the context, relate to entertaining objections.

   By pointing out these more micro-level features, I do not mean to suggest
that every stance resource needs to be identified every time discourse is
examined, and for Graff and Birkenstein's aims in They Say / I Say, such detail
may be unnecessary. However, research cited above shows that in more advanced
academic writing contexts rhetorical moves like hedging, boosting, subtle
countering, and conceding points are important strategies and ones with which
many students struggle. Acknowledging how these meanings are expressed in
text at the level of the sentence may therefore require a non-commonsense
way of talking about texts. Finally, Graff and Birkenstein themselves cannot
entirely avoid employing technical terms. As two instances, they refer to
"embedding voice markers" (p. 70-71; 170) and "metacommentary" (p. 123-
132; 176). These (or similar) terms are necessary, as I believe the authors would
acknowledge, if they are to make the points about language that they need to
make. In general, the degree of specialization in metalanguage is influenced by
the type of meanings and the level of linguistic detail that require attention. It is

284
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

also influenced, of course, by students' level of academic discourse knowledge.
While Graff and Birkenstein's approach may be ideally suited for first-year
university writers, working with upper-level students in specific disciplinary
contexts may require more specialized terminology for making disciplinary
stance moves explicit.

   Returning to the first objection, how realistic is it to propose using any
kind of specialized metalanguage in faculty development contexts focused on
stance and reader positioning? Which linguistic concepts should be addressed
and how? Above, I focused on hedging, boosting, and related concepts because
these areas proved important after detailed discourse analysis of upper-level
student writing. How can faculty in other contexts learn to identify meaningful
patterns of language use in their own students' writing? A positive effect of this
kind of analysis would be that faculty come to recognize the complexity of the
writing they are asking their students to take on and to better understand the
nature of the difficulties that weaker student writers experience. This kind of
recognition could potentially lead to more nuanced grading and commenting
practices, as well as to strategies for making stance expectations explicit when
designing writing assignments.

   To be sure, learning to track micro-level stance moves in disciplinary
discourses is a tall order. Nevertheless, while faculty in the disciplines may
not be trained in discourse analysis, they do have the clear advantage of being
trained in the disciplinary discourse itself. Valued uses of language are thus an
implicit part of their overall communicative repertoire for making meaning in
disciplinary genres. The task for faculty in the disciplines, therefore, is to learn
to identify these valued uses of language explicitly. I make some suggestions for
assisting them to do this in the next section.

SUGGESTIONS FOR WORKING WITH
FACULTY IN THE DISCIPLINES

   My suggestions for working with faculty in this section are focused on two
types of metalanguage about stance, one more general and the other specific. I
explain how these could be useful to writing specialists who aim to assist faculty
in the disciplines to track meaningful patterns of stance in their disciplinary
discourses and in their students' writing.

   The first, more general metalanguage comprises concepts such as stance,
reader-positioning, dialogic expansion and contraction, dialogic control,
authoritativeness, contrastiveness, critical distance, and discoursal alignment.
Concepts such as these (which are illustrated in the Appendix) are "general"

                                                                                                285
Lancaster

because they have to do with rhetorical effects that are abstracted away from
word/phrase, sentence, and text-level patterns. They have to do with abstract
qualities of stance that are constructed through recurring configurations
of language use. When examining student writing, writing specialists and
disciplinary faculty could use general concepts like these to guide their process
of identifying and interpreting more specific patterns of language use in student
work.

   In terms of how they could use these concepts, I would suggest that the
metaphorical orientation of academic writing-as-conversation, which Graff and
Birkenstein, among many others in composition studies, endorse, could serve as
a useful overarching framework for facilitating workshop activities. As I discuss
below, this metaphorical orientation could be more useful than other metaphors
about writing, such as argument-as-war (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980), especially
when the task at hand is to identify patterns of stance in students' texts. This is
because it offers a lens through which to introduce related conceptual metaphors
about stance. These may include reader positioning (or moves to bring the reader
into alignment with the author's views), dialogic control (or use of language
to establish a sense of control over various participants in the discourse) and
dialogic expansion and contraction (or use of language to decrease and increase
authorial commitment and thus involve and guide the reader through the
argument). Through the use of these dialogically-oriented concepts, other more
general stance concepts can be introduced in coherent ways.

   For example, an authoritative stance can be discussed as a quality that is
achieved not just through use of highly assertive language--through boosters,
for example--but through rhetorical strategies that work to manage a dialogic
exchange among various interactants in the discourse. Connected to this,
reader-positioning can be introduced as a lens through which to examine
how student writers use language to engage and interact with the reader when
developing their arguments and thereby establish an authoritative stance. For
example, workshop participants can practice identifying textual moves for
offering concessions to the reader and then countering (e.g., It is indeed the
case that ...; but ...), identifying points of shared knowledge (e.g., Of course,
it is widely understood among compositionists that ...), correcting potential
misunderstandings (e.g., This is not to say that ...; but rather ...), and other
strategies that extend hands of solidarity to readers, especially readers who are
not already aligned with the writer's views.

   In general, the writing-as-conversation metaphor, while certainly not new
to writing scholars, could be useful for anchoring discussions of stance with
faculty from various disciplinary contexts. Importantly, it could also lead to
the formation of new questions about student writing that motivate close

286
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

examination of language use in student-produced texts, i.e., to the features of
language that operate to realize the abstract concepts explained above.

   The second type of metalanguage is more directly tied to text-level details.
While less intuitive for instructors who have not been trained in discourse
analysis, this metalanguage--e.g., hedging, boosting, evidentializing,
conjecturing, problematizing, and other canonical discourse analytic concepts
discussed in Barton and Stygall (2002), Hyland (2004), Swales and Feak (2012),
and elsewhere--might be drawn on selectively as faculty begin to notice salient
patterns of language use in their own students' writing. As discussed above,
identifying linguistic patterns is facilitated through a metalanguage that gives
a name to specific linguistic concepts, and whichever linguistic features are
discussed must be determined by the discourse context.

   Before suggesting specific examples of this way of talking about stance
with faculty in the disciplines, I would like to suggest that the writing-as-
conversation metaphor could supplement or re-orient (rather than entirely
replace) participants' existing metalanguage about writing. This is so they can
practice examining student texts through lenses that are both familiar and new.
Terms that might be more familiar to describe qualities of student writing,
such as evaluative descriptors like well-structured, clear, critical, engaging,
formal/informal, and awkward, could in fact serve as starting places for infusing
faculty development workshop activities with metaphors that place emphasis
on meanings related to stance. Barton (2002), for instance, explains how her
motivation to figure out what types of language use contributed to the impression
of "awkwardness" in student writing led to her to the linguistic concept of
evidentiality (defined, after Chafe (1986), as attitudes toward knowledge). She
then used this linguistic concept to systematically analyze stance in student
writing (in Barton, 1993).

   I now turn to specific examples of how faculty in the disciplines might be
encouraged to track patterns of stance in their students' writing. Starting with
the case of PolSci 409, the professor's term to describe effective student writing
is "control." This is a concept he spoke about enthusiastically in our interview
and one that he reported to be using with students when discussing writing.
Understandably, however, he had some difficulty identifying specific places
in students' essays where control is accomplished, as well as places in Victor's
and other low-performers' essays where control wanes. Refining the concept of
"control" to dialogic control might usefully direct his attention to meaningful
patterns in his students' writing for navigating between different theoretical
viewpoints. The question, that is, could subtly shift from how a sense of control
is accomplished in the text to how the student writer establishes control over the
dialogue between theorists. This latter question is well-suited to the particular

                                                                                                287
Lancaster

essay assignment because the assignment required students to juxtapose two or
more theoretical arguments. It required that they orchestrate a critical discussion
among theorists. This can be accomplished in ways that convey varying degrees
of dialogic control.

   With this subtle shift in emphasis from control to dialogic control, the
workshop discussion could explore how high-performing students use language
to control the dialogic exchange between different theoretical perspectives.
Identifying patterns of language use related to dialogic control could lead, for
instance, to an examination of problematization moves. This is because the high-
performers in the course often used problematization as a structuring device.
That is, in order to make the transition from one theorist to another, they
would often identify gaps in reasoning that could only be resolved by turning
to another theorist. For example, Ethan's problematizing of Fraser's argument
in 4b (above) worked as rhetorical motivation for turning the discussion
to Rawls. Moving the attention down to text-level features with a focus on
problematization could then open up a discussion about ways to problematize
in more and less measured ways, which might then lead to the observation that
hedges are useful for constructing a stance that is both contrastive and measured
or "aware" of other dialogic possibilities.

   In Econ 432, the instructor's metalanguage about student writing, as revealed
in our interview and his comments on students' essays, is guided largely by the
conceptual metaphor of argument as war (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). In our
interview, he spoke about the need for students to build, in his words, "strong,"
"defensible," and "airtight" arguments. He identified counterargumentation as
one strategy that students could use to better defend their positions. Making this
argument-as-war metaphor explicit in faculty development workshop settings
could be useful for opening up discussions with faculty in other disciplines
about goals for student writing. Interestingly, this particular metaphor does
correspond to the highly adversarial quality of the discourse on antitrust law
and economics (McCloskey, 1985/1998), a quality which is realized in the
high-graded Econ 432 essays partly through repeated counterargument moves.
But the argument-as-war metaphor does not account for all of the instructor's
explanations of valued features of student writing.

   For example, the instructor praised Ken for insightfully "step[ping] outside
of economics" to make his argument. This suggests a view of academic writing
as participating in a disciplinary (or interdisciplinary) conversation. It suggests
that writing is a matter of staying within or stepping outside of a particular
disciplinary area and thus perhaps participating in a disciplinary culture.
If, therefore, the conceptual metaphor for evaluating student writing were
shifted from argument-as-war to argument-as-conversation, an interesting

288
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

question becomes, how might counterargumentation be seen and talked about
differently? This is a question that could be put to this Econ 432 instructor.
Discussions might lead toward viewing counterargumentation less in terms of
defending positions or sealing up holes in arguments and more in terms of
increasing argumentative complexity by engaging with alternative views and
voices in the discourse.

   In a faculty development workshop setting, the Econ 432 instructor could
be encouraged to consider how counterargumentation correlates with taking a
step back or outside of the discourse. Stemming from this discussion, different
uses of countering could be introduced to workshop participants. For example,
deny/counter pairs (it is not the case that ... rather ...) and concede/counter pairs
(yes, it is true that, but ...)--both highly assertive maneuvers--could be discussed
as reader-oriented strategies for steering the reader through the discussion and
thus controlling the conversation. In contrast, hedge/counter pairs (it could be/
possibly/perhaps ... at the same time, though ...) could then be discussed as moves for
negotiating with others' views, for opening up the conversation and then pushing
it forward. This type of explicit language-based discussion would preserve the
instructor's focus on counterargumentation while also shifting the concept from
one metaphorical system to another, from argument-as-war to argument-as-
conversation. In other words, counterargumentation moves could be explained
as a rhetorical strategy for guiding the readers through the argument.

   In addition to using conceptual metaphors to facilitate interaction about
patterns in student writing, it would also be possible to build activities that
start with instructors' comments on students' essays (rather than with the essays
themselves). Instructors could be encouraged to examine patterns in their own
commenting practices, perhaps with a special focus on those pertaining to
language use. What types of features in student writing elicited their comments?
From there, discussions could focus on how students' use of language index
particular kinds of stances.

   For instance, the Econ 432 instructor's comments on students' papers
suggest that he was sensitive to their level of commitment when putting forth
critical evaluations. This was seen, for example, in his suggestion on one essay
to "use a weaker word here than `could'." His suggestion for alternate wording
was "maybe `might' or `conceivably could'?" Pausing on a comment like this
could open up space for reflecting on the question of where in students' writing
they should try to adopt a committed stance and where they should strive for a
more expansive or less committed one. The instructor's comment about using a
"weaker word" could have left the student confused, and so this is an example
of a good opportunity to comment on rhetorical strategies in the specific
context. In particular, if the larger goal is for students to construct an assertive,

                                                                                                289
Lancaster

committed, strong argument, what exactly is the purpose of backing off from
full commitment when offering a critical evaluation? Why not, as it were,
use the "stronger" word? Such a question ties in directly with the metaphor
of writing-as-conversation because it suggests that authoritativeness has just as
much to do with manipulating dialogic space in strategic ways, with opening
up space for others' views and voices, as it does defending positions by sealing
up holes in arguments.

   Examples of useful workshops discussions/activities could go on. But in
general, the suggestion I am making is that it is important to create opportunities
for meaningful interaction among disciplinary faculty and writing researchers
about language use in student writing, specifically language use related to stance.
This interaction can be guided by a general metalanguage about stance and
reader positioning, which could help to promote conscious noticing of patterns
in language in student-generated texts. (Zawacki & Habib [this volume] suggest
that having a language to talk about language would have been useful for the
faculty they interviewed who expressed a willingness to help their L2 students
improve their writing but also frustration with their inability to diagnose the
causes of the problems or how to fix them.)

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS

   The principal pedagogical implication that has emerged from my own
and others' linguistics work on stance in student writing is greater awareness
among faculty in the disciplines of valued and less valued patterns of stance
in student writing. Sharing results of text analyses is one way to foster such
awareness. Another way that may have greater potential for sustainability is
through faculty development workshops that are designed to assist faculty to
identify subtle patterns of interpersonal meanings in their students' writing and
in their responses to students' wordings. Since this second option is especially
challenging considering that most faculty in the disciplines do not have prior
training in text analysis, it is important that the pedagogical stakes of attending
closely to micro-level meaning-making in student writing be made apparent.
For instance, writing specialists can assist faculty to identify how styles of
stance-taking in their students' writing operate to position the instructor-
reader in certain ways--for example, as aligned or not with a shared analytic
framework or with a certain kind of epistemological and attitudinal orientation
to disciplinary concepts.

   With a keener eye to the ways specific linguistic patterns interrelate with
learning goals and epistemological values, faculty in the disciplines can become

290
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

more reflexive about how and why they respond to student writing in the ways
that they do. They can also learn to discuss with their students in explicit ways
what rhetorical moves are valued in the course writing and why. Armed with a
rich metalanguage for making connections between texts and contexts, faculty
could enable high-performing students like Ken, Luis, Ethan, Eric, and Maria to
draw on their discursive expertise in strategic ways to respond effectively to less
familiar writing contexts. For students like Victor and Ryan, who appear to be
putting forth effort in their writing but not employing the necessary rhetorical
and linguistic strategies needed to create valued stances, it is doubly important
that faculty be explicit about their genre expectations and work with these
students to closely read genre exemplars, to identify how patterns of language
are working, and to learn to monitor and evaluate their own discursive choices.

NOTES

1. In systemic functional linguistics (SFL), the theme is the "point of depar-
ture" for the message of a text (Halliday, 1994, p. 94). The theme includes the
grammatical subject of the sentence as well as any material that may precede
the subject, for example circumstantial adjuncts (e.g., From there Microsoft Ex-
cel and Matlab were used to analyze data.), fronted dependent clauses (e.g., If
people were just as aware of the value in their endemic biodiversity, curbing
the spread of exotic species would take an easier turn), and other options.
2. There are, of course, other stance differences that can be identified in the
two texts above. Ethan's stance is, for instance, more critically distant than Vic-
tor's. But for now I point out that Victor's stance of assumed agreement is one
reason his essay also does not use hedging strategies. That is, he does not need to
mitigate the force of his critiques because he does not develop critiques.
3. Ryan's native-language is Korean, and the professor's sense was that Ryan's
writing is more representative of "1.5 Generation" writers than it is L2 writers
because, while his control of syntax, local coherence and cohesion is advanced,
the register he selects is often highly conversational. This conversational register
can be seen in example 6. I grouped Ryan as an L2 writer in my study because
he responded that English is not his native language in a pre-term course survey.

REFERENCES

Barton, E. L. (1993). Evidentials, argumentation, and epistemological stance.
   College English, 55, 745-769.

                                                                                                291
Lancaster

Barton, E. L. (2002). Inductive discourse analysis: Discovering rich features. In
   E. L. Barton & G. Stygall (Eds.), Discourse studies in composition (pp. 19-42).
   Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.

Barton, E. L. and Stygall, G. (Eds.) (2002). Discourse studies in composition.
   Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.

Chafe, W. (1986). Evidentiality in English conversation and academic writing.
   In W. Chafe & J. Nichols (Eds.), Evidentiality: The linguistic coding of episte-
   mology (pp. 261-272). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Chafe, W. & Nichols, J. (Eds.) (1986). Evidentiality: The linguistic coding of
   epistemology. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Chang, P. (2010). Taking an effective authorial stance in academic writing: In-
   ductive learning for second language writers using a stance corpus (Unpub-
   lished doctoral dissertation). University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Deep
   Blue Dissertation and Theses database. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.
   net/2027.42/77860

Charles, M. (2003). "This mystery": A corpus-based study of the use of nouns
   to construct stance in theses from two contrasting disciplines. Journal of Eng-
   lish for Academic Purposes, 2, 313-326.

Cheng, X. & Steffensen, M. S. (1996). Metadiscourse: A technique for improv-
   ing student writing. Research in the Teaching of English, 30(2), 149-181.

Coffin, C. (2002). The voices of history: Theorizing the interpersonal semantics
   of historical discourses. Text, 22(4), 503-528.

Concha, S., & Paratore, J. (2011). Local coherence in persuasive writing: An
   exploration of Chilean students' metalinguistic knowledge, writing process,
   and writing products. Written Communication, 28(1), 34-69.

Engelbretson, R. (Ed.). (2007). Stancetaking in discourse. Amsterdam: Ben-
   jamins.

Feak, C. B. (2008) Culture shock? Genre shock? Paper presented at the British
   association of lecturers in English for academic purposes. University of Read-
   ing, Whiteknights, UK.

Graff, G. & Birkenstein, C. (2006). They say, I say: The moves that matter in
   academic writing. New York: Norton.

Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An introduction to functional grammar (2nd ed.). Lon-
   don: Arnold.

Hunston, S. & Thompson, G. (2000). Evaluation in text: Authorial stance and
   the construction of discourse. London: Oxford University Press.

Hyland, K. (2004). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writ-
   ing. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Hyland, K. (2005). Stance and engagement: A model of interaction in aca-
   demic discourse. Discourse studies, 7(2), 173-192.

292
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

Hyland, K. (2011). Disciplines and discourses: Social interactions in the con-
   struction of knowledge. In D. Starke-Meyerring, A. Par, N. Artemeva, M.
   Horne, & L. Yousoubova (Eds.), Writing in knowledge societies (pp. 193-214).
   Fort Collins, Colorado: WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press. Retrieved
   from http://wac.colostate.edu/books/winks

Hyland, K. & Milton, J. (1997). Qualifications and certainty in L1 and L2
   students' writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 6(2), 183-205.

Jaffe, A. (Ed.). (2009). Stance: Sociolinguistic perspectives. New York/Oxford:
   Oxford University Press.

Johnstone, B. (2009). Stance, style, and the linguistic individual. In A. Jaffe
   (Ed.), Stance: Sociolinguistic perspectives (pp. 29-52). New York/Oxford: Ox-
   ford University Press.

Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago: Chicago
   University Press.

Lancaster, Z. (2011). Interpersonal stance in L1 and L2 students' argumenta-
   tive writing in economics: Implications for faculty development in WAC/
   WID programs. Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colo-
   state.edu/atd/ell/lancaster.cfm

Lancaster, Z. (2012). Stance and reader positioning in upper-level student writing
   in political theory and economics (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Univer-
   sity of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Macken-Horarik, M. & Morgan, W. (2011). Towards a metalanguage adequate to
   linguistic achievement in post-structuralism and English: Reflections on voicing
   in the writing of secondary students. Linguistics and Education, 22, 133-149.

Martin, J. R. & Rose, D. (2007). Working with discourse: Meaning beyond the
   clause (2nd ed.). London: Continuum.

Martin, J. R. & White, P. R. R. (2005). The language of evaluation: Appraisal in
   English. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

McCloskey, D. N. (1998]). The rhetoric of economics. Madison, WI: University
   of Wisconsin Press. (Original work published 1985)

Perales-Escudero, M. D. (2011).Teaching and learning critical reading with
   transnational texts at a Mexican university: An emergentist case study (Un-
   published doctoral dissertation). University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Deep
   Blue Dissertation and Theses database. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.
   net/2027.42/86301

Perales-Escudero, M. D. & Swales, J. M. (2011). Tracing convergence and di-
   vergence in pairs of Spanish and English research article abstracts: The case
   of Ibrica. Ibrica, 21, 49-70.

Schleppegrell, M. J. (2004). Technical writing in a second language: The role
   of grammatical metaphor. In L. J. Ravelli & R. A. Ellis (Eds.), Analysing aca-

                                                                                                293
Lancaster

   demic writing: Contextualized frameworks (pp. 172-189). New York/London:
   Continuum.
Schleppegrell, M. J. & de Oliveira, L. C. (2006).An integrated language and
   content approach for history teachers. Journal of English for Academic Pur-
   poses, 5, 254-268.
Soliday, M. (2004). Reading student writing with Anthropologists: Stance and
   judgment in college writing. College Composition and Communication, 56(1),
   72-93.
Soliday, M. (2011). Everyday genres: Writing assignments across the disciplines.
   Carbondale & Edwardsville, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Swales, J. M. & Feak, C. B. (2012). Academic writing for graduate students (3rd
   ed.). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Tang, R. (2009). A dialogic account of authority in academic writing. In M.
   Charles, D. Pecorari, & S. Hunston (Eds.), Academic writing: At the interface
   of corpus and discourse (pp. 170-190). New York/ London: Continuum.
Tardy, C. (2009). Building Genre Knowledge. West Lafayette, IN: Parlor Press.
Thompson, G. (2001). Interaction in academic writing: Learning to argue with
   the reader. Applied Linguistics, 22(1), 58-78.
Turner, J. (1999). Academic literacies and the discourse of transparency. In: C.
   Jones, J. Turner, & B. Street (Eds). Student writing in the University: Cultural
   and Epistemological Issues. Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
White, P. R. R. (2003). Beyond modality and hedging: A dialogic view of the
   language of intersubjective stance. Text, 23(2), 259-284.
Wu, S. M. (2006). Creating a contrastive rhetorical stance: Investigating the strate-
   gy of problematization in students' argumentation. RELC Journal, 37, 329-353.
Wu, S. M. (2007). The use of engagement resources in high- and low-rated under-
   graduate geography essays. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 6, 254-271.

APPENDIX: EXPLANATION OF KEY
TERMS AND CONCEPTS

Confusing "Teacher Talk" about Stance:

   Be critical: offer judgments and critical evaluations
   ... but don't be judgmental or biased
   Display excitement and commitment to your argument
   ... but be objective
   ... and try not to use "I" or other self-mentions
   Use your own words, your own voice

294
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

   ... but don't be colloquial and address the wrong audience
   Write assertively and with authority
   ... but be sure to allow for other viewpoints
   ... and don't forget you're not yet an expert
   Engage with others' views and voices
   ... but don't just summarize what others have said
   Be interesting, experiment with new argument strategies
   ... but be sure to write clearly and concisely

Stance: refers to the ways that writers--as they go about analyzing and
evaluating things, making assertions and recommendations, providing evidence
and justifications and so forth--project an authorial presence in their texts, one
that conveys attitudes and feelings and that interacts with imagined readers
by recognizing their views, identifying points of shared knowledge, conceding
limitations, and otherwise positioning them as aligned with or resistant to the
views being advanced in the text.

Reader-positioning: the reader-oriented side of stance. Reader-positioning
is the use of stance strategies for engaging and interacting with the imagined
reader, including marking concessions and counters, identifying points of
shared knowledge, correcting potential misunderstandings, acknowledging
points of contention, and other strategies designed to bring the reader into
alignment with the writer's views.

Examples of Stance and Reader Positioning
Moves in Published Academic Discourse

   These example texts are discussed in Ken Hyland's (2005) article "Stance
and Engagement: A Model of Interaction in Academic Discourse," Discourse
Studies, 7(2), 173-192.

         I argue that their treatment is superficial because, despite
         appearances, it relies solely on a sociological, as opposed to
         an ethical, orientation to develop a response. (Sociology)

         Chesterton was of course wrong to suppose that Islam denied
         "even souls to women." (Philosophy)

         This measurement is distinctly different from the more
         familiar NMR pulsed field gradient measurement of solvent

                                                                                                295
Lancaster

         self-diffusion. (Physics)

         Our results suggest that rapid freeze and thaw rates during
         artificial experiments in the laboratory may cause artifac-
         tual formation of embolism. Such experiments may not ...
         (Biology)

         ... two quantities are rather important and, for this reason,
         the way they were measured is re-explained here. (Mechanical
         engineering)

Some Key Discursive Resources of Stance

   Hedging: a stance-taking strategy used to reduce authorial commitment to
the proposition being forwarded, for the purpose of expressing cautiousness and/
or opening up discursive space for alternative views. Hedging is accomplished
through low-probability modal expressions (may, might, could), appearance-
based evidential verbs (seems, appears, suggests), low-certainty adverbs (perhaps,
possibly) and other linguistic resources.

   Evidentializing: a type of hedging that expresses sustained consideration of
evidence. e.g.:

         In national terms, Pabst became the third largest brewer in
         1961, three years after the acquisition, with 5.83% of the na-
         tional beer market. These numbers suggest that the anticom-
         petitive damage done to the beer market, no matter how it is
         defined geographically, must have been minimal.

   Conjecturing: a type of hedging that expresses an internalized process
grounded in the subjectivity of the authorial voice. e.g., "Regulation of prices
may be left best to companies with more stable cost structures."

   Boosting: a stance-taking strategy used to increase authorial commitment
to the proposition being forwarded, for the purpose of drawing attention to
the importance of the topic and tightening up discursive space. Boosting is
accomplished through the expressions of certainty, as in strongly, clearly,
countless, and completely.

   Dialogic expansion: The use of various linguistic resources, including
hedges, attributions, rhetorical questions, and others, for releasing the author
from full commitment or responsibility for a proposition. e.g.

296
                                                                                    Making Stance Explicit

         However, this case is not without concerns. There is the
         possibility for abuse if the producer sets different maximum
         prices for different retailers, allowing some to reap higher
         profits. There is also a possibility that for new retailers to
         enter the market they would have to charge higher prices
         initially, in which case a maximum price could deter compe-
         tition. It appears, then, that maximum price fixing does the
         greatest harm when set below a competitive level. In Case 4
         it could potentially do harm to small retailers trying to enter
         the market, but does so for the benefit of consumers and the
         producer. Based purely on the models, it appears that, at
         the very least, maximum prices deserve a Rule of Reason ap-
         proach to evaluate their cost and benefits.

   Dialogic contraction: The use of various linguistic resources, including
boosters, denials, counters, and others, for increasing the author's commitment
and closing down space for alternative views. e.g.

         If what Foucault says is true ... should we abandon the idea of
         a human reasoning, able to reflect over choices? My answer is
         no. I do not deny that we all have notions of what is right and
         wrong behavior and many of these notions are without a doubt
         acquired through Socialization .... However we would hardly
         accept that every action is strictly a result of Socialization.

   Problematization: A rhetorical strategy for "showing that a prevailing
assumption, idea, view, or situation needs reexamination, reconceptualization,
or reevaluation of some kind" (Barton, 1993, p. 748). Problematization is
often used to prepare the ground for the author's research and argumentative
contribution to an ongoing discourse.

Some Abstract Stance Qualities Valued in Academic Discourses

   Critical distance: a quality of stance marked by interpersonal detachment
toward the entities that are being analyzed and evaluated. This quality can be
accomplished by some hedging devices. It can also be accomplished through the
use of various "embedded" wordings, for example when writers use wordings to
objectify their own mental processes. e.g.

         Young's concept of the "five faces of oppression" offers a

                                                                                                297
Lancaster

         perspective from which to view the various relationships in
         the novel as ones that are typical of societies imbued with
         systemic oppression. Young's definition of oppression is also
         useful in examining the different ways in which, and to what
         degree, different groups suffer from oppression in the novel.

   Contrastiveness: a quality of stance marked contrast against others' views
and voices. Frequent use of contrastive connectors (e.g., however, nevertheless,
but, etc.) and denials (e.g., it is not, never, failed, etc.) index a contrastive stance,
as do frequent problematization moves.

   Dialogic control: a quality of stance marked by control over a conversation
with the reader and other discourse participants. It can be achieved through
strategic deployment of dialogical expansion and contraction for regulating the
dialogic space. Problematization moves can help to construct a sense of dialogic
control, as can more sentence-level features like deny/counter strategies (e.g., I
am not suggesting that ... but rather that ...) and hedge/counter strategies (e.g.,
There is a possibility that ... However ...). Further resources can include strategic
transition devices (or "roadmapping"), as well as elaboration strategies (e.g.,
in other words, that is, what I mean is that) and exemplification strategies (for
instance/example).

   Discoursal alignment: a quality of stance marked by assimilation of the
language of the discourse with the writer's "own language." It is often accomplished
by use of language that frames evaluations in terms of disciplinary constructs
while also positively evaluating those constructs, conveying assimilation of the
disciplinary discourse. e.g.

         The realities raised by Fraser offer important complexities to
         Young's political discourse. Young provides a useful schemat-
         ic for understanding oppression both in Coetzee's Disgrace
         and contemporary society.

   Authoritativeness: a very general quality of stance, one that is highly con-
text-sensitive and construed through a configuration of various linguistic re-
sources. In many academic discourses, a sense of authoritativeness may be re-
lated to such qualities as critical distance, contrastiveness, dialogic control, and
discoursal alignment.

298
CHAPTER 12

IN RESPONSE TO TODAY'S
"FELT NEED": WAC, FACULTY
DEVELOPMENT, AND SECOND
LANGUAGE WRITERS

Michelle Cox
Dartmouth College

With increased awareness of the presence of second language writers
in courses and programs across the disciplines comes increased requests
for faculty development focused on second language writing. Drawing
from scholarship on second language writing pedagogy and theory, as
well as the author's experience as an instructor of ESL writing and a
WAC program director, this chapter presents approaches to working
with faculty on issues related to L2 writers. After discussing alliances
WAC program leaders can make with other groups on campus who
work with L2 writers, this chapter presents a framework for thinking
about the differences in L2 writing when compared to writing by na-
tive English speakers and approaches for working with faculty during
consultations and workshops, with specific attention to shifting faculty
perspectives on L2 writing from a difference-as-deficit stance (Canaga-
rajah, 2002) to a difference-accommodated stance, and ultimately, a
difference-as-resource stance (Canagarajah, 2002). Throughout the
chapter, specific workshop activities and materials are shared.

My experience with teaching ESL students is that they have
often not received adequate English instruction to complete
the required essay texts and papers in my classes. I have been
particularly dismayed when I find that they have already
completed 2 ESL courses and have no knowledge of the parts
of speech or the terminology that is used in correcting English
grammar on papers. I am certainly not in a position to teach
English in my classes. (The problem has been particularly acute

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.12                        299
Cox

       with Chinese/S. E. Asian students.) These students may have
       adequate intelligence to do well in the courses, but their language
       skills result in low grades. (I cannot give a good grade to a student
       who can only generate one or two broken sentences during a ten-
       minute slide comparison.)

                              --Professor of art (as quoted in Zamel, 1995)

       For the research paper for the English class they are in for getting
       your writing skill better, so they will be more patient. But for the
       computer science class, no. They expect you to know everything,
       to have good writing skills. If you do not that's not their
       problem, right? You should go back to the ELI [English Language
       Institute].

            --Undergraduate student enrolled in writing-intensive course
                               (quoted in Wolfe-Quintero & Segade, 1999)

       Teachers in the disciplines who are told they do not need to
       know about grammar in order to use writing in their classes feel
       betrayed when faced with a non-native speaker's grammatical
       and syntactic tangles in a writing-to-learn assignment. Many
       WAC directors themselves feel at the edge of their competence in
       dealing with such situations.

                                     --Susan McLeod & Eric Miraglia, 2001

   The above passages illustrate a growing tension in Writing Across the
Curriculum (WAC) program administration: faculty are becoming increasingly
aware of (and perhaps frustrated by) the presence of second language (L2)
students in their classrooms and reach out to WAC program leaders for
direction, L2 students enrolled in writing-intensive courses want more writing
support from their instructors across the curriculum, and WAC program
directors are not always sure how to respond. 1 Though research that engages
both WAC and L2 writing has proliferated, the question that remains central
to WAC program administrators is the question of how to implement faculty
development focused on L2 writing. We have seen a number of what I term
"calls to action" (Cox, 2011) --calls by scholars, typically L2 writing scholars,
for WAC campus leaders to pay more attention to L2 writers in our program
administration, scholarship, and faculty development (Cox, 2011; Hall,

300
                                          WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers

2009; Johns, 2001; Matsuda & Jablonski, 2000). The special issue of Across
the Disciplines, "Writing across the Curriculum and Second Language Writers:
Cross-Field Research, Theory, and Program Development" (2011), which I co-
edited with Terry Myers Zawacki, begins to address questions of how to develop
linguistically and culturally inclusive program administration, how to inform
WAC research with L2 writing scholarship, and how to investigate the writing
practices and experiences of L2 students as they write across the curriculum, as
does this edited collection.

   But questions around how to implement faculty development remain. How
can WAC program directors help faculty who come to us with concerns and
questions about working with L2 writers? What do we tell faculty about L2
writing pedagogy, culturally sensitive approaches to writing assignment design,
and approaches for responding to and assessing L2 student writing? How do
we convince faculty not only to infuse their pedagogy with writing, an already
challenging task in some cases, but also to create linguistically and culturally
inclusive classrooms? And how do we WAC professionals, who often feel "at the
edge of [our] competence" in this area (McLeod & Miraglia, 2001), convince
ourselves that we know enough about L2 writing to do so? In this chapter, I
draw from research on L2 writing development and pedagogy, as well as my
own experiences as a L2 writing scholar and a former WAC program director
at Bridgewater State University,2 to share approaches to working with faculty
on issues related to L2 writers. While research and theory on working with L2
writers inform this chapter, I highlight practice--concrete activities, sources
of information, and handout materials that WAC program directors and L2
writing specialists can use during faculty workshops and consultations.

ONE INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT

   Bridgewater State University (BSU) is a teaching-mission comprehensive
master's state university with, as of fall 2011, 11,294 students (with 9,552
at the undergraduate level), 316 full-time faculty and approximately 900
adjunct faculty (BSU, 2011b). I launched BSU's WAC program in spring of
2007, a program that the provost asked me to initiate in response to a newly
implemented core curriculum that required that students complete a series
of writing-intensive courses. Like other regional universities and community
colleges, BSU enrolls relatively few international visa students: between 2006
and 2011, there were between 97 and 120 of these students enrolled (BSU,
2011b). And also like most universities, BSU does not keep track of the number
of US resident L2 students. However, the local region from which 95% of BSU

                                                                                                301
Cox

students are drawn (BSU, 2011b) is rich in linguistic and cultural diversity, as
it is home to many immigrant communities. School profile data from the cities
and towns that surround BSU show that between 21.4% and 43.9% of the
students use English as a second language with 52% of these students speaking
Spanish as their first language (Massachusetts Department of Education, 2011).
Given this diversity, from the start of BSU's WAC program, attention to L2
student writing was interwoven into WAC programming, faculty development
workshops, and faculty consultations. Below, I describe how I found allies to
partner with in this work.

NATURAL ALLIES

   Those charged with starting a new WAC program are often cautioned
by experienced WAC directors to first get a lay of the land: pay attention to
who on campus is already invested in student writing, who in the past has
already worked on WAC initiatives, and who is doing related work in faculty
development. We know that it is critical to do this groundwork before
initiating a new WAC program so that we don't step on toes, so that we build
on work already done, and so that we create a network of allies, critical for
collaboration. This step may be even more important for initiating faculty
development related to second language writing. Unlike other areas of writing,
WAC directors are often not the experts on campus when it comes to L2
students. Many campuses have an English Language Institute (ELI), an English
as a Second Language (ESL) Program, ESL sections of first-year composition,
an international student services office, a diversity center, and/or a center for
international and global partnerships. At BSU, I worked with Second Language
Services (an office that sets up conversation partners for international L2
students), the First Year Writing Program, the Office of Teaching and Learning,
the Office of Institutional Research, the Office of Institutional Diversity, and
the Office of Undergraduate Research when creating and implementing faculty
development related to L2 writing and writers. These partners and allies helped
me find information about L2 students at BSU, provided venues for faculty
development on L2 writing, and collaborated with me to promote linguistically
and culturally inclusive pedagogy. Many of these offices are natural allies for
WAC, while some of the others, like the offices related to linguistic and cultural
diversity, may not typically be thought of as WAC allies, and yet they too can be
powerful partners in creating culturally and linguistically inclusive pedagogies.

   An important first step for WAC directors interested in creating such
programming is to reach out to those directing, staffing, and teaching

302
                                          WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers

within programs like these, for several reasons: (1) to learn from information
gathered on international and/or multilingual students on your campus; (2)
to learn about other faculty development efforts related to L2 students; and
(3) to form partnerships for researching L2 writers on campus and offering
faculty development. These stakeholders, who share a focus on or interest in
multilingual and multicultural students, may be brought together as a working
group or taskforce, or, if there isn't the means to organize a formal group, serve
individually as potential collaborators whom the WAC director may call upon
to co-lead a workshop or present on a particular topic during a workshop.

   But what expertise do we, as WAC program directors, bring to this group?
In addition to our knowledge of faculty development and the institutional
landscape, the important piece we bring is our perspective on student writing.
Many ELIs, ESL courses, and ESL sections of first-year composition (FYC)
are led from an applied linguistics perspective and focus more on the structure
of the English language--grammar, usage, syntax, vocabulary--and on other
language skills--speaking, listening, and reading--than on writing (Matsuda,
1999; Zawacki & Cox, 2011). In fact, at first, conversations on ESL writing with
this group may focus solely on grammar, with requests for the WAC director
to enforce grammar across the curriculum, a perspective reflecting a structural
view of language. As I will discuss further, however, the philosophies of many
WAC programs--with their focus on writing as process, as a form of expression
and communication, and as a mode of learning--are effective pedagogies for
supporting L2 writers.

A FRAMEWORK FOR FACULTY DEVELOPMENT

   In my experience as a WAC director, I have found it critical to first
understand the assumptions that underlie faculty attitudes toward L2 writers
before deciding on an approach for working with faculty. As reflected in the
quote from the art professor used to open this chapter, faculty who come to us
to discuss L2 student writers may first come out of frustration with the number
of surface-level errors in the writing, with writing that appears disorganized, and
with writing that seems uncritical. Canagarajah (2002), in Critical Academic
Writing and Multilingual Students, has argued that these frustrations emerge
from a tendency to see the writing of native English speaking (NES) students
as setting the bar, so that differences in L2 writing are then seen as problematic,
as indicative of "deficits" in L2 student writing. This "difference-as-deficit"
stance is the perspective taken when L2 writers' "distance from the English
language and Anglo-American culture has been treated as depriving them of

                                                                                                303
Cox

many essential aptitudes required for successful academic literacy practices" (p.
217). Canagarajah argues that this perspective affects not only how L2 students'
writing is viewed, but also how their thinking is viewed: "Some have gone
further to stigmatize multilingual writers as illogical in thinking and incoherent
in communication, by virtue of their deficient L1 and native culture" (p.
217). In fact, in her research on faculty attitudes on L2 writers, Zamel (1995)
observed that faculty sometimes conflated what they termed "bad language"
with "insufficient cognitive development" (p. 509), equating linguistic ability
in a second language with intelligence. (Some of the faculty interviewed by
Ives et al. [this volume] expressed this very concern.) Canagarajah (2002)
suggests that, in place of this "limiting" stance, we move toward a "difference-
as-resource" stance, in which we "respect and value the linguistic and cultural
peculiarities our students may display, rather than suppressing them" (p. 218).
In this stance, the focus shifts from deficits to strengths, emphasizing what L2
students can do with language rather than what they cannot.

   While research that maps the linguistic strengths of L2 students is scant,
there are a few points we can draw from the literature. In her study on L2
student-faculty interactions, Leki (2006) reported that faculty described L2
students as having stronger vocabulary acquisition skills than NES students,
giving them an advantage when learning discipline-specific discourse (p.
143). Leki (2006) also reported that faculty in her study noted the "cultural
sophistication" of L2 students, due their cross-cultural experiences (p. 143).
Jordan (2008), in his study of the rhetorical competencies of L2 students,
has described the ways in which they draw on their cross-cultural knowledge
as well as rhetorical skills when working with NES students in peer review
groups. Further, given the experiences L2 students have had writing across
multiple cultures, educational systems, languages, and communities, it stands
to reason that they have gained rhetorical flexibility, astuteness, and savvy (Cox
& Ortmeier-Hooper, 2008).

   During faculty development, my goal is to move faculty toward the
difference-as-resource stance. However, the leap from difference-as-deficit to
difference-as-resource is a large one, so I find it useful to consider a third, middle
stance: difference-accommodated. In this stance, faculty understand that there
will be syntactic, rhetorical, and cultural differences in L2 writing, but seek to
accommodate L2 students in some way. While the difference-as-resource stance
asks faculty to transform their pedagogy, the difference-accommodated stance
asks them to make adjustments to their pedagogy, representing an important
incremental step. Below, I describe how I move faculty from a difference-as-
deficit approach toward a difference-accommodated approach, and, ultimately,
a difference-as-resource approach.

304
                                          WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers

MOVING FACULTY FROM A DIFFERENCE-
AS-DEFICIT STANCE

   The best approaches to addressing frustration with L2 writers, I find, are
to create empathy for L2 students and share information about L2 writing
development. One of the most valuable strategies for creating empathy is to
put the faculty member in the L2 writer's shoes, using an activity first suggested
by Leki (1992) in Understanding ESL Writers. So, for example, when I lead a
workshop on L2 writing, I begin by asking participants to raise their hand if
they ever studied a foreign language. Usually, all hands go up. I then give a
freewriting prompt. (My most recent prompt, given to writing center tutors on
the heels of a winter storm that cut off power to most of the area--in fact, the
campus was running on generators when I arrived--was this: "Write about an
experience or memory related to snow.") First, I ask participants to respond to
the prompt in their second language and tell them they will have five minutes.
I say everything I would usually say when giving students a freewriting prompt:
Don't worry about grammar or word choice; I won't be collecting these; you
won't be required to read this aloud; write without stopping; if you run out of
things to say, write, "I can't think of what to say next" until something comes to
you. After five minutes of freewriting, I ask them to respond to the same prompt
in their first language. After another five minutes, I ask them to do one more
freewrite: to reflect on the differences between the two experiences, focusing
on how they felt during the two experiences, what they wrote about each time,
and the length and level of depth of each piece. I then ask participants to report
out, based on this reflection. Invariably, participants tell me that they felt much
less stress writing in their first language, that even though I told them not to
worry about grammar and word choice, they did worry about these issues when
writing in their second language, that they could not write about what they
wanted in their second language because they didn't have the vocabulary to
express it, that their writing in their second language was far briefer than the
writing they produced in their first language, that they felt embarrassed when
they got stuck when writing in their second language, because they didn't even
have the ability to write "I can't think of what to say next." This is a highly
effective exercise, as the comments I've just listed are the same ones I hear from
L2 students.

   At BSU, I had an advantage over many WAC directors at other institutions
in that I not only directed a WAC program, but I also taught sections of FYC
designated for ESL writers. So, when the faculty describe their frustrations in
trying to write in a second language, I tell them how their experiences mirror
those experienced by students in my classes. Workshop leaders do not need to

                                                                                                305
Cox

have direct experience with L2 students to make this move. Instead, they may
follow this exercise with materials that present the voices of L2 students or
information on L2 writing development and language acquisition, and then
ask participants to reflect on how the information presented connects with their
experience during this exercise.

   The voices of L2 students shared during the workshop may come from a
variety of sources: surveys conducted on your campus, quotes by L2 students
captured in the literature, literacy narratives by L2 writers (published or
from campus), or films (either publicly available or from campus). The allies
I described above may be good resources for such materials. Below, I have
provided samples from a workshop handout that I compiled from a language
and literacy questionnaire given to an ESL section of FYC (see Appendix A for
the full handout):

     I have never taken a class that focuses only on writing. In
         my ESL classes we did very short writing assignments. The
         longuest [sic] piece of writing I've written in English is one
         paragraph. In my ESL classes we read short paragraphs
         and answered basic questions. [...] It is easier for me to
         understand English when I hear it or read it. It is more
         difficult for me to speak and write because I have trouble
         choosing the correct words. --Mexican student, who took
         ESL courses at a college in California

     I haven't received any writing instruction in English. I
         studied reading for TOEFL Test, so the longest text I've read
         English is TOEFL text book. --Japanese student, who went
         to an English Language Institute in the US

     [In this course] I hope I achieve English obstacles in my life
         as much as I can.

     [In this course] I would like to learn writing as American.
         Sometimes I write dialy [sic] in English but I can't do well so
         I would like to practice.

   These voices, describing the students' past experiences with writing in English
and goals as writers, inform faculty about their own students, as well as create
empathy. I have also created handouts from published material. The following

306
                                          WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers

are examples from a handout I created drawing on Zawacki and Habib's (2010)
article on the experiences of L2 students writing across the curriculum (see
Appendix B for the full handout):

         In America, when I write totally different style of paper, the
         professor say, "Where are you from? How did you get into
         this college? Your writing is behind the line, so you can't
         really catch up to the class." So, I don't know how to figure
         that out. --Yoon, student from S. Korea

         I would really love to learn nice words, because I do have
         ideas, and I do want to put something down, but I am short
         of words. --Ayesha, student from Pakistan

         When you ultimately succeed in writing is when you have
         your own accent. When I speak, my accent reflects who I am
         and where I come from. Well, I want my writing to reflect
         me in that way. --Tonka, student from Bulgaria

Studies by Zamel (1995), Zamel and Spack (2004), and Leki (1995, 1999,
2001, 2007), along with chapters in this collection, can also provide powerful
voices of L2 students.

   I have also made of use of videos and literacy narratives that are available
publicly. A video I often turn to is Writing Across Borders, written and directed
by Wayne Robertson and produced by the Oregon State University Center
for Writing and Learning and Writing Intensive Curriculum programs, which
features L2 undergraduate and graduate students as well as L2 writing scholars
speaking to such issues as second language acquisition, culturally distinct
patterns of organization, and cultural approaches to argument and critique, as
well as information on how to respond to and assess L2 writing. I have shown
the entire 32-minute video during a workshop or sometimes just one of the
10-minute sections (each section is available on YouTube). Several literacy
narratives are also available, through publications and YouTube. The following
literacy narratives, for example, are all by first-year L2 students:

    Jun Yang's "Lost in the Puzzles" (2010), describes the student's challenges
       moving between Chinese, English, and "Chenglish," which she describes
       as the "language of birds" (published in Cox, Jordan, Ortmeier-Hooper,
       & Schwartz, Reinventing Identities in Second Language Writing)

                                                                                                307
Cox

    Jean Mervius' "I Am a Survivor" (2011), describes the student's experi-
       ence surviving the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, and then negotiating im-
       migration to the US, learning English, and becoming a college student.

    Wilson Castillo, "Losing Was Never an Option" (2011), describes the
       student's experience immigrating alone to the US from the Dominican
       Republic at age 11, without knowing English, to escape poverty and
       illiteracy.

   These kinds of videos and literacy narratives help faculty understand the
challenges of learning a second language from the perspectives of L2 students.
Whether I use a handout or video material depicting voices of L2 students, I
follow up on this material by asking participants to write about what surprises
them, how these voices connect to their experiences working with L2 students,
and what questions these passages raise for them about second language writing.

   It is also important to share information from the literature about L2 writing
development, as faculty need not only to have empathy for L2 writers, but also
to understand that L2 writers are not a monolithic group but have a wide range
of linguistic, educational, cultural, and literacy history backgrounds that have
an impact on language acquisition, and that language acquisition itself is a long
and complicated process. Further, some faculty will be more persuaded by data
and research than by narratives and testimony by L2 students. To provide infor-
mation about L2 writers and writing, I use a handout I created that highlights
key differences between two broad categories of L2 students--international visa
students and permanent resident students--and that also focuses on the com-
plexity of learning and writing in a second language that cuts across these two
L2 categories (see Appendix C for the handout). My goal with this handout is
to show that second language acquisition is a long process and that native-like
writing cannot, and should not, be the goal. In fact, it is unethical to demand
native-like (or error-free) writing from L2 students. To do so is to require L2
students to do something that NES are not required to do: pay for copy-editing,
as writing centers, rightly so, do not provide copy-editing services for students (a
fact that some faculty may not know). I also want faculty to question the goal of
asking L2 students to write in standard written English. I point out that, just as
we expect L2 students to speak with an accent, we can expect them to write with
an accent (a point also made in Leki, 1992, and Zawacki et al., 2007). I use the
following example: if we were to go to a conference presentation given by a mul-
tilingual speaker, and if we were to comment that the presentation wasn't very
good because the speaker spoke with an accent, we'd be seen as prejudiced. And
yet, it's been seen as acceptable to make a similar kind of statement in relation to
differences in writing that are related to written accent.

308
                                          WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers

   It is also important to share with faculty data on L2 students on campus,
particularly the number of L2 students enrolled at the institution, the numbers
of students enrolled in each program, and national origins and languages of
these students. All institutions are required to maintain data on international
visa students, and this information is typically available through the institu-
tional research office. In fact, universities often include information about the
number of countries and languages represented on its campus as part of their
advertising campaigns to showcase the institution as multicultural and global-
ized. These data are also collected on the Open Doors website, which makes
available profiles of different states as well. It is more difficult to come by data
on residential L2 students, as admissions offices are prohibited from collecting
data on student linguistic background or English language status, as this infor-
mation may be used to discriminate against students from minority groups.
However, for institutions that draw heavily from the local region, you may
construct a picture of the residential L2 population of students on your cam-
pus by collecting data on local K-12 school systems through the Department
of Education (DOE) website, since school districts do collect information on
the number of English Language Learners (ELL), English Limited Proficiency
(ELP) students, countries of origin, and home languages. It's also possible that
an ESL office, the first year writing program, or the writing center on your
campus collects language data on L2 students. Many of the available sources of
data, however, are limited in the information they provide. For instance, with
respect to information found on DOE's website, according to the terms used by
the DOE, a student may move from ELP to ELL, but once tagged as ELL, the
student will always be marked as ELL, even if that student exited the ESL pro-
grams while in elementary school. Further, this data will tell you little about the
students' literacy experiences--their experiences with reading, writing, speak-
ing, and listening in their different languages. For this type of information, you
may need to construct a survey that asks students to report on various strengths
and experiences with English. A powerful example of such a survey, developed
by Angela Dadak at American University, is available at http://wac.colostate.
edu/atd/ell/cox.cfm.

WORKING WITH FACULTY TO
ACCOMMODATE DIFFERENCE

   Once faculty learn more about L2 writers and feel empathy for these students,
they are generally ready to make changes to their pedagogy to accommodate
them, but their first reaction may be that they feel overwhelmed. They may tell

                                                                                                309
Cox

you that they feel that they have to start over--that they feel that everything
they knew about supporting student writers has to be thrown out the window.
Not true. Research has shown that many of the same pedagogical approaches
for writing in an L1 are effective for supporting writing in an L2. Second
language students benefit from clear and detailed writing assignments (Hirsch,
this volume; Reid & Kroll, 1995), from seeing samples of student writing
from the same assignment (Hirsh, this volume; Leki, 1995), and from teacher-
student conferences on their writing (Ewert, 2009; Phillips, this volume). It
has proven beneficial for L2 students to receive feedback focused on expression
and communication as well as structure, grammar, and usage (Goldstein, 2005;
Hyland, 1998; Jacobs, Curtis, Braine, & Huang, 1998; Phillips, this volume;
Reid, 1994; Truscott, 1999; Wolfe-Quintero & Sedage, 1999), participate in
peer-review groups (Berg, 1999; Tsui & Ng, 2000; Zhu, 2001), and engage in
writing-to-learn activities (Fishman & McCarthy, 2001; Phillips, this volume).
However, there are adjustments that faculty can make to their pedagogy that
will better support the L2 students in their courses, particularly in relation to
giving feedback, peer review, writing-to-learn activities, writing assignment
design, and evaluation of writing assignments.

FEEDBACK TO L2 STUDENT WRITING

   The advice WAC specialists tend to give to faculty when working with
any student - comment on both content issues and structural issues, focus
on two or three "error trends" in a draft rather than comment on every error,
and give both positive feedback and feedback oriented toward revision--also
work to support second language students. I have noticed, though, that faculty
often leave this advice behind when reading and responding to L2 student
writing. Faculty unaccustomed to giving feedback to L2 writers tend to take
either a hands-off approach, reading past all errors and responding only to
content, or a heavy-handed approach, marking every syntactic, usage, and
grammatical error (Matsuda & Cox, 2009). Neither approach is very helpful,
as the first doesn't help a student improve as a writer, and the second can be
overwhelming to the writer. Second language students, do, however, require
feedback on English language issues, as they are still in the process of acquiring
the language. Ferris, a leading scholar on error feedback in L2 writing, has
demonstrated that most L2 students need only to have their errors pointed
out to them, through circling or checkmarks in the margins, and then they
can edit their own work (Ferris, 2002; Ferris & Roberts, 2001). Research has
also shown that L2 students tend to assume that feedback on their writing is

310
                                          WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers

focused only on English language issues and not on discipline-specific issues
and so tend to revise only at the surface level. For this reason, it's important
that instructors distinguish between the two types of comments (Cox, 2010)
and that they also indicate to students that they are, in fact, interested in and
value what the students have to say.

PEER REVIEW

   While the processes of giving and receiving peer feedback, as well as simply
seeing peers' drafts-in-progress (Kietlinska, 2006), have all been shown to
be effective for L2 writers, there are pedagogical approaches instructors can
use to enhance the experience for L2 students, approaches that are useful to
share during faculty development. Research has shown that international visa
students tend to be unfamiliar with the process of peer review and tend to trust
teacher feedback over peer feedback (Kietlinska, 2006; Nelson & Carson, 1998;
Zhang, 1999) and also that, in peer review groups that include both NES and
L2 students, the NES students tend not to trust comments from L2 students
(as indicated in some of the student comments reported in Fredericksen &
Mangelsdorf [this volume]) and L2 students have difficulty finding openings to
offer oral comments (Zhu, 2001). It may be that the instructor also doubts the
value of contributions by L2 students in the peer review process. However, L2
students have strengths in commenting on rhetorical moves in writing (Jordan,
2008) as well as grammatical issues. International students in particular, who
learned English through grammar drills and translation (Reid, 1998), have
training in the grammatical structure of English, unlike most NES students.
Therefore, in order to maximize the benefits of peer review, it is important the
instructor prepare students by explaining to the class the value of peer review,
the role of peer review in the writing process, and the value of comments from
L2 students (Berg, 1999).

   Further, the instructor should let students know the extent to which they
should comment on surface-level issues and how they should attend to these. In
early drafts, students can be advised to pay attention to higher-order concerns
(HOCs), such as idea development, focus, and overall organization, and only
comment on grammatical issues that get in the way of comprehension. In later
drafts, students can be advised to pay attention to lower-order concerns (LOCs),
but to focus only the two or three types of errors that are most disruptive to
the reading experience. Since L2 students do often need additional time to
read and respond to drafts, it is helpful to require students to exchange drafts
ahead of the workshop and/or to provide adequate time in class to respond to

                                                                                                311
Cox

drafts (a strategy described by Fredericksen & Mangelsdorf [this volume]). It is
also helpful if the instructor provides worksheets that include specific questions
to focus the feedback, so that students can provide both written and oral
commentary, an approach that draws on multiple language strengths.

WRITING-TO-LEARN ACTIVITIES

   Writing-to-learn activities, such as freewriting, double-entry journals, and
tickets-to-leave, all support L2 student learning (Hirsch [this volume]) as well
as their facility in writing in English. It is important to remind faculty that
writing produced by L2 students during these activities should be treated the
same as writing by NES students: as a low-stakes activity meant more for the
eyes of the student than for the instructor. I have seen well-intended instructors
take a red pen to L2 students' low-stakes writing, feeling compelled to attend to
English language issues. As it would for any student, this move raises the stakes
of the assignment, which may impede learning. As these writing activities are
meant to facilitate thinking, and not all L2 students can think fluently in their
L2, L2 students can be encouraged to use their first language during writing-
to-learn activities (Bean et al., 2003; Hirsh & DeLuca, 2003) as well as early in
the drafting process (Murphy & Roca de Larios, 2010; Ting, 1996). Because
it takes more time for cognitive processing in a second language, it is also a
good idea to ask instructors to provide additional time for in-class writing-to-
learn activities, or to assign writing-to-learn activities as homework, so that L2
students can work at their own pace.

WRITING ASSIGNMENT DESIGN

   In addition to these pedagogical approaches, during faculty development
workshops, we should encourage faculty to design writing assignments that are
culturally inclusive. In her ethnographic research on undergraduate L2 writers in
courses across the curriculum, Leki (1995) came across writing assignments that
"required an implicit and sophisticated knowledge of everyday US culture that
was far out of the reach of a student just arrived in the US" (p. 241). Instructors
often assign projects that ask students to draw from US history and pop culture,
in an effort to help them connect course content with what they already know.
However, an assignment that does this kind of connection can turn what
might be a personal reflection or reader response assignment for an English L1
student into a research assignment for an L2 student. We would not want to

312
                                          WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers

discourage instructors from giving these kinds of assignments, but instead to
expand the options for the assignment, so that students are invited to draw on
personal experience and knowledge based in the US or in another country. (See
Hirsch [this volume] for examples of assignments that allow undergraduates to
draw on knowledge from daily life) and see Phillips [this volume] for details
on how a graduate student drew on knowledge related to his home country
to be successful with course projects). To address assignment design during
workshops, I hand faculty descriptions of three or four assignments and ask
them to look at them through the lens of an L2 student. Which assignment
is the most culturally and linguistically inclusive? How can the assignments
be adjusted to become more inclusive? This activity invariably leads to rich
conversations about multilingualism, multiculturalism, and assignment design.

EVALUATION OF WRITING ASSIGNMENTS

   When I was a WAC program director, the question I heard most from
faculty on my campus was, "How do I assess L2 students in a way that is fair to
all students in my class?" (See Ives et al. and Zawacki & Habib [this volume] for
faculty perspectives on fairness in evaluating L2 writing). First, faculty should
be made aware that L2 students are doing something much more difficult than
are English L1 students: they are learning and being evaluated on their learning
in a second language. To make evaluation truly equitable, faculty would need to
ask English L1 students to complete writing assignments in a second language.
Second, we should point out to faculty that L2 writing, when compared to
English L1 writing, will almost always appear to fall short. In his landmark
article, "Toward an Understanding of the Distinct Nature of L2 Writing: The
ESL Research and Its Implications," Silva (1993) reviews 72 research reports
that compare English L1 and L2 student writing, to state that L2 writing has
been shown to be "less fluent (fewer words), less accurate (more errors), and less
effective (lower holistic scores)" (p. 200) and that L2 writing is "strategically,
rhetorically, and linguistically different in important ways from L1 writing"
(p. 201). It would be unfair to evaluate L2 writing using the same criteria for
length, grammatical accuracy, and overall organization as would be used to
evaluate English L1 students. However, for most faculty across the curriculum,
length, number of surface errors, and organization aren't all that they are
looking for when they give a writing assignment. They are also looking at the
ways in which students meet the learning outcomes of an assignment, and in
most courses across the curriculum, learning outcomes don't include writing for
length, grammatical accuracy, or organization. My advice to faculty, then, is to

                                                                                                313
Cox

create a rubric focused on learning outcomes. One part of the rubric may focus
on "presentation," which may include length, editing, and citation format, but
even here, I advise faculty to be flexible in terms of required length (asking for
a range of page lengths, say five to seven pages), and to focus on readability,
rather than error-free writing. In my rubrics, I include this statement: "The
writer edited areas pointed out by readers, particularly areas that readers found
confusing due to grammatical issues." L2 students can be expected to edit
areas of their drafts pointed out by readers as being incomprehensible due to
grammatical errors. I also encourage faculty to ask students to hand in, along
with the final draft, the first draft, feedback from peers and/or the instructor,
and a cover letter that explains what was revised and why, and that reflects
on what the student would revise further had there been more time. Looking
through this "mini-portfolio" will help the instructor better assess the progress
the student has made as a writer through the project, how the writer revised and
edited using reader feedback, and what the writer knows about writing that s/
he can't quite enact at this time.

   To address the issue of evaluating L2 writing during faculty workshops, I
hand out an assignment description, a rubric (based on learning outcomes, with
one area focused on presentation, as described above), and two or three samples
of student writing. I select the samples so that one is practically error-free but
has little depth or rhetorical sophistication and one is riddled with surface-level
errors (but none that render the message incomprehensible) but displays depth
of understanding and rhetorical savvy. I ask the participants to evaluate each
essay, using the rubric, and then discuss their choices. Each time I've done this,
faculty first talk about the error-free essay as being the strongest until someone
points out that, according to the rubric, the error-laden essay is the strongest,
leading to a rich discussion on what we prioritize in student writing.

   The approaches I have described in this section can be seen as taking up
Universal Instructional Design (UID) strategies--adjusting pedagogy so that
it meets the needs of a broad spectrum of students, including L2 students, a
framework that has proven useful in rethinking writing pedagogy for students
with disabilities (Dolmage, 2008). Canagarajah (2002), as well as Horner
and Trimbur (2002) and Horner, Lu, Royster and Trimbur (2011), has been
challenging compositionists to go further than just accommodating difference,
but to value difference, and to create writing pedagogy that builds on the strengths
of multilingual and multicultural students, a challenge that faculty across the
curriculum face as well. Similar to Canagarajah's call for faculty to assume a
difference-as-resource stance, Horner, Lu, Royster and Trimbur (2011) propose
that compositionists take up a "translingual approach [which] sees difference

314
                                          WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers

in language not as a barrier to overcome or as a problem to manage, but as a
resource for producing meaning in writing, speaking, reading, and listening" (p.
303). These two approaches call on faculty to create curriculum that builds on
the rhetorical, cultural, linguistic, and literacy resources of student writers. In
the following section, I explore the complexity of designing linguistically and
culturally inclusive pedagogy that draws on L2 students' strengths as learners
and writers.

WORKING WITH FACULTY TO BUILD
ON L2 STUDENTS' STRENGTHS

   The field of composition-rhetoric is currently grappling with the question
of how to create pedagogy using a difference-as-resource stance. Little has been
published in this area, though two CCCC pre-conference workshops have
focused on this question. In 2010, in "Building on Their Strengths: Advocating
for L2 Writers through Teaching, Administrating, Mentoring," workshop
participants focused on "the theoretical framework of `difference-as-resource'
(Canagarajah, 2002) as a heuristic for exploring how writing instructors and
writing program administrators can create pedagogy and programming that
builds on the rhetorical, cultural, linguistic, and literacy resources of second
language writers" (Cox et al., 2010). In 2012, the question was brought to bear
on WAC in a workshop titled, "Embracing the Richness of Multilingualism
through WAC/WID: Re-envisioning Institutional Leadership, Advocacy, and
Faculty Support." During both workshops, participants struggled to translate
this rich area of theory into practice.

   If we are working at the edge of our knowledge in this area in composition-
rhetoric, how can we work with faculty across the curriculum to create
linguistically and culturally inclusive pedagogy? In discussing how the
"translingual approach" would be enacted in composition-rhetoric, Horner, Lu,
Royster and Trimbur (2011) say this:

         In short, new work, in which many faculty cannot yet
         claim expertise, will be demanded of both faculty and their
         students. That is the challenge of embracing a translingual
         approach, and its promise: the necessity of working on
         writing collaboratively with our students, our current
         colleagues, and those who can become our colleagues amid
         the realities of a translingual nation and world. (p. 309)

                                                                                                315
Cox

   Horner, Lu, Royster and Trimbur (2011) thus call on composition scholars
to collaborate with colleagues and students to create linguistically and culturally
inclusive pedagogy. I call on WAC leaders to take the same approach when
working with faculty across the curriculum, an approach not dissimilar to one
taken when the WAC movement was just getting off the ground. Russell (2006),
in his introduction to A History of Writing Across the Curriculum: Composing a
Community, describes the WAC movement as "an extraordinary example of
grassroots change in education" (p. 3). When the movement began, as Russell
tells us,

         [it] did not have an elaborated theory but rather a few
         powerful ideas, which might be summarized as "Writing to
         learn; learning to write." Nor did it have a single curricular
         agenda, but rather a wide range of possible models, to be
         adapted or rejected according to local institutional needs and
         personalities. (p. 5)

   WAC leaders are accustomed to taking these "few powerful ideas" and
"possible models" to faculty across the curriculum and trusting faculty to do
the hard work of translating these ideas and curricular models into pedagogy
that supports their disciplinary and classroom contexts. We WAC program
leaders do not need to have all of the answers, only the questions, the seeds of
pedagogical change, which faculty then take up and use to transform teaching
and learning across the curriculum. An initial step WAC leaders might take is to
gather like-minded faculty and begin the conversation by posing the following
questions:

    How we can design writing curricula that invites students to draw on
       their multiple languages, cultures, literacy experiences, and areas of rhe-
       torical knowledge as resources?

    How we can value students' "written accents" in our curricula?
    Where, in your discipline, does pedagogy that builds on the strengths

       of linguistically and culturally diverse students already exist? Where, in
       your discipline, does "written accent" or writing that draws on multiple
       languages already exist? How can these examples of pedagogies and texts
       be used to showcase multilingualism and multiculturalism as part of
       your field?
   But what can we offer faculty as curricular models of linguistically and
culturally inclusive pedagogy? I suggest that we ask faculty to pay attention to
the ways in which L2 students in their courses reshape assignments. In "Coping
Strategies of ESL Students in Writing Tasks Across the Curriculum," Leki

316
                                          WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers

(1995) tells us that in order to succeed, L2 writers often "rewrit[e] the terms"
of writing assignments, giving the example of Julie, a business major from
France, who negotiates a history assignment on a novel's representation of US
southern women in the 1950's--an assignment that assumes deep cultural and
historical knowledge of the US--by adapting the assignment to instead focus
on the novel's female character she could most connect to as an international
student (p. 243). Rather than see these reshapings of assignments as "errors"
or "misunderstandings," we may see them as clues to approaches to creating
pedagogy that builds on L2 writers' strengths.

CONCLUSION

   Russell tells us that the first WAC programs "began with faculty in various
disciplines sitting down to talk about a felt need--poor writing (or thinking)
among students" (p. 11). The model that WAC leaders turned to was the
faculty workshop--a model that Russell describes as "egalitarian": "The faculty
workshop was a place to share ideas and practices, not a place to learn from an
expert, ordinarily" (p. 11). Today's "felt need" is the question of how to work
with L2 writers, and faculty from across the curriculum are turning to WAC
program leaders for guidance. Though WAC directors often are not experts in
L2 writing studies, we do have expertise in bringing faculty together around the
same table, sharing a "few powerful ideas" about student writing, learning from
what is already happening in classrooms across the curriculum, and engaging
faculty in collaborative inquiry into pedagogy. Fulwiler (2006) tells us that
when asked why he and WAC colleague Art Young continue, even a decade
into retirement, to help colleges and universities develop WAC programs, he
answers, "because exploring good ideas with interested colleagues is the most
exciting work we've learned to do" (p. 167). Linguistically and culturally
inclusive writing pedagogy is currently theory that is waiting to be translated
into practice, and that pedagogy can only be created in collaboration with
faculty across the curriculum. This is, indeed, an exciting time to do WAC
work.

NOTES

1. Many thanks to Kimberly Harrison, Christina Ortmeier-Hooper, and Terry
Myers Zawacki, whose comments, suggestions, and insights greatly enriched
this essay.

                                                                                                317
Cox

2. While writing this chapter, I left Bridgewater State University to become a
Multilingual Specialist at Dartmouth College, where I develop writing support
and oral presentation support for L2 international graduate students and teach
writing courses in the Institute for Writing and Rhetoric.

REFERENCES

Bean, J., Cucchihara, M., Eddy, R., Elbow, P., Grego, R., Kutz, E., ... Matsuda,
   P. K. (2003). Should we invite students to write in home dialects or lan-
   guages? Complicating the yes/no debate. Composition Studies, 31(1), 25-42.

Berg, C. E. (1999). The effects of trained peer response on ESL students' re-
   vision types and writing quality. Journal of Second Language Writing, 8(3):
   215-241.

Bridgewater State University. (2011a). Bridgewater State University Fact-
   book 2010-2011. Retrieved from http://www.bridgew.edu/depts/IR/Fact-
   book2010-2011/BSU_FACT_BOOK_1011.pdf

Bridgewater State University. (2011b). BSU at a glance: Fall 2011. Retrieved
   from http://www.bridgew.edu/depts/IR/AAG_F11.pdf

Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). Understanding critical writing. Reprinted in P. K.
   Matsuda, M. Cox, J. Jordan, & C. Ortmeier-Hooper (Eds.) (2006), Second
   Language Writing in the Composition Classroom: A Critical Sourcebook (pp.
   210-224). Boston, New York: Bedford/St. Martin's.

Castillo, W. (2011). Losing was never an option. Writer's Caf, Bridgewater State
   University. Retrived from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6vn8hn2Hd
   Wo&feature=related

Cox, M. (2010). Identity, second language writers, and the learning of work-
   place writing. In M. Cox, J. Jordan, C. Ortmeier-Hooper, & G. G. Schwartz
   (Eds.), Reinventing identities in second language writing (pp. 75-95). Urbana,
   IL: NCTE.

Cox, M. (2011). "WAC: Closing doors or opening doors for second language
   writers?" In "Writing across the Curriculum and Second Language Writers:
   Cross-Field Research, Theory, and Program Development [Special Issue]."
   Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/ell/
   cox.cfm

Cox, M., Dadak, A., Nielsen-Dube, K., Canagarajah, A. S., Shuck, G., Eric-
   Depew, K., Miller-Cochran, S., & Matsuda, P. K. (2010, March). Building
   on their strengths: Advocating for L2 writers through teaching, adminis-
   trating, collaborating. Workshop presented at the annual convention of the
   Conference on College Composition and Communication, Louisville, KY.

318
                                          WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers

Cox, M. & Ortmeier-Hooper, C. (2008). Beyond the deficiency model: Second
   language writers as rhetorically savvy. Paper presented at the annual conven-
   tion of the Conference on College Composition and Communication, San
   Francisco, CA.

Cox, M. & Zawacki, T. M. (Eds.). (2011, December). Writing across the Cur-
   riculum and Second Language Writers: Cross-Field Research, Theory, and
   Program Development [Special Issue]. Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved
   from http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/ell/index.cfm

Cummins, J. (1981). Age on arrival and immigrant second language learning in
   Canada. A reassessment. Applied Linguistics, 2, 132-l49.

Dolmage, J. (2008). Mapping composition: Inviting disability in the front
   door. In C. Lewiecki-Wilson & B. J. Brueggemann (Eds.), Disability and the
   Teaching of Writing: A critical sourcebook (pp. 14-27). Boston: Bedford / St.
   Martin's.

Ewert, D. E. (2009). L2 writing conferences: Investigating teacher talk. Journal
   of Second Language Writing, 18(4), 251-269.

Ferris, D. (2002). Treatment of error in second language student writing. The
   Michigan Series on Teaching Multilingual Writers. Ann Arbor: University
   of Michigan Press.

Ferris, D., & Roberts, B. (2001). Error feedback in L2 writing classes. How
   explicit does it need to be? Journal of Second Language Writing, 10, 161-184.

Fishman, S. M. & McCarthy, L. (2001). An ESL writer and her discipline-
   based professor: Making progress even when goals do not match." Written
   Communication, 18(2), 180-228.

Fu, D. (1995). My trouble is my English: Asian students and the American dream.
   Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Fulwiler, T. (2006). Writing across the Michigan Tech curriculum. In S. H.
   McLeod & M. I. Soven (Eds.), A history of Writing Across the Curriculum:
   Composing a community (pp. 168-199). West Lafayette, IN: Parlor Press.

Goldstein, L. (2005). Teacher Written Commentary in Second Language Writing
   Classrooms. The Michigan Series on Teaching Multilingual Writers. Ann Ar-
   bor: University of Michigan Press.

Hall, J. (2009). WAC/WID in the next America: Redefining professional iden-
   tity in the age of the multilingual majority. The WAC Journal, 20, 33-49.
   Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/journal/vol20/hall.pdf

Hirsh, L. & Deluca, C. (2003). WAC in an urban and bilingual setting: Writ-
   ing-to-learn in English y en Espao. Language and Learning Across the Dis-
   ciplines, 6(3). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/llad/v6n3/hirsch.pdf

Horner, B., Lu, M-Z., & Royster, J. J. (2011). Opinion: Language difference
   in writing: Toward a translingual approach, College English, 73(3), 303-321.

                                                                                                319
Cox

Horner, B. & Trimbur, J. (2002). English only and US college composition,.
   College Composition and Communication, 53(4), 594-630.

Hyland, F. (1998). The impact of teacher written feedback on individual writ-
   ers. Journal of Second Language Writing, 7(3), 255-86.

Jacobs, G. M., Curtis, A., Braine, G., & Huang, S. Y. (1998). Feedback on
   student writing: Taking the middle path. Journal of Second Language Writing,
   7(3), 307-17.

Johns, A. M. (2001). ESL students and WAC programs: Varied populations
   and diverse needs. In S. H. McLeod, E. Miraglia, M. I. Soven, & C. Thaiss
   (Eds.), WAC for the new millennium: Strategies for continuing writing-across-
   the-curriculum programs (pp. 141-164). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Jordan, J. (2008). Rethinking competencies in linguistically diverse composi-
   tion courses. Paper presented at the annual convention of the Conference on
   College Composition and Communication, San Francisco, CA.

Kietlinska, K. (2006). Revision and ESL students. In A. Horning & A. Becker
   (Eds.), Revision: History, theory, and practice (pp. 63-87). West Lafayette, IN:
   Parlor Press and WAC Clearinghouse. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.
   edu/books/horning_revision/

Leki, I. (1992). Understanding ESL writers. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Leki, I. (1995). Coping strategies of ESL students in writing tasks across the

   curriculum. TESOL Quarterly 29(2), 235-260.
Leki, I. (1999). "Pretty much I screwed up": Ill-served needs of a permanent

   resident student. In L. Harklau, K. M. Losey, & M. Siegal (Eds.), Generation
   1.5 meets college composition: Issues in the teaching of writing to US-educated
   learners of ESL (pp. 17-43). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Leki, I. (2001). "A narrow system of thinking": Nonnative-English-speaking
   students in group projects across the curriculum. TESOL Quarterly 35(1),
   39-67.
Leki, I. (2006). Negotiating socioacademic relations: English learners' reception
   by and reaction to college faculty. Journal of English for Academic Purposes
   5(2), 136-152.
Leki, I. (2007). Undergraduates in a second language: Challenges and complexities
   of academic literacy development. Boston: Routledge.
Massachusetts Department of Education (2011). School/District profiles. Re-
   trieved from http://profiles.doe.mass.edu
Matsuda, P. K. (1999). Composition studies and ESL writing: A disciplinary
   division of labor. College Composition and Communication, 50(4): 699-721.
Matsuda, P. K., & Cox, M. (2009). Reading an ESL writer's text. In S. Bruce
   & B. Rafoth (Eds.), ESL writers: A guide for writing center tutors (2nd ed.; pp.
   42-50). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook Heinemann.

320
                                          WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers

Matsuda, P. K. & Jablonksi, J. (2000). Beyond the L2 metaphor: Towards a
   mutually transformative model of ESL/WAC collaboration. Academic.Writ-
   ing, 1. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/aw/articles/matsuda_jablon-
   ski2000.pdf. 20 May 2011

McLeod, S. & Miraglia, E. (2001). Writing across the curriculum in a time of
   change. In S. H. McLeod, E. Miraglia, M. I. Soven, & C. Thaiss (Eds.), WAC
   for the new millennium: Strategies for continuing writing-across-the-curriculum
   programs (pp. 1-27). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Mervius, J. K. (2011). "I Am a Survivor." Writer's Caf, Bridgewater State Uni-
   versity. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6vn8hn2HdWo
   &feature=related

Murphy, L. & Roca de Larios, J. (2010). Searching for words: One strategic use
   of the mother tongue by advanced Spanish EFL writers. Journal of Second
   Language Writing, 19(2), 61-81.

Nelson, G. N., & Carson, J. G. (1998). ESL students' perceptions of effec-
   tiveness in peer response groups. Journal of Second Language Writing, 7(2),
   113-131.

Ortmeier-Hooper, C. (2010). The shifting nature of identity: Social identity,
   L2 writers, and high school. In M. Cox, J. Jordan, C. Ortmeier-Hooper, and
   G. G. Schwartz (Eds.), Reinventing identities in second language writing (pp.
   5-28). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Reid, J. (1994). Responding to ESL students' texts: The myths of appropria-
   tion. TESOL Quarterly, 28(2), 273-292.

Reid, J. (1998). "Eye" learners and "ear" learners: Identifying the language
   needs of international student and US resident writers. In P. Byrd and J. M.
   Reid (Eds.), Grammar in the composition classroom: Essays on teaching ESL for
   college-bound students (pp. 3-17). New York: Heinle.

Reid, J., & Kroll, B. (1995). Designing and assessing effective classroom assign-
   ments for NES and ESL students. Journal of Second Language Writing, 4(1),
   17-41.

Russell, D. R. (2006). Introduction: WAC's beginnings: Developing a com-
   munity of change agents. In S. H. McLeod & M. I. Soven (Eds.) A history
   of Writing Across the Curriculum: Composing a community (pp. 3-15). West
   Lafayette, IN: Parlor Press.

Silva, T. (1993). Toward an understanding of the distinct nature of L2 writ-
   ing: The ESL research and its implications. In T. Silva & P. K. Matsuda
   (2001) Landmark Essays on ESL Writing (pp. 191-208). Mahwah, NJ: Erl-
   baum.

Ting, Y. R. (1996). Looping forward: Drafting in my own language. ELT Jour-
   nal, 50, 135-142.

                                                                                                321
Cox

Truscott, J. (1999). The case for "The case against grammar correction in L2
   writing classes": A response to Ferris. Journal of Second Language Writing,
   8(2), 111-22.

Tsui, A. B. M. & Ng, M. (2000). Do secondary L2 writers benefit from peer
   comments? Journal of Second Language Writing, 9(2): 147-170.

Valds, G. (1992). Bilingual minorities and language issues in writing: Toward
   professionwide responses to a new challenge. Written Communication 9(1),
   85-136.

Vandrick, S. (2010). Social class privilege among ESOL writing students.
   In M. Cox, J. Jordan, C. Ortmeier-Hooper & G. Schwartz (Eds.), Rein-
   venting Identities in Second Language Writing (pp. 257-272). Urbana, IL:
   NCTE.

Wolfe-Quintero, K. & Segade, G. (1999). University support for second-lan-
   guage writers across the curriculum. In L. Harklau, K. M. Losey, & M. Siegal
   (Eds.), Generation 1.5 meets college composition: Issues in the teaching of writ-
   ing to US-educated learners of ESL (pp. 191-209). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Yang, J. (2010). Lost in the puzzles. In M. Cox, J. Jordan, C. Ortmeier-Hooper,
   and G. G. Schwartz (Eds.), Reinventing identities in second language writing
   (pp. 51-53). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Zamel, V. (1995). Strangers in academia: The experiences of faculty and ESL
   students across the curriculum. College Composition and Communication,
   46(4), 506-521.

Zamel, V. & Spack, R. (Eds). (2004). Crossing the curriculum: Multilingual
   learners in college classrooms. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Zawacki, T. M. & Cox, M. (2011, December). Introduction to WAC and sec-
   ond language writing. Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.
   colostate.edu/atd/ell/zawacki-cox.cfm

Zawacki, T. M., Hajabbasi, E., Habib, A., Antram, A., & Das, A. (2007). Valu-
   ing Written Accent: Non-Native Students Talk about Identity, Academic Writ-
   ing, and Meeting Teachers' Expectations. Fairfax, VA: George Mason Univer-
   sity. Retrieved from http://writtenaccents.gmu.edu/

Zawacki, T. M. & Habib, A. (2010). "Will our stories help teachers under-
   stand?" Expectations across academic communities. In M. Cox, J. Jordan,
   C. Ortmeier-Hooper, and G. G. Schwartz (Eds.), Reinventing identities in
   second language writing (pp. 54-74). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Zhang, S. (1999). Thoughts on some recent evidence concerning the affective
   advantage of peer feedback. Journal of Second Language Writing, 8(3), 321-
   326.

Zhu, W. (2001). Interaction and feedback in mixed peer response groups. Jour-
   nal of Second Language Writing, 10(4): 251-276.

322
                                          WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers

APPENDIX A: VOICES OF BSU ESL STUDENTS,
FROM AN ENGL 101 SURVEY

   In response to, "Please describe the writing instruction in English you've
received."

    I have never taken a class that focuses only on writing. In my ESL classes
       we did very short writing assignments. The longuest [sic] piece of writ-
       ing I've written in English is one paragraph. In my ESL classes we read
       short paragraphs and answered basic questions. [...] It is easier for me to
       understand English when I hear it or read it. It is more difficult for me
       to speak and write because I have trouble choosing the correct words. --
       Mexican student, who took ESL courses at a college in California

    I haven't received any writing instruction in English. I studied reading for
       TOEFL Test, so the longest text I've read English is TOEFL text book.
       --Japanese student, who went to an English Language Institute in the US

    The writing basically has three parts: Introduction, body, and conclu-
       sion. Introduction has hook, background, thesis. Body has usually three
       paragraphs. Each paragraph's first sentence usually is the thesis of the
       paragraph. It's better has [sic] transition words for each of these three
       paragraphs. The last paragraph is conclusion. It is good for writer to
       repeat the thesis in another words. --Chinese student, attended an Eng-
       lish Language Institute I attended high school in Cape Cod, 2 years.

    My longest piece written in English is 2-3 pages. --Cape Verdean stu-
       dent, immigrated to the US two years ago.

   In response to, "Please describe the reading instruction in English you've
received," and "What kinds of reading have you done?"

    First, read the first and last sentences of each paragraph. Second, read
       the questions and then go back to the paragraph to find out the answers.
       Skip the new words if you haven't seen before or you can according to
       the context, try to guess the meaning of the words that you don't know. I
       have red [sic] short novel, SAT reading, TOEFL reading, and newspaper.
       --Chinese student, attended an English Language Institute

    I'm reading "Art History." There are so many technical words so at first,
       I need to check these vocabrary [sic] and after that, I need to read two
       times. It takes a lot of time but understanding the content of textbook is
       the most important. --Japanese student, attended an English Language
       Institute

                                                                                                323
Cox

   In response to, "What do you hope to learn in this course?"

    I hope I'll get more writing skill in draft that that [sic] I wrote before. In
       addition, I wanna [sic]express notion or an abstruct [sic] concept because
       I'm poor at those expression on the draft.

    I hope I can speak English fluently and can write easily.
    I want to improve my writing skills so I could write properly in other

       classes.
    I hope I achieve English obstacles in my life as much as I can.
    I would like to learn writing as American. Sometimes I write dialy [sic]in

       English but I can't do well so I would like to practice.

APPENDIX B: L2 STUDENT VOICES FROM
ACROSS THE CURRICULUM

   These voices are from Terry Myers Zawacki and Anna Habib's (2010)
research on the experiences of linguistically and culturally diverse students
across the curriculum at George Mason University.

         In America, when I write totally different style of paper, the
         professor say, "Where are you from? How did you get into
         this college? Your writing is behind the line, so you can't
         really catch up to the class." So, I don't know how to figure
         that out. --Yoon, student from S. Korea

         I had my initial friction between the cultures here when I was
         told over and over again "you know you have to cut down,
         clean up your paragraphs." I was very offended because I
         came with a lot of confidence behind me and suddenly I find
         that it is totally different. But it didn't take me long to catch
         up though. I realized any nice language I use is wasted; no
         one is going to look at it in that way. --Kanishka, student
         from Sri Lanka

         "My strength in Spanish," Diana said, "is my personal style
         of how to write, and that's something that people like. And
         my grammar and vocabulary in Spanish are really good. In
         English, definitely, I would like to have more vocabulary, so I
         can do that [same thing]."

324
                                          WAC, Faculty Development, and Second Language Writers

         I would really love to learn nice words, because I do have
         ideas, and I do want to put something down, but I am short
         of words. --Ayesha, student from Pakistan

         When you ultimately succeed in writing is when you have
         your own accent. When I speak, my accent reflects who I am
         and where I come from. Well, I want my writing to reflect
         me in that way. --Tonka, student from Bulgaria

APPENDIX C: BASIC INFORMATION
ABOUT L2 WRITERS AND WRITING

   International students: These are visa-holding students studying in the US
for a set amount of time, usually with plans to return to the home country
afterward. In general, international L2 students:

    Have a wide range of experiences with English in home country; some
       students will have studied English since elementary school while others
       will have studied English for only a few years

    Undergraduates tend to be high-performing students from privileged
       backgrounds (Vandrick, 2010); graduate students tend to come from a
       wider range of socioeconomic backgrounds

    Tend to have learned English "through their eyes" (Reid, 1998), though
       grammar exercises, memorization of vocabulary, and translation

    Tend to have limited experiences with writing, speaking, and listening in
       their second language

    May have enrolled in an English Language Institute (ELI) prior to en-
       rolling in college, which tend to teach formulaic approaches to writing
       (thesis-drive, five-paragraph essays)

   Permanent resident students: These are students who moved to the US for
a wide range of reasons, including seeking a US education, opportunities for
work, and political unrest or war in their home country. In general, among
permanet resident students:

    Some will have studied English in home country; others will have only
       learned English after arriving

    Some will have literacy in first language; others will have had their edu-
       cation disrupted by war and political unrest

                                                                                                325
Cox

    Some will live in ethnic enclaves, using their primary language in their
       homes and communities

    Many will have experience in US public schools, ranging from one or
       two years to longer enrollment

    Most tend to have learned English primarily "through their ears" (Reid,
       1998), through American TV, pop culture, and socializing with peers

    Many will have had limited experience with writing, as high school ESL
       programs focus on oral communication over written, and ESL students
       tend to be placed in low tracks in high school, where the emphasis is on
       grammar and worksheets over extended writing (Fu, 1995; Ortmeier-
       Hooper, 2010)

    ESL permanent resident students jumped through many hoops to make
       it to college, so they tend to be driven, high-performing students who
       take advantage of resources available to them at the university

   What is generally true about L2 college writers?
    It takes five to seven years of being immersed in the target language to

       become fluent in that language (Cummins, 1981)
    Fluency  Native-like; L2 students will retain a "written accent" which

       may never disappear (Valds, 1992)
    L2 college writers have written across multiple languages, educational

       systems, cultures, and rhetorics, building important rhetorical knowl-
       edge Section III WAC Practices and Pedagogies Transformed

326
                               SECTION III

WAC PRACTICES AND PEDAGOGIES
              TRANSFORMED

                                                                                             327
CHAPTER 13

DEVELOPING WRITING-
INTENSIVE COURSES FOR A
GLOBALIZED CURRICULUM
THROUGH WAC-TESOL
COLLABORATIONS

      Megan Siczek
      George Washington University

      Shawna Shapiro
      Middlebury College

       This chapter makes the argument that WAC and TESOL should work
       together to create new curricular spaces for enacting an institution's
       commitment to diversity, inclusion, and global perspectives. Though
       internationalization is often touted as an institutional goal, universi-
       ties tend to overlook the potential contributions of students--particu-
       larly second language writers--toward this goal. TESOL faculty are
       similarly excluded from conversations about how to cultivate global
       competence across the curriculum. The authors make the case for
       writing-intensive, globally-oriented courses that are developed through
       coordination between WAC and TESOL programs. The first section
       provides a framework for internationalization, articulating its rela-
       tionship to diversity and inclusion. The second section describes the
       persistent disciplinary segregation between WAC and TESOL and ex-
       plains why their collaboration provides a viable means of contributing
       to an inclusive and globally-relevant curriculum. The third section
       offers a WAC course model that unites internationalization goals with
       this collaborative potential.

INTERNATIONALIZATION: A MISSED OPPORTUNITY?

   There is little doubt that "internationalization" has become a buzzword
across most US college campuses. Most institutional mission statements include

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.13  329
Siczek and Shapiro

phrasing such as "global perspectives," "global citizenship," "cross-cultural
understanding," and "engaging the world," implying that this ethos is indeed
embedded in their philosophy and practice. The rationale for this movement
toward a global orientation stems in part from a recognition of increasing global
interdependence. We can look at this interconnectedness in humanistic terms,
as indicated by the American Association of American Colleges and Universities
(AACU)'s endorsement of global education "to prepare students for ... [a]
shared future marked by justice, security, equality, human rights, and economic
sustainability" (Stromquist, 2007, p. 82). We can also regard this impetus in
highly practical terms, motivated by "a firm grasp of practical and competitive
realities in the contemporary world" (Taylor, 2004, p. 153). The overarching
goal of internationalization in higher education, then, is to prepare students to
inhabit a shared world community.

   Internationalized practices may take many forms, including branch
campuses in other countries, joint degree programs with other institutions,
study abroad programs, learning of foreign languages, globalized curricular
content, and the enrollment of international students in US institutions (see,
for example, Craig and Lavalle & Shima [this volume]). The assumption behind
these practices is that they cultivate global competency, which Olson and
Kroeger (2001) define as "substantive knowledge, perceptual understanding,
and intercultural communication skills [needed] to effectively interact in our
globally interdependent world" (p. 117). In essence, global competency involves
developing skill sets--such as global analysis and intercultural communication--
as well as mindsets for critical inquiry, global consciousness, and appreciation
of diversity. Students must be given the opportunity to interrogate their own
understandings of the world, to consider how and why others may perceive
things differently, and to position themselves and their own experiences in
the context of the "other." Ultimately, according to Mezirow, this can result in
"transformative learning," whereby students change their "structures of habitual
expectation to make possible a more inclusive, discriminating, and integrating
perspective" and then begin to act according to this perspective (as cited in Van
Gyn, Schuerholz-Lehr, Caws, & Preece, 2009, p. 29).

   Unfortunately, many of the internationalization initiatives undertaken at
US colleges and universities fall short in meeting this ideal of transformative,
globally-competent education. Often, internationalization is interpreted to
mean simply that US students should be encouraged to spend time abroad or
that campuses should recruit more foreign-born students. This attitude allows
internationalization to remain external to the classroom experience of many
students and faculty. Jones and Killick (2007) have mined the literature in the
field to identify some of the features of a truly internationalized curriculum: it

330
                                                                   Developing Writing-Intensive Courses

should "demand culturally inclusive behavior ... engage critically with the global
plurality of knowledge ... [develop] an awareness of [students'] own culture
and perspectives ... recognize and appreciate different cultural perspectives
on the same issue ... [and] apply critical thinking skills to problems with an
international or intercultural dimension ..." (p. 112). However, much of the
literature concedes that curricular responses to internationalization tend to
be tacked on, rather than thoughtfully embedded across disciplinary spaces.
Although there may be specific programs, departments, or individuals devoted
to teaching about international perspectives, this orientation is generally not
sustained throughout the curriculum. As a result, few students graduate with
a solid grounding in global competency. Citing decades of research, Hunter,
White, and Godbey (2006) have concluded that "few American college graduates
are competent to function in different cultures, speak another language, or have
any significant understanding of the world beyond US borders" (p. 272).

   In order to be longstanding and transformative, internationalization must
be an integrative process. It must be guided by a vision that is "ongoing, future
oriented, multi-dimensional, interdisciplinary, leadership-driven" and "involves
many stakeholders working to change the internal dynamics of an institution"
(Ellingboe, 1998, as cited in Taylor, 2004, p. 150). Internationalization must
not only be outward-looking, but also inward-looking. It requires that we
acknowledge the diverse values and perspectives within our own institutions,
and take into account who might be excluded or marginalized by our existing
institutional practices. It also asks that we consider how institutional diversity
might be tapped as a resource for cultivating global competency. In this way,
internationalization is closely tied to another recent buzzword in higher
education: inclusion. As Jones and Killick (2007) point out, a diverse student
body is "the most obvious, and perhaps least utilized" mechanism for improving
teaching and learning for global purposes (p. 113). Taking advantage of the
potential contributions of our student body requires pedagogical practices that
are inclusive of diverse backgrounds and viewpoints.

   Rarely, however, do institutions recognize the link between
internationalization and inclusion. All too often, the students who have the
most to offer to a globally-oriented curriculum--particularly second language
writers--are excluded from the mainstream, segregated into language support
or remediation programs. As a result, many institutions ignore the diversity
that exists within their walls, and instead operate "in isolation of the wider
world," creating a space "where the student body, staff, curriculum context and
supporting materials all reflect a single dominant culture" (Caruana, 2012, p.
34; also see Matsuda, 2006). Ironically, we may miss an opportunity to engage
second language writers in globalizing our classrooms, despite the fact that

                                                                                                331
Siczek and Shapiro

they have crossed multiple cultural, linguistic, national, and epistemological
boundaries to become members of our college communities. TESOL
specialists--who also have a great deal to offer to an inclusive, internationalized
curriculum, tend to be similarly segregated--often operating in isolation from
more mainstream academic programs such as WAC.

   Thus despite the rhetoric of internationalization, our schools are missing an
opportunity to draw on the cultural and linguistic diversity that actually exists
within our campuses, and to create a curriculum that is both inclusive and globally-
oriented. In this chapter, we argue that WAC and TESOL can lead the way in
developing courses that take advantage of what second language writers bring to
institutions of higher education, and can thereby implement a more transformative
and inclusive approach to internationalization. We articulate a rationale for
collaboration between the two disciplines, and present a course model that provides
rigorous writing instruction while at the same time recognizing and building on
the global competencies of multilingual students. Such a course demonstrates the
value of pedagogical and political alliances between WAC and TESOL.

WHY WAC AND TESOL?

   Both of these disciplines have a great deal to contribute toward the aims of
internationalization and global competency: they are both invested in promoting
more inclusive, democratic institutional practice, and in supporting students who
have traditionally been excluded from the curriculum (Matsuda & Jablonski,
2000). Both are concerned with issues of cultural and linguistic diversity as they
relate to power and privilege. Moreover, both fields have in recent years become
increasingly aware of the impact of globalization and internationalization on their
work, as evidenced by trends in scholarship and pedagogy (see, for example, the
CCCC Committee on Globalization established in March 2012). The two fields
also complement each other in what they bring to a globally-oriented curriculum:
TESOL offers a rich understanding of students as language users, and of the
intersections between language, culture, identity, and power. WAC offers insights
into literacy practices as they vary across disciplines and discourse communities, as
well as strategies for how to embed literacy instruction throughout the academic
curriculum. Together, the two disciplines offer a multi-dimensional framework
for exploring language and literacy within a global context.

   Before we discuss in greater detail the contributions that TESOL can make
to WAC, it is important to consider what keeps them apart. One of the main
reasons that these two fields rarely collaborate is disciplinary history. Although
both fields draw a great deal on research methodology from the social sciences,

332
                                                                   Developing Writing-Intensive Courses

they have historically been associated with different disciplines--TESOL with
applied linguistics, and composition-rhetoric (which includes WAC) with
English. As the two fields began to professionalize, they did so within separate
institutional spaces, forming separate pedagogical alliances. This has resulted in
what Paul Kei Matsuda (1999) calls a "disciplinary division of labor" in regard
to the teaching of writing: "Language" is thought of as the domain of TESOL
and "Writing" the domain of composition-rhetoric.

   While the division of labor between WAC and TESOL is somewhat
understandable given this disciplinary history, the persistence of that division
has harmful effects. If language is conceived of as separate from writing, then
the composition classroom is assumed to be a monolingual space, and the
contributions of second language writers are likely to be overlooked (Matsuda,
2006). Language difference therefore comes to be thought of as deficiency,
rather than a resource (Canagarajah, 2006). Multilingualism is then treated as
"a problem to be solved, a disease to be cured" (Hall, 2009, p. 37). Another
negative byproduct of disciplinary division of labor is curricular misalignment.
Comparative case studies have found that the writing instruction in ESL courses is
often approached from a "remedial" or "basic skills" perspective, and may diverge
significantly from what is expected in first-year composition, writing-intensive
courses, or other courses across the curriculum (Atkinson & Ramanathan, 1995;
Braine, 1996; Harklau, 1994). This divergence is reflected in course policies as
well: ESL coursework is often non-credit and may cost additional fees beyond
regular tuition (Shapiro, 2012; Van Meter, 1990; also see TESOL, 2012). As
a result, many students come to resent their ESL coursework, feeling that it is
irrelevant to their academic goals and is more of a hindrance than a help (Leki,
2007; Roberge, Harklau, & Siegal, 2009; Shapiro, 2012).

   Part of what prevents more equitable policies, as well as a more integrated
curriculum, is the institutional alienation of TESOL professionals themselves.
Research has found that many feel they are accorded "second class status" at
their institutions, and that their work is considered "remedial" and/or "less
academic" compared to that of other departments (Blumenthal, 2002, p. 48;
Gray, Rolph, & Melamid, 1996, p. 77-78). This low status is instantiated in very
tangible ways: ESL instructors tend to have lower pay, higher teaching loads,
less job security, and fewer professional development opportunities compared
with faculty in other disciplines (Blumenthal, 2002; Ignash, 1995; Williams,
1995; also see Shapiro, 2012). Given these dynamics, it is not surprising that
faculty specializing in second language writing have little if any opportunity for
cross-disciplinary collaboration.

   Clearly, TESOL stands to benefit both pedagogically and politically from
increased institutional integration and could be greatly aided in this aim

                                                                                                333
Siczek and Shapiro

through an alliance with WAC. This alliance might also help WAC to respond
more proactively to the exigencies of internationalization and meet the needs
of second language writers. As Jonathan Hall (2009) has pointed out, although
WAC prides itself on promoting innovative pedagogical practices, it appears to
have a blind spot of its own in failing to prepare for "the next America"--a "new
psychic and pedagogical landscape" where multilingualism is the norm, rather
than the exception (p. 34). "The future of WAC," Hall explains, "is indissolubly
tied to the ways in which higher education will have to, willingly or unwillingly,
evolve in the wake of globalization and in response to the increasing linguistic
diversity of our student population" (p. 34). By turning to TESOL for insights
on the implications of multilingualism and internationalization for its work,
WAC can lead, rather than follow, in cultivating global competency and
inclusive teaching across the curriculum. In sum, alliances between these two
disciplines can help both of them to become further institutionally integrated.

   We are not the first authors to discuss the possibilities for a reciprocal
relationship between WAC and TESOL. Matsuda and Jablonski (2000) have
called for a "mutually transformative" relationship between the disciplines,
which they characterize as involving not only interdisciplinary borrowing
but also collective action. The authors point out that such a relationship has
political as well as pedagogical benefits: "By working together in the service
of improving teaching and learning," they explain, "WAC and ESL could ...
aid one another in securing increased institutional status" (p. 6). These and
other scholars have enumerated a variety of possibilities for collaborative
work between the disciplines. (A website put together by Michelle Cox has
an excellent set of strategies and resources. See also Mallett and Zghreib [this
volume] who offer a vivid illustration of how this kind of collaboration can
result in a deeply thoughtful and carefully designed curriculum for international
students.) However, there is a need for more articulation of models at the course
level that draw on the expertise of both fields (Zawacki & Cox, 2011). The
existing literature tends to focus on how the two can work together to support
second language writers in other content areas, rather than on how they might
themselves add to the curriculum through content-based, writing-intensive
courses with a global orientation. As the landscape of higher education is being
shaped by internationalization, there is tremendous opportunity for WAC
and TESOL to make ground-level contributions, drawing on their collective
expertise. Jonathan Hall (2009) has framed the opportunity that lies before
us in this way: "We need to ask ourselves: how can WAC/WID programs
more effectively encourage Multilingual Learning Across the Curriculum? (p.
37). In the section that follows, we present a course model that responds to
this question.

334
                                                                   Developing Writing-Intensive Courses

A CURRICULAR RESPONSE: WRITING
ABOUT GLOBAL ENGLISH

   We have made the argument that the rhetoric of internationalization must
be translated into inclusive opportunities to develop global competencies and
global mindedness for students on our campuses. This entails leveraging the
resource of student diversity and exploring avenues for coordination between
TESOL and WAC programs. This particular model of coordination is a writ-
ing-intensive course about English as a global language designed and taught by
a TESOL specialist, with support and input from WAC programs. The course
content, global English, was selected because it crossed geographic and disciplin-
ary boundaries, and also because it allowed for the inclusion of multiple/criti-
cal perspectives. We present this as an example of globally-relevant curricular
content that can be academically purposed through WAC programs while at the
same time being "international and relevant to the needs to all student groups"
(Leask, 2001, p. 101). Variations of this course have been piloted at two institu-
tions--George Washington University and Middlebury College. Although the
two variations are quite similar, they differ in two respects--the mix of students
(L2-only vs. mixed L1/L2) and their approach to writing instruction.

   The course at George Washington University (GW) responds directly to the
institution's mission statement, which highlights the core value of cultivating
"a dynamic, student-focused community stimulated by cultural and intellec-
tual diversity and built upon a foundation of integrity, creativity, and open-
ness to the exploration of new ideas" (http://www.gwu.edu/~ire/info/mission.
htm). This statement represents the potential for transcending the monolin-
gual/monocultural classroom, as well as the institutional boundaries that can
limit cross-disciplinary collaboration. In regard to international engagement,
the university also aims to "promote the process of lifelong learning from both
global and integrative perspectives" by "provid[ing] a stimulating intellectual
environment for its diverse students and faculty." This emphasis brings to light
the university's commitment to engage with diverse perspectives and global-
mindedness in both teaching and learning.

   While the writing program at GW endeavors to foster a "stimulating intel-
lectual environment," the global perspectives and respect for diversity articu-
lated in the university mission statement are not always evident in the course
options it puts forward. First-year writing course options tend to be humani-
ties-oriented and skewed toward American cultural themes. This can disadvan-
tage second language writers who may lack the cultural knowledge base of their
US counterparts as well as overlook the development of global competencies
that are so necessary in our interconnected society. Among the writing-intensive

                                                                                                335
Siczek and Shapiro

(WI) courses offered, global options can be similarly limited. At the time this
course was designed, many of the WI courses available were in the humanities,
particularly British and American literature, and the few social science options
on the schedule had a focus on the American perspective, such as US diplo-
matic history and American politics and government. Courses with global con-
tent were most likely to be offered through departments of foreign languages
or international affairs. Thus, second language writers at the university faced
limited opportunities to take composition and writing-intensive courses that
were inclusive of their diverse experiences and perspectives.

   Though the TESOL and WI programs were part of separate departments
in the institution, with TESOL instruction housed in the credit-bearing Eng-
lish for Academic Purposes (EAP) program and WI located in the University
Writing Program (UWP), they were aligned in particular ways. Both programs
focused on writing only, and the second language writers who took an EAP
writing class went on to complete the full series of required courses in the Uni-
versity Writing Program. This literacy series included a rigorous first-year writ-
ing course and two WI courses that were grounded in the content of particular
academic disciplines but had a significant writing component "designed to fa-
cilitate student involvement with particular bodies of knowledge, their methods
of scholarship, and modes of communication" (http://www.gwu.edu/~uwp/
wid/wid-about.html). At least one of the WI courses needed to be taken within
a student's major, but the other course could be from another field of study.
Because the writing courses were connected in this way, both the EAP program
and the University Writing Program had a stake in the success of second lan-
guage writers. In addition, the two programs shared a physical space, and this
proximity created a collegial atmosphere and many opportunities for the shar-
ing of experiences and ideas. This cross-pollination at GW led to the develop-
ment of a social science WI course for international students called "English in
a Global Context."

   The rationale for this particular course was in part based on the challenges
second language writers faced in WI courses at the university and the potential
contribution of EAP's pedagogical approach, which tends to make explicit the
practices, skills, and textual conventions associated with academic writing in
English. The course was broadly described as an interdisciplinary examination
of the global use of English, a subject matter that was particularly accessible
to international students who had spent their lives operating in the arena of
"global English." Course content included a study of the historical context that
engendered the growth of English, a treatment of how English functions in
global society, and an examination of cultural attitudes about the hegemonic
power of English in the modern world. Course materials were drawn from a

336
                                                                   Developing Writing-Intensive Courses

range of social science disciplines--including sociolinguistics, applied linguis-
tics, anthropology, culture studies, and education--and represented the extent
to which global English has become a subfield of increasing scholarly interest.

   The objectives of this global English course linked content expectations with
social science research and writing expectations. In keeping with the university's
WI guidelines, students were expected to use critical reading strategies to ana-
lyze an interdisciplinary set of course materials; to develop research techniques
relevant to the social sciences; to assess writing situations to compose for diverse
purposes and audiences; and to produce 15-20 pages of finished text that dem-
onstrated the conventions of social science writing including style, language
use, and APA documentation format. The course objectives also emphasized
scholarly collaboration and revision.

   Specific assignments were designed to build on both the global theme and on
the social science skill set and included four short papers that highlighted writing
for diverse purposes and audiences (language profile, critical article review, policy
memo, reflective writing), and two larger projects that focused on research--a
survey analysis project and an annotated bibliography project. The survey analy-
sis project was considered original social science research and required students
to develop and administer a survey about English language use that considered
practices and/or attitudes. The results of this survey were analyzed and presented
in the form of a social science research article. Conducting original research and
linking it to scholarly work in the field helped students realize the value of di-
verse experiences and develop their own voices as writers, completing projects
with titles such as "Why English Cannot Dominate the World" and "Is an Ini-
tially Positive Experience with the English Language a Strong Factor in Motivat-
ing One to Learn the Language?" The other major assignment was an annotated
bibliography on an independently conceived topic relevant to the course theme.
For this project, students translated their own experiences and interests into an
academic research focus, and topics included hybridized language use, English
language educational practices, and the role of technology in the spread of Eng-
lish. This course, though initially designed via an experimental course designa-
tion, has been approved as a permanent WI offering.

   Another variation on this course model has been implemented at Middle-
bury College, which, like George Washington University, sees internationaliza-
tion as central to its mission: The college "strives ... to cultivate the intellec-
tual, creative, physical, ethical, and social qualities essential for leadership in a
rapidly changing global community" (Middlebury College). Middlebury seeks
students who wish to "engage the world"--a phrase that is used frequently in
its promotional materials. This emphasis on global understanding is reflected in
the strong emphasis on foreign language study, international perspectives, and

                                                                                                337
Siczek and Shapiro

study abroad throughout the curriculum. It is also reflected in the strong repre-
sentation from international students, who comprise 10% of the student body.

   The writing-intensive World English course at Middlebury was designed to
mesh with this commitment to internationalization, but also to meet a need for
increased L2 writing support. As part of their undergraduate degree, all Middle-
bury students are required to take two College Writing (CW) courses, which
are usually taught by faculty in the disciplines. Faculty in the Writing Program
(WRPR) offer additional, supplementary courses for students who wish to re-
ceive more attention from a composition specialist. Many L2 writers had been
encouraged by their faculty advisers to take a WRPR course but were reluctant
to do so since those courses did not fulfill general education distributions or
other graduation requirements and were not tied to their academic interests.

   The World English course at Middlebury was designed to appeal more di-
rectly to L2 writers, by offering content that was more globally-oriented than
that in other WRPR courses, and also met requirements for general education
distributions. It was hoped that such a course would attract a mix of stronger
and weaker writers, as well a range of cultural and linguistic backgrounds and
academic interests. The course was open to L1 writers as well--in essence, re-
sponding the call put forth by Jonathan Hall (2009):"How can we develop
differentiated instruction methods so that both monolingual English speakers
and MLLs [multilingual language learners] simultaneously have a rich and sat-
isfying classroom experience in the same writing classroom?" (p. 45). We hoped
that a course with these attributes would be an ideal space for students who
might be hesitant to select an "ESL" or "remedial" course.

   The course we created, "The English Language in a Global Context," ful-
fills two general education requirements--one in social analysis and another in
comparative cultures--and has been approved as an elective option for minors
in Linguistics and Education Studies. The course is advertised to students in
the syllabus as an interdisciplinary content course in English language/ sociolin-
guistics that helps students "develop a deeper understanding of the relationship
between language and socio-political dynamics." It also fulfills the goals of the
Writing Program, which include teaching "critical and creative thinking, con-
ventions of academic discourse, and persuasive argumentation" (Middlebury
College). As with other WRPR offerings, this course teaches writing via a pro-
cess approach, offering multiple opportunities for feedback and revision. This
particular WRPR course put greater emphasis, however, on critical reading, use
of source texts, genre, and other disciplinary conventions.

   Course material for this variation of the global English course included ar-
ticles and essays from the social sciences, as well as supplementary material
from the humanities, including poetry, prose, creative nonfiction, film, and

338
                                                                   Developing Writing-Intensive Courses

other digital media. As with the GW model, the writing assignments for this
course required research, analysis, and argumentation: For the first assignment,
students researched and reported on a particular variety of English, drawing
on course readings and outside sources, as necessary. Topics for this assign-
ment included US-focused varieties, such as Boston English, Chicano English,
or African American Vernacular, as well as Englishes in "outer" and "expand-
ing" circle countries, such as Jamaica, Singapore, France, and China. Students
presented their findings orally and in a written report. The second assignment
was a position paper on a controversial question, such as one of the following:
"How serious a problem is linguistic imperialism?" "Should the US (or another
country) adopt English as its official language?" "What if anything should be
done about language death, particularly if English is a contributing factor?"
These assignments gave students the opportunity to practice expository and
persuasive writing, as well as to improve their use of textual borrowing practices
and academic register. The final project, entitled "World Englishes and Social
Justice," took a more creative turn. Students wrote for a public audience in
response to an issue or problem that had been raised throughout the semester,
such as bilingual education, language loss, or linguistic prejudice. Student work
for this project included autobiographical essays, editorial letters, informational
pamphlets, public speeches, and works of fiction. For all three of these major
assignments, students completed multiple revisions, receiving feedback from
peers, peer tutors, and the instructor. They also reflected on what they had
learned, in a Writer's Memo submitted with the final draft. (See http://shawn-
ashapiro.com for more course materials).

   The global English course model we have proposed and piloted in these two
variations has been successful in a number of regards: It has drawn students
from a diverse array of linguistic and cultural backgrounds, and has created the
space for them to put their personal experience into dialogue with the course
material. It has caused students to question their own assumptions about lan-
guage, identity, and power, and to write in thoughtful and critical ways about
complex concepts. Below, we discuss in greater detail how this course responds
to our call for a more inclusive response to internationalization.

Cultivating Global Competency

   This course model embodies the goals of internationalization by embedding
curricular content that is global in nature. The spread and current use of the
English language has been driven by global forces and is sometimes used as
a symbol of our interconnected world. At the same time, this course speaks
to both the humanist and the practical rationales for internationalization,

                                                                                                339
Siczek and Shapiro

as articulated earlier. A course on global English allows us to identify--and
question--the structures of power that have enabled English to rise to its
hegemonic position. Interrogating our own assumptions and asking questions
about who "owns" English, as well as who may be advantaged or disadvantaged
by its use in a global setting, can help students uncover global inequalities and
perhaps envision the world as a community with a shared future. In terms of the
global marketplace, this type of course offers a perspective on the language of
global commerce and what it means to interact with those who speak the same
language in very different contexts. Students in both variations of the course
have commented on how it has expanded their global perspective. One student
in the GW course said in the course evaluation that the most valuable aspect
of the class was "to come to understand the vague term `English as a Global
Language' in a historical, sociological way." One of the Middlebury students
wrote, "I loved this course, because it made me think about things I had never
thought about before." Another Middlebury student said, "I learned to look at
systems of power in the world more critically."

Inclusiveness and Relevance for Diverse Student Populations

   Because this course model offers curricular material that is deeply global
in nature, it can be inclusive of the experiences and needs of diverse student
populations. The content of the course is relevant to students of any cultural and
linguistic background but what truly distinguishes this course is that, by its very
nature, it invites different perspectives and points of view. The classroom can
become a shared space in which L1 and L2 students are co-creators of knowledge,
with each drawing authority from his/her own experience and cultural background
and interacting to make meaning of globally relevant concepts. Native speakers of
English, who may have been socialized in monolingual, monocultural classrooms,
are forced to look beyond their own understanding of the language, and to
consider how it is perceived in other contexts (a benefit of linguistically diverse
classes that was also noted by graduate students in Fredericksen & Mangelsdorf
[this volume]). This awareness was reflected in the comments from students in
the Middlebury course who said they appreciated the diversity of backgrounds
represented in the course: "This course taught me to question my own culture,"
said one Middlebury student, "because I never thought that any English beside
my own was correct." An L1 writer explained in a reflective assignment, "I have
never had experience with losing my identity or culture because of language."
For this reason, she wrote her final project about the cognitive benefits of being
bilingual, in order to "help other people like me, who have not experienced that
double identity, still appreciate and encourage bilingualism."

340
                                                                   Developing Writing-Intensive Courses

   Second language writers in both variations of the course commented that the
global content empowered them to share their personal experience more than they
had in most of their other classes. One of the GW students said, "We can bring in
our own learning experience to this class to make the class more diverse." This course
is "very helpful for international students," explained another, "because they have
more chances to express their opinions [and are] able to participate in class more
vigorously." Making these sorts of connections helped L2 writers to understand
themselves better. Similarly, one of the Middlebury students said the course "allowed
me to tap in to my heritage and identity" (See Hirsch [this volume] and Phillips
[this volume] for more evidence that curricula that invited L2 students to draw on
their multicultural experiences as resources is beneficial to L2 writing development).
Another wrote that the course helped him/her to "understand about the challenges
I have been facing." When all students have an equal - though perhaps different--
stake in the course content, we move away from the assimilationist assumptions
that can disadvantage or silence students who are outside of the mainstream. In
interacting with course content and peers, students are able to engage in reciprocal
and transformative learning. This is where we can move from the skills of global
competence into a deeper conception of global mindedness, one that is oriented
toward diversity as a strength rather than a deficiency.

   An additional benefit of the course derived from its approach to writing
instruction which was responsive to students' needs as writers. According to
Jonathan Hall (2009), the "hallmark of the EAP approach is a rigorous and
detailed breakdown of common academic tasks into their components, which
are examined independently and taught sequentially" (p. 44). The pedagogical
expertise of the instructor as a TESOL specialist helped enable students to attend
actively to the processes and practices of writing. One GW student remarked
that "This class actually helps international students to develop their writing
skills, while other WI classes just make students to write without teaching them
how to." Another commented that the most valuable aspect of the class was
being able to understand how to do social science research and writing, and
another mentioned the benefit of the process-oriented approach and the high
level of support offered in the class: "My writing only gets improved when I
keep practicing and refining with comments from my instructor." (For examples
of WI syllabi and curricula that effectively make use of WAC pedagogies to
scaffold writing instruction for L2 students, see Hirsch [this volume]).

It integrates cross-disciplinary perspectives

   Another benefit of the English in a global context course model is that it does
not pretend to occupy a single discipline. Because the topic of global English is

                                                                                                341
Siczek and Shapiro

inherently interdisciplinary, this course creates opportunities for coordination
across programs and departments. We describe the materials for this model
course as being drawn from a range of social science disciplines, because it
would be impossible to say that global English fits into only one space. We can
speak of it as a linguistic phenomenon, or define it in anthropological terms, or
policy terms, or economic terms, but putting this topic into a single disciplinary
space limits our perspective on the issue. In other words, the English language
is global in nature and its implications are complex and far-reaching. Creating
an inclusive and interdisciplinary space for this course allows us to honor its
complexity and diversity.

   Building a course around a theme that is interdisciplinary in nature makes
it much easier to fulfill the cross-disciplinary goals of WAC, and therefore to
build more institutional alliances. Though our colleges and universities often
operate on a model of disciplinary division, the WAC framework offers one way
to enter cross-disciplinary territory by embedding writing instruction across the
curriculum. Inviting L2 writing specialists into that space enhances the level of
writing support for multilingual writers, and can in turn reduce the isolation
of TESOL faculty. This support for interdisciplinary interaction also extends to
students' classroom experiences. As a result of this class, students learn to think
about global English, and about the act of writing, from multiple disciplinary
perspectives: one student who took the WI course at GW said, "I learned the
style and form of social science writing (ex. APA) and social science (especially
sociological, anthropological, a little linguistic) way of analyzing information."
Another said, similarly, "I learned ... the fields that social science study, how
to read these articles and analyze, how to interact with scholars' ideas." An
international student at Middlebury commented in an email, "Now, I can write
different type of papers, academic, research and directed to public audience
ones. I am not going to say that I have been perfect in writing, but I know
that, what I learned in this class was a lot!" This responsiveness to rhetorical
situations is a hallmark of WAC writing instruction, and adding the element
of global perspectives heightens our students' ability to interact across cultural
spaces.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Our global English courses are one means by which TESOL specialists can
contribute to the curricular offerings of WAC programs. In the section below,
we offer suggestions for institutions looking to encourage more of these sorts
of contributions from TESOL specialists, as well as for instructors looking to

342
                                                                   Developing Writing-Intensive Courses

incorporate internationalized content, such as the global English theme, into
their writing-intensive courses.

   First, it is important to tailor the course to each institutional context.
Colleges and universities whose mission statements and strategic priorities
emphasize global competency may be particularly open to developing globally-
oriented curricular options and tapping into TESOL specialists and L2 writers
as resources. Schools should also consider their departmental framework
and academic culture. In both variations of this course model, there was
an infrastructure in place for cross-departmental coordination, as well as a
general understanding of the struggles and needs of diverse writers across the
campus, which created opportunities for dialogue between writing programs
and TESOL programs. Institutions were further willing to approve innovative
course offerings that diversified the curriculum and strengthened the level of
support for multilingual writers, while at the same time fulfilling requirements.
For this sort of coordination to be effective, institutions must recognize that
TESOL specialists are often untapped resources in the academic community.

   An additional consideration for a course of this kind is deciding who has
the interest and expertise to teach it. In both variations of the course model
described here, a TESOL specialist designed and taught the course, with input
and support from the WAC program. Scholars such as Ruth Spack (1988),
however, have warned TESOL specialists about the dangers of building courses
around content areas in which they are not proficient. Though such instructors
may be highly qualified in teaching the rhetorical principles and skills of
writing, they may find that they have "little basis for dealing with the content ...
[or] find themselves in the uncomfortable position of being less knowledgeable
than their students" (p. 37). For a course like this to be successful, TESOL
faculty should be fluent in the methods of inquiry, textual conventions, and
scholarly interactions of the field, so that students can be "immerse[d] in the
subject matter ... by participating in the field, by doing, by sharing, and by
talking about it with those who know more" (Spack, 1988, p. 40). Faculty who
have some reservations about teaching global English may wish to pilot a single
unit on global English for an existing course, before developing an entirely
new course on the topic. It is also important for TESOL specialists to draw
on the expertise of colleagues in writing programs, as well as to connect with
instructional librarians for support in accessing research materials appropriate
to the course content.

   The intended mix of students (L2-only or mixed L1/L2) also depends on the
institutional setting, as well on the goals of the program offering the course. There
are advantages to both options: In an L2-only course, for example, students feel
more confident expressing themselves in class. One GW student commented

                                                                                                343
Siczek and Shapiro

that L2 students "get more active in class when there are only international
students," and another offered a remark on the affective environment of the L2-
only class: "I think `international only' is good. This can be contradicted with
UW (university writing) because most of my friends don't say anything in that
class." However, one of the second language writers in the GW class made the
point that it would be valuable to have L1 students in the class as well "because
local students can share their views on global status of English." Another reason
to consider a mixed classroom is to reduce the stigma of segregation, since many
multilingual writers (particularly those who are US-educated) are resistant to
"ESL" labels (Ortmeier-Hooper, 2008). Although it can be difficult to address
all of the literacy needs present in a mixed class, the diversity of the student
population certainly enriches students' understanding of course material, as
well as their overall sense of institutional integration.

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS

   In this chapter, we have argued that the phenomenon of internationalization
presents new pedagogical opportunities within higher education. In order for
internationalization to have a transformative impact on students, however, a
global orientation must be integrated throughout the curriculum, and must be
linked to other institutional goals of diversity and inclusion. WAC and TESOL
have a great deal to offer to institutions seeking the integration of internation-
alization throughout the curriculum, because each has a historical commitment
to curricular innovation and inclusive pedagogy. Yet rarely do the two disciplines
have the opportunity to partner together in this regard. The writing-intensive
global English course is certainly not the only form such a partnership might
take, but it offers tremendous potential toward the goal of inclusion--not just
for students, but also for TESOL professionals. A course of this kind allows the
disciplines to work together as institutional allies, toward a more democratic
and globally-competent curriculum for all students.

REFERENCES

Atkinson, D., & Ramanathan, V. (1995). Cultures of writing: An ethnographic
   comparison of L1 and L2 university writing/language programs. TESOL
   Quarterly, 29, 539-568.

Braine, G. (1996). ESL students in first-year writing courses: ESL versus main-
   stream classes. Journal of Second Language Writing, 5(1), 91-107.

344
                                                                   Developing Writing-Intensive Courses

Blumenthal, A. J. (2002). English as a second language at the community col-
   lege: An exploration of contexts and concerns. New Directions for Commu-
   nity Colleges, 117, 45-53.

Canagarajah, A. S. (2006). Toward a writing pedagogy of shuttling between lan-
   guages: Learning from multilingual writers. College English, 68(6), 589-604.

Caruana, V. (2010). The relevance of the internationalised curriculum to gradu-
   ate capability. In E. Jones (Ed.), Internationalisation and the student voice:
   Higher education perspectives (pp. 30-43). New York/ London: Routledge.

Cox, M. (n.d.). WAC and second-language writing. WAC Clearinghouse. Re-
   trieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/slw/

The George Washington University (n.d.). Writing in the Disciplines. Retrieved
   from http://www.gwu.edu/~uwp/wid/wid-about.html

Gray, M. J., Rolph, E. S., & Melamid, E. (1996). Immigration and higher edu-
   cation: Institutional responses to changing demographics. Santa Monica, CA:
   RAND Corporation.

Hall, J. (2009). WAC/WID in the next America: Redefining professional iden-
   tity in the age of the multilingual majority. The WAC Journal, 20, 33-49.

Harklau, L. (1994). ESL and mainstream classes: Contrasting second language
   learning contexts. TESOL Quarterly, 28(2), 241-272.

Hunter, B., White, G., & Godbey, G. (2006). What does it mean to be globally
   competent? Journal of Studies in International Education, 10(3), 267-285.

Ignash, J. M. (1995). Encouraging ESL student persistence: The influence of
   policy on design. Community College Review, 23(3), 17-34.

Jones, E. & Killick, D. (2007). Internationalisation of the curriculum. In E.
   Jones & S. Brown (Eds.), Internationalising higher education (pp. 109-119).
   New York/ London: Routledge.

Leask, B. (2001). Bridging the gap: Internationalizing university curricula.
   Journal of Studies in International Education, 5(2), 100-115.

Leki, I. (2007). Undergraduates in a second language: Challenges and complexities
   of academic literacy development. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Matsuda, P. K. (1999). Composition Studies and ESL writing: A disciplinary
   division of labor. College Composition and Communication, 50(4), 699-721.

Matsuda, P. K. (2006). The myth of linguistic homogeneity in US college com-
   position. College English 68(6), 637-51.

Matsuda, P. K., & Jablonski, J. (2000). Beyond the L2 metaphor: Towards a
   mutually transformative model of ESL/WAC collaboration. Academic.Writ-
   ing, 1. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/aw/articles/matsuda_jablon-
   ski2000.htm

Middlebury College (n.d.) Middlebury's Mission Statement. Retrieved from
   http://www.middlebury.edu/about/mission

                                                                                                345
Siczek and Shapiro

Olson, C. L., & Kroeger, K. R. (2001). Global competency and intercultural
   sensitivity. Journal of Studies in International Education, 5, 116-137.

Ortmeier-Hooper, C. (2008). English may be my second language, but I'm not
   ESL. College Composition and Communication, 59(3), 389-419.

Roberge, M., Harklau, L., & Siegal, M. (2009). Generation 1.5 in college com-
   position: Teaching ESL to US-educated learners of ESL. New York: Routledge.

Shapiro, S. (2012). Stuck in the remedial rut: Confronting resistance to ESL
   curriculum reform. Journal of Basic Writing, 30(2), 24-52.

Shapiro, S. (2012). Citizens vs. aliens: How institutional policies construct lin-
   guistic minority students. In Y. Kanno & L. Harklau (Eds). Linguistic mi-
   nority students go to college: Preparation, access, and persistence (pp. 238-254).
   New York: Routledge.

Shapiro, S. (n.d.). Curriculum Vitae. Retrieved from http://shawnashapiro.com
Spack, R. (1988). Initiating ESL students into the academic discourse commu-

   nity: How far should we go? TESOL Quarterly, 22(1), 29-51.
Stromquist, N. P. (2007). Internationalization as a response to globalization:

   Radical shifts in university environments. Higher Education, 53(1), 81-105.
Taylor, J. (2004). Toward a strategy for internationalisation: Lessons and prac-

   tice from four universities. Journal of Studies In International Education, 8(2),
   149-171.
TESOL (2012). Position statement on academic and degree-granting credit for
   ESOL courses in postsecondary education. Retrieved from http://www.te-
   sol.org/docs/pdf/academic-credit-for-esl-in-postsecondary-institutions.
   pdf?sfvrsn=0
Van Gyn, G., Schuerholz-Lehr, S., Caws, C., & Preece, A. (2009). Education
   for world-mindedness: Beyond superficial notions of internationalization.
   In C. Kreber (Ed.), Internationalizing the curriculum in higher education (pp.
   25-38). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Van Meter, J. (1990). Academic credit for ESL classes? Review of Research in
   Developmental Education, 8(1), 2-6.
Williams, J. (1995). ESL composition program administration in the United
   States. Journal of Second Language Writing 4(2), 157-179.
Zawacki, T. M., & Cox, M. (2011). Introduction to WAC and second language
   writing. Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
   atd/ell/zawacki-cox.cfm

346
CHAPTER 14

GRADUATE WRITING
WORKSHOPS: CROSSING
LANGUAGES AND DISCIPLINES

Elaine Fredericksen and Kate Mangelsdorf
University of Texas at El Paso

A Graduate Writing Workshop aimed at graduate students from vari-
ous language backgrounds and disciplines is described. Taught in an
English Department by faculty with second-language writing back-
grounds, the workshop is structured around a student-created contract
that is sufficiently flexible to accommodate a wide range of students'
literacies. In the workshop, students work on writing required for their
degrees, such as research reports, theses, and dissertations. The results
of a survey of former students show that most students thought that
working with peers from different language backgrounds and academ-
ic fields was beneficial. Because the university is situated on the US-
Mexico border, most students are bilingual, which might have made
students more receptive to the multilingualism of the course. Sugges-
tions are given for developing a similar Graduate Writing Workshop
at other colleges and universities, particularly those in which most stu-
dents come from various language backgrounds.

   In addition to serving the needs of undergraduate students, WAC/WID
programs are increasingly playing a role in supporting graduate student writers,
who are becoming more diverse every year. The number of international
students enrolled in U. S. graduate schools jumped 11% from 2010-2011
(Fischer, 2011), and minority student graduate enrollment is increasing as well
(National Center, 2011). To serve these diverse populations effectively, WAC/
WID programs require resources, administrative support, and leadership, all
of which may be in short supply in under-resourced institutions. Because
our own university--the University of Texas at El Paso, or UTEP--has been
unable to sustain a WAC program, six years ago one of the authors of this
chapter, Mangelsdorf, who directed UTEP's Rhetoric and Composition PhD

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.14                         347
Fredericksen and Mangelsdorf

program, was asked by the dean of the UTEP Graduate School to develop a
writing course for graduate students across campus who needed assistance in
completing their research reports, theses, and dissertations. The other author of
this chapter, Fredericksen, has been the lead instructor for the course that was
developed, which is housed in the English department and which has, since
it was first offered, attracted English L1, L2, and bilingual students. In this
chapter, we describe this course, called the Graduate Writing Workshop, and,
using the results of a survey of former students who have taken the workshop,
we analyze the benefits and drawbacks of the course, focusing in particular on
the effectiveness of the course in offering writing instruction for students from
different language backgrounds and disciplines. Finally, we offer suggestions
for adapting this type of workshop course to other institutional settings,
particularly those with students who have a wide range of language proficiencies
and experiences.

GRADUATE WRITING WORKSHOP MODELS

   A writing course for graduate students from a variety of language backgrounds
and disciplines, with students who might range from new MA students to PhD
students writing dissertations, is challenging to develop and teach. Frodesen
(1995) has noted that such a course "must not only address writing needs across
disciplines; it must adapt to students' various stages of involvement in the
larger academic community and in their specific disciplines" (p. 333). Further,
the level of student engagement in such a course can be undermined if the
students are not given course credit toward their degree. Another challenge
of such a course can come from its location within the institution. A course
that is housed in the English Department, for instance, can be isolated from
students' disciplinary homes, especially if the university lacks a strong WAC/
WID program. This isolation can bolster the false notion that form and content
are separate: English teachers are responsible for how students write while
disciplinary faculty take care of what students write. Concerning writing in the
disciplines, however, Bazerman et al. (2005) argue that "students are aided most
by learning how to understand and participate in specific writing situations,
including learning and responding to the local criteria and expectations, as
well as strategically deploying task-relevant techniques" (p. 89). While we agree
that teaching writing within specific disciplinary contexts is preferable, such
a program was not on the horizon at our university. In this chapter we argue
that in certain contexts and with appropriate curricula, a writing course that
crosses disciplines and languages and that is taught by a writing specialist rather

348
                                                                             Graduate Writing Workshops

than a disciplinary insider, such as the writing workshop that we describe here,
can help students develop and improve as writers and raise their awareness of
language-related issues.

   When Mangelsdorf created and developed this course, she drew on
characteristics of successful English L1 and L2 graduate-level writing courses
both in the US and abroad. In several of the courses she looked at, students
studied genres of writing common to their various disciplines (Belcher, 2009;
Cargill, Cadman, & McGowan, 2001; Delyser, 2003; Dudley-Evans, 1995;
Swales & Lindemann, 2002), and some involved content-area faculty in the
writing course (Barratt, Hanlon, & Rankin, 2011; Dudley-Evans, 1995). Peer
review was a valuable component in many of the syllabi she used as models
(Belcher, 2009; Delyser, 2003; Dudley-Evans, 1995; Frodesen, 1995; Heinrich,
Neese, Rogers, & Farente, 2004; Steinert, McLeon, Liben & Snell, 2008). The
course she planned, based on these models, featured peer review groups who
were given time to work together at almost every class meeting (thus the name
of the course, Graduate Writing Workshop). Because the dean of the Graduate
School had emphasized that students needed help with their theses and
dissertations, she was also particularly focused on allowing students to work on
these projects in the course. She was also aware, however, that the course would
attract students just beginning their graduate studies, so, to accommodate the
different types of writing that students would be producing, she borrowed an
idea from a course described by Frodesen (1995), in which students were given
the flexibility of designing their own assignments. Following this model, she
decided that most of the course curriculum would originate from contracts that
students created at the beginning of the workshop in which they made their
own assignments and set their own deadlines (see Phillips [this volume] for a
description of a graduate writing course that became more effective when the
graduate student was permitted to develop a similar contract.) The flexibility
of the contract system would be especially useful for L2 students who needed
more time to write. As will be explained later, the contract system became a key
feature in the success of the workshop.

   UTEP's local context also played a role in the course design. UTEP is a
Research 1-aspirational university that draws much of its student body from
the El Paso, US/Ciudad Juarez, Mexico region. In fall 2011, 60% of degree-
seeking graduate students were Hispanic, 16% were White, 10% were Mexican
Internationals, and 7% were "other International" (University of Texas at El
Paso, 2012). Thus, the graduate student population is primarily Spanish-
English bilingual, though students also come from the Middle East, East Asia,
and China. While Mangelsdorf was unable to find a description of a graduate
writing course that blended L1 and L2 students, the bilingualism of UTEP's

                                                                                                349
Fredericksen and Mangelsdorf

student body made it impractical to offer separate different sections of the
workshop for L2 learners, or to separate L1 and L2 learners in the workshop
curriculum. This range of language orientations, which is becoming a norm
in many US universities (Hall, 2009), posed a challenge, however, because
instruction had to be sufficiently differentiated to meet students' various needs.
But the blended course also offered opportunities for students to communicate
with and learn from students with different language backgrounds. As we've
seen, the range and continuum of students' linguistic expertise, combined with
the range of disciplines that they represent, has given this writing workshop a
complexity and richness that, while challenging, has proven to be successful in
our university setting, as we'll explain, and can potentially serve as a model for
other institutions with multilingual graduate students with a variety of language
backgrounds and proficiencies. (As a model, this course includes many of the
pedagogical components of the year-long team-taught writing and language
courses offered in the more resource-intensive ACCESS and Bridge programs
that Mallett & Zgheib [this volume] describe.)

THE GRADUATE WRITING WORKSHOP CURRICULUM

   Our Graduate Writing Workshop (ENGL 5316), a 16-week course that
meets three hours a week, was developed in response to requests from the
Graduate School, as we noted. Students enroll voluntarily, though they are
often strongly encouraged by their faculty advisors, and receive three hours
of graduate credit that count toward financial aid but that won't count toward
degree credit. A standard grading system is used (A, B, etc.). Students can enroll
in the course as many times as they want, and they can take the course at any
time during their graduate studies. The course is structured so that students
typically complete writing projects in their degree programs, from course
assignments to theses and dissertations. Two sections of the course, capped at
15 students, are offered each semester.

   The instructors for the course are full-time faculty with PhDs in Rhetoric
and Composition and experience teaching second language writers. They
teach in UTEP's doctoral program in Rhetoric and Composition, which has
intercultural writing as one of its key focuses. At the time of this writing, all
but one of the faculty who have taught the course have been English-Spanish
bilingual or fluent Spanish speakers, a language background that is helpful but
not required. The faculty's disciplinary expertise enables them to ground the
course in rhetorical principles and research-based pedagogy, and their status
as full-time faculty helps to give them ethos when discussing the course with

350
                                                                             Graduate Writing Workshops

faculty across campus. The course counts as a regular part of the instructor's
course load and is subsidized by the English Department as part of its service
role in the university. Instructors are asked to follow the course curriculum and
assignments (see below), though they might make minor adjustments according
to their own preferences.

   Because Mangelsdorf wanted to pilot the workshop curricula before
handing the Graduate Writing Workshop over to other instructors, she taught
the workshop the first two semesters it was offered. Subsequently, Fredericksen
became the lead instructor for the workshop and over the years has refined the
workshop components based on student feedback, as we'll describe.

Workshop Components

   The different parts of the workshop include features frequently mentioned in
the published descriptions of similar courses, including an analysis of discipline-
specific writing, peer review sessions, mini-lessons, and final presentations and
portfolios. The two major innovations are the structure of the peer review
workshop and the student-created writing contracts.

Contracts and Evaluation

   To make the course structure flexible and individualized and to enable
students to communicate regularly with their major professor, the majority of
the semester's work is organized according to student-created contracts. In these
contracts (written during the first two weeks of the workshop), students specify
the writing that they will complete each week. The contracts are created in
consultation with students' major professors as well as the workshop instructor;
students are encouraged to continue communicating with their major professors
about their writing throughout the course. All of the writing comes from the
students' required projects in their different degree plans. In their contracts,
students explain the type of writing and the number of pages they will produce
weekly. Generally, they are encouraged to write at least five pages of original
text per week; at the same time, they revise work that has been commented on
by peers and the workshop instructor, resulting in a total of up to 20 pages of
writing weekly. Many students elect to increase the minimum goal, usually by
dividing the finished project (e.g. articles, thesis, dissertation) into relatively
equal parts spread out over the available class meetings. Students who are less
experienced writing in academic English often need more revision time, so in
their contracts they may specify that they will only produce two to four pages
early in the semester with the goal of writing more as their skills improve. The

                                                                                                351
Fredericksen and Mangelsdorf

student, the student's major professor, and the workshop instructor sign this
contract, which becomes the student's syllabus for the rest of the semester and is
posted on the course website for everyone to see. For some students who are just
beginning their graduate studies, the workshop instructor will act as the major
professor and help the student design an appropriate contract; for instance,
students might summarize a number of journal articles in their field (for more
on the role of summary-writing in L2 learning, see Du [this volume]). (See
Appendix A for the contract assignment sheet.)

   We'll note here that, because students' linguistic and rhetorical awareness
of academic genres and publications is essential to their success (Johns, 2002;
Swales & Feak, 2011), the one assignment that all students must complete at
the start of the workshop is an analysis of a major journal in their field and
an analysis of an article in that journal that can serve as a model for their own
writing. The journal and the article are treated as representative artifacts that can
reveal how knowledge is created, communicated, and valued in their discipline.
Topics covered are both broad (why the journal is important, what kinds of
evidence are used, what is assumed about the audience) and specific (the level
of style, the citation system, the organizational patterns). This analysis helps to
make explicit the discourse conventions in the students' academic disciplines.

   Students' course grades are based on successful completion of their self-
designed contracts and on the grade they receive for their analysis of scholarly
publications. In addition, they must attend class regularly, participate fully in
peer-review sessions, make a presentation, and submit a final portfolio, as we
explain further below.

Peer Review Workshop

   In several of the writing courses described in the literature (i.e., Cargill,
Cadman, & McGowan, 2001; Dudley-Evans, 1995; Frodesen, 1995),
instructors were concerned that students in multidisciplinary peer review groups
would not understand the content of their classmates' papers, and as a result the
feedback would be limited to surface-level writing issues. To work around this
problem, students in our course participate in two different peer review groups
throughout the semester, each of which is mixed linguistically. In "content"
peer review groups, three or four students in the same or a similar field focus
primarily on the ideas, evidence, format, organization, and coherence in the
writing. They are encouraged to consult with their major professors when they
disagree with a group member's suggestion or comment. After each content
peer review group session, they revise their writing and return the next class
period to work with a "proofreading" peer review group, comprising three

352
                                                                             Graduate Writing Workshops

or four students from different fields. These educated lay readers read these
drafts for surface errors, conciseness, parallelism, and other local concerns,
consulting with the workshop instructor when necessary. After the workshop,
students revise their work for a second time and hand in their drafts to the
course instructor, who provides the third reading. Students use the instructor
comments to make a final revision that will appear, along with other substantive
drafts, in the final portfolio. The portfolio draft is typically the one that goes to
the major professor and thesis/dissertation committee.

   This separation between "content" and "proofreading" in the peer review
groups is necessarily artificial, and students don't always separate their responses
in this way. While discussing the appropriateness of a certain feature in a
proofreading session, they might begin to discuss more conceptual issues.
For instance, a student who corrects the formation of the passive voice in a
classmate's paper might initiate a discussion among members of the group about
how different disciplines employ the passive voice in research reports. This kind
of discussion illustrates how writing workshops can lead students to greater
awareness of how discourse is embedded in particular rhetorical contexts.

   This three-step workshop structure (content peer review group, proofreading
peer review group, instructor review) ensures that each writer has a wide
audience. During each step of this process, students can accept the comments
they find useful and reject those they do not. Based on our observations of
the peer review sessions, we have found that the most productive peer review
structure is to require students to share their drafts online before each class
session. As a result, students come to class having read and commented on their
peers' writing and can thus spend the entire class session discussing, questioning,
and expanding on the comments. This hybrid format (online reviewing plus in-
class discussion) is especially helpful for students who are slower readers or who
want to take their time commenting.

Mini-lessons

   Almost every class day, the workshop instructor also conducts a mini-lesson,
which lasts anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes and precedes the peer review
sessions. The topics of mini-lessons change depending on the type of peer
review sessions the students will engage in, and most apply to all of the students
in the course, whether L1, L2, or bilingual. The mini-lessons are intended to
provide instruction at the point of need and enable students to immediately
apply what they have learned to their own (and their classmates') writing. For
example, on the days when the students will be in peer review groups that focus
on content, the lessons focus on issues related to writing in specific disciplines,

                                                                                                353
Fredericksen and Mangelsdorf

such as different types of claims, patterns of organization, forms of evidence,
documentation formats, and disciplinary lexicon, register, tone, and stance. On
the days when students will be participating in proofreading peer review groups,
the focus is typically on punctuation, grammar and usage, vocabulary, and
other more local considerations. When discussing parallelism and conciseness,
instructors take examples from students' writing. When topics are more specific
to L2 students, such as word order, verb tense, articles, and prepositions, native
English speakers learn more about the grammar of their own language and gain
a greater appreciation of the challenges of writing in an unfamiliar language.
When vocabulary is discussed, connections between languages are particularly
emphasized as is the reality of world Englishes and how languages change
according to particular contexts. (Students read about World Englishes in the
handbook used in the course, Raimes and Jerskey's Universal Keys for Writers.)
Thus while students are improving their ability to use standard written English,
they are also becoming more aware that languages are always developing and
changing.

Presentations and Portfolios

   During the last week or so of the semester, students make oral presentations,
supported by slides and handouts, about their class experience. They give a brief
synopsis of the completed segments of their projects, present their electronic
or paper portfolios for class perusal, and talk about their perceived progress
as writers. The presentations are not graded, but do include questions and
comments from the audience. These serve as invention material for the self-
reflection statements that are included in the end-of-semester portfolios.

   The portfolios, not graded but required for successful completion of the
course, may be electronic or paper. They include the contract, the journal
analysis, and all sections of the project that have been worked on in class,
both final drafts and substantive preliminary drafts with peer and instructor
comments. Perhaps the most important item in the final portfolio, however, is
the self-reflection letter. Here students write about themselves as writers, rather
than as scientists, engineers, artists, accountants, and so on. Many students
comment that reading papers written by their classmates in a variety of fields
made them more conscious of how each field has its own way of creating and
communicating knowledge. Students often refer to the frequent discussions
about language and culture in the workshop; these discussions appear to
help the L2 students in particular become more motivated and write with
greater confidence. (The survey results that we give in the next section of this
chapter provide a fuller explanation of this point.) This rhetorical awareness

354
                                                                             Graduate Writing Workshops

of language, audience, purpose, and context is one benefit of a course with a
range of languages and disciplines represented; this mix can help give students
the rhetorical flexibility and awareness that they will need as they "shuttle"
(Canagarajah, 2006) between the languages and discourse communities that
they will encounter.

   The purpose of these different course components--the students' individual
writing contracts, the journal and article analysis, the two types of peer review
sessions, the mini-lessons, and the presentation, portfolio, and reflection--
is to give students ample writing support and feedback, while at the same
time accommodating the students' varied language backgrounds and making
language difference an asset. The survey results, explained below, suggest that
for the most part this goal has been achieved.

CROSSING LANGUAGES AND
DISCIPLINES: A STUDENT SURVEY

   Because enrollment was strong in this writing workshop, we believed the
course appeared to meet the needs of students. However, every semester a few
students missed too many classes. While the most common reasons for absences
were either personal (such as illness) or professional (a professional conference
to attend), we wanted to make sure that students found the workshop beneficial
to attend. Student input would also help us to continue improving the course
design, particularly as it pertained to the mixing of language backgrounds
and disciplinary specialties within the same class. Using SurveyMonkey, we
designed an 18-item survey (see Appendix B) that asked students about the
course as well as gathered information about their fields of study and languages.
Before distributing the survey, we piloted it by asking several students to take it
and make suggestions for revision. Then, we emailed 71 former students to ask
them to complete the survey; of these, 27 answered for a response rate of 28%.
For the most part, the respondents were students who had taken the course
most recently, in the last couple of semesters.

   In this section, we focus on the survey results as they pertain to two
fundamental characteristics of the workshop, the mixing of languages and
disciplines. The 27 students who responded to the survey represented a cross-
section of disciplines, with Engineering (6), Health Science (5), and Science (4)
being the most common. Seventeen of the students were enrolled in doctoral
programs and10 in master's programs. The students' self-reported language
backgrounds reflected UTEP's location on the US-Mexico border to some
extent. A slim majority of students (17 or 66%) self-reported as proficient in

                                                                                                355
Fredericksen and Mangelsdorf

speaking and writing in English and Spanish. Other languages represented by
the students were Nepali, Hindi, Thai, and Telugu. When asked their countries
of origin, eleven students indicated Mexico, eight said they were from the US,
and the other students listed Nepal (2), India (2), Cuba (1), and Thailand (1).
Only one student self-identified as monolingual English.

Survey Results: Crossing Languages

   Because the mix of bilingual and monolingual speakers with English L2
speakers in the course is unique, we wanted to know the students' views about
how well this mix worked for them. We asked, "Tell us your thoughts about
working with students who had different language backgrounds. To what extent,
if any, did this benefit you?" Twenty-three students had entirely positive views
about working with linguistically diverse writers; three had some positive and
some negative perspectives; and two were entirely negative about the experience.

   The students who had only positive comments on this question wrote that
working with students from a variety of language backgrounds helped them
learn aspects of English that they could apply to their own writing, increased
their metalinguistic awareness, improved their oral comprehension of English,
and enhanced their appreciation of multiculturalism/multilingualism. Here are
some sample responses from students who described themselves as Spanish-
English bilingual:

         I found myself meeting and talking to people with the same
         language issues as me, and helping each other in finding the
         correct words or order.

         I need to hear accented Englishes more (that are different
         from Spanish).

         It was supportive, enhanced the multicultural setting of
         UTEP, and my learning experience too.

         This interaction helps in identifying other languages' writing
         styles.

We speculate that these bilingual English-Spanish students might have been
more open about linguistic diversity because at UTEP and in the community at
large, bilingualism is the norm. Almost half of UTEP's entering students report
that they are equally comfortable speaking Spanish and English.

356
                                                                             Graduate Writing Workshops

   The two students who expressed problems with working with students
from different language backgrounds focused on the time that it took them
to read and comment on their fellow students' writing. These students, who
spoke neither English nor Spanish as a first language, also expressed a strong
preference for working with native English speakers:

         A mix of students helps, but there should be enough English
         native speakers to help students whose first language is other
         than English.

         As an ESL student it is better to work with monolingual
         students because sometimes I doubt other ESL students'
         corrections.

The assumption in these two comments is that native English speakers are
better able to help writers edit their work, an example of what Kubota and Lin
(2006), among others, have called "native speakerism." This assumption can
occur even though non-native English speakers may have had more preparation
and experience writing standard academic English than their native English-
speaking counterparts (see Phillips [this volume] for an example of this dynamic
in group work assigned at the graduate level). Perhaps these students were not
as open to learning from students with different language backgrounds because
they were not in the bilingual mainstream at UTEP.

   Because so few students had negative responses to this question, we believe
that the multilingual course approach is valuable. Throughout the course,
instructors emphasize the value of multilingualism, in particular in mini-
lessons that focus on correcting surface errors. For instance, when everyone
in the workshop recognizes that in and on both translate to en in Spanish,
they realize why native Spanish speakers have trouble with these prepositions.
When everyone knows that articles seldom appear in Asian languages, they
see the need to help native speakers of these languages use articles in English.
Awareness of difference not only made the workshop proceed more smoothly, it
also strengthened classroom relationships.

Survey Results: Concerns about Standard English Correctness

   While students clearly valued the variety of language backgrounds in the
workshop, the survey also revealed a persistent concern with writing correct
academic English. In a question about the classroom activities that students
found most helpful to them, the four most frequent responses were the

                                                                                                357
Fredericksen and Mangelsdorf

proofreading peer review groups, the grammar lessons, the vocabulary exercises,
and the punctuation practice. Similarly, in a question concerning how students
thought their writing had improved, the two most common responses were: "I
know more about correcting errors" and "I make fewer errors in my writing."
When we asked students "What recommendations do you have for improving
English 5316?", the most frequent recommendation was for the course to
include more lessons in grammar, vocabulary, and punctuation--this despite
the fact that almost all students reported that their proficiency with surface-
level correctness had improved as a result of the course.

   Pressures to produce error-free writing (from a U.S perspective) are still
extremely powerful both in the US in general and in the academy in particular,
despite the fact that non-native English speakers outnumber native English
speakers at least three to one worldwide (Crystal, 2003). For example, Thaiss and
Zawacki's (2006) results from a faculty and student survey found that faculty
valued grammatical correctness, some of them emphatically. The students they
studied "gave no evidence of resisting this expectation" (p. 132). Grammatical
correctness is often associated with positive attributes such as paying attention
to detail, a view expressed in a recent article in the Harvard Business Review
titled "I Won't Hire People Who Use Poor Grammar. Here's Why" (Wiens,
2012). Many studies (i.e., Fredericksen, 2006) indicate that spoken accents and
accented writing (such as the misuse of prepositions or omission of articles)
create problems for bilingual and L2 speakers when they apply for jobs, present
papers at conferences, or teach in the US.

   We have found that workshop discussions often function as a release valve for
students to express their anxieties about language. Because language insecurities
of some kind affect almost all language users whether English L2, bilingual,
or English L1, these discussions tended to make the workshop students more
supportive of each other. For instance, in one peer review group session, they
complained about professors who told them they use too many commas, or not
enough commas, or to never use commas at all. Teaching assistants in the course
talked about freshmen who say that their accents are too thick. And all shared
ideas about how to alleviate nervousness when giving presentations. They often
requested mini-lessons on usage topics, such as the difference between effect and
affect, that concern students from all language backgrounds.

Survey Results: Crossing Disciplines

   As we noted, students in this Graduate Writing Workshop come from a
variety of academic fields, and they spend much of their class time interacting
with peers outside of their own disciplines. To discover the usefulness of these

358
                                                                             Graduate Writing Workshops

interactions, we asked: "What are your thoughts about working with students
in different fields? To what extent, if any, did this benefit you?" Twenty-three
respondents had positive comments in regard to working with students from
various disciplines; three had mixed reactions.

   The many students who said that they liked this aspect of the course
wrote that working with students in a variety of fields taught them about
other disciplines, increased their awareness of different discourse conventions,
improved their reading and vocabulary, and helped them write more clearly:

         A multidisciplinary approach not only increased my
         vocabulary, but also my knowledge of other fields.

         It helps students write in a style easy to understand for
         everyone.

         Working with students outside my discipline made me more
         aware of audience differences and writing style preferences
         across disciplines. I began to pay more attention to stylistic
         matters that I had typically shrugged off as being "just my
         way of writing."

Our students' responses to the mixture of disciplines were similar to the positive
reactions by students in the graduate writing courses taught by Dudley-Evans
(1995), Frodesen (1995), and Norris & Tardy (2006), who also found that
working with peers from other fields can help students understand that there is
no single way to conduct research or communicate knowledge.

   We do acknowledge, however, that a generalist writing workshop cannot
accomplish what writing instruction within a student's discipline can accomplish
even when the course instructor seeks assistance from the students' faculty
advisors. For instance, the workshop instructor can describe only in a general
way the different sections of a research report, while understanding, at the same
time, that there is no single research report genre as the genre is shaped by the
actions it performs within a particular disciplinary context. So, while working
across disciplines can add to students' general rhetorical awareness, they still
need instruction and feedback within their own disciplinary communities. We
tried to accomplish this instruction in the content peer review groups, in which
students from the same or similar disciplines were grouped together. These groups
were not entirely successful, however; as one survey student noted, "Content
groups often did not catch content errors." Depending on who registered for
the workshop, a few of the content groups also lacked disciplinary cohesiveness.

                                                                                                359
Fredericksen and Mangelsdorf

Even in mixed disciplinary groups, however, the feedback could still be helpful.
In one class, for example, a group of students from communication, teacher
education, and rhetoric and communication engaged in conversations on topics
such as the difficulties of conducting qualitative research, the IRB process they
each experienced, and the traditional IMRAD (Introduction, Methods, Results
and Discussion) report format.

Survey Implications

   As we've indicated, the survey elicited primarily positive responses from the
students regarding the multilingual and multidisciplinary aspects of the course.
Overall satisfaction was high as well; when asked if they would recommend
the course to another student, all of the students reported that they would. In
particular, the overall satisfaction with the multilingual aspect of the course--
the wide range of students' language proficiencies and backgrounds--was a
pleasant surprise given that a clear demarcation between L1 and L2 students
usually exists in higher education (Matsuda, 2006). What facilitated this
successful mixture of students from different language backgrounds?

   No doubt part of this success was that at UTEP, Spanish-English bilingualism
is the norm. As the demographics of our survey indicated, a little over half of the
students surveyed self-identified as bilingual, which accords with the UTEP's
student body as a whole. A smaller but still sizeable percentage of students
self-identify as Spanish dominant, with monolingual English speakers a clear
minority. And, as mentioned earlier, all but one of the workshop instructors has
been either Spanish-English bilingual or a fluent Spanish speaker. The faculty's
personal understanding of the challenges of learning academic English has
added to the overall openness about language differences that has permeated
the course.

   We believe that the structure of the course, in particular the contract system,
also has contributed to the workshop's effectiveness regarding the range of
student language backgrounds. In the survey, we included a question about
the effectiveness of the contracts that students created in which they set their
own assignments and deadlines. The responses to the contracts were almost
uniformly positive. To the open-ended question, "What did you think of
the contract grading system in which you decided on the projects you would
complete for the course?" Twenty-four of the 27 students gave entirely positive
responses that often focused on how the contracts helped the students with
time management. We suggest that a contract system might be particularly
helpful for students less experienced with writing in academic English than
their peers. Leki's (2007) case studies of L2 writing students, for example,

360
                                                                             Graduate Writing Workshops

documented the students' struggles to meet deadlines more appropriate for L1
students. The contracts gave all students both flexibility and a sense of control
over their writing development. (For further evidence of the importance of
allowing multilingual graduate students develop their own plan for graduate
writing seminars, see Phillips [this volume]).

ESSENTIAL COMPONENTS OF OUR
COURSE AS A MODEL FOR OTHERS

   The sustained popularity of the Graduate Writing Workshop, the number
of students who choose to repeat it, and the students' positive comments
about the course in our survey, albeit based on a relatively small response rate,
demonstrate that such a course can be valuable in helping graduate students
from a variety of language backgrounds and disciplines develop as writers. In
particular, our survey suggests that a flexible and individualized contract system,
combined with structured peer review sessions, can give students from different
language backgrounds the time and feedback necessary for them to progress.
The workshop also addresses students' anxieties about not being able to write
"correctly"--an important part of helping students gain the linguistic capital
they need to feel confident enough to succeed in their disciplines.

   We believe that this workshop model can be adapted for other institutional
contexts, in particular institutions with a significant number of bilingual and
multilingual graduate students. Based on our own experiences, we suggest the
following as essential components of such a course, including the first in this list
that we would do were able to revisit the planning phase of our course.

   1. Make systematic connections to disciplinary faculty. When the
Graduate Writing Workshop was in the planning stages, several faculty across
campus were contacted informally for their suggestions. However, connections
with these faculty were not systematically maintained, and as a result feedback
from faculty across campus has been sporadic. In order to maintain faculty input
and support, we recommend that early in the planning stages, faculty across the
disciplines who have voiced concerns about student writing be invited to join a
committee that will assist in gaining institutional buy-in, designing the course
curriculum, and assessing the course's effectiveness for graduate writers. These
faculty will also likely be the ones to suggest the course to their students, which
will help facilitate communication between the workshop instructor, students,
and supervising professors.

   2. Ensure that course instructors understand language acquisition
and appreciate language differences. While it is not necessary that course

                                                                                                361
Fredericksen and Mangelsdorf

instructors be L2 or bilingual writers themselves, it is important that they know
the challenges of acquiring standard academic English and view multilingualism
as an asset to the overall learning in the course.

   3. Structure the course around student-created contracts. Organizing the
writing course around student-written contracts can ensure that students are
producing writing that is part of their degree plans. The contracts also give
more time to students who are less experienced writing in English, help to
promote time management, and allow students to feel more in control of their
writing progress. This individualized course structure can be especially effective
for students with a wide range of language backgrounds and proficiencies.

   4. Provide students with the linguistic capital that they need to succeed
in their graduate programs. Give students the instruction and resources they
want to feel competent in producing correct standard language forms. At the
same time, allow students to express their anxieties about writing "correctly"
and point out that language differences and varieties are strengths rather than
weaknesses.

   Traditionally, graduate students have not been a major part of WAC and WID
programs despite the rising number of graduate students in higher education
in the US who need writing support. A multilingual and multidisciplinary
graduate writing course, such as the Graduate Writing Workshop that we have
described in this chapter, can close this gap by offering writing instruction
that can help a variety of students in a setting that affirms and values language
diversity.

REFERENCES

Barratt, C., Hanlon, D., & Rankin, M. (2011). Assessing the success of a disci-
   pline-based communication skills development and enhancement program
   in a graduate accounting course. Higher Education Research & Development
   30, 681-695. doi: 10.1080/07294360.2010.527929

Bazerman, C., Little, J., Bethel, L., Chavkin, T., Fouquette, D., & Garufis, J.
   (2005). Reference guide to writing across the curriculum. West Lafayette, IN:
   Parlor Press and WAC Clearinghouse. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.
   edu/books/bazerman_wac/

Belcher, W. L. (2009). Reflections on ten years of teaching writing for publica-
   tion to graduate students and junior faculty. Journal of Scholarly Publishing,
   40, 184-200. doi: 10.3138/jsp.40.2.184

Canagarajah, A. S. (2006). Toward a writing pedagogy of shuttling between
   languages: Learning from multilingual writers. College English, 68, 589-604.

362
                                                                             Graduate Writing Workshops

Cargill, M., Cadman, K., & McGowan, U. (2001). Postgraduate writing:
   Using intersecting genres in a collaborative, content-based program. In I.
   Leki (Ed.), Academic writing programs (pp. 85-96). Alexandria, VA: TE-
   SOL.

Crystal, D. (2003). English as a global language (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cam-
   bridge University Press.

Delyser, D. (2003). Teaching graduate students to write: A seminar for thesis
   and dissertation writers. Journal of Geography in Higher Education, 27, 169-
   181. doi: 10.1080/0309026032000107487

Dudley-Evans, T. (1995). Common-core and specific approaches to the teach-
   ing of academic writing. In D. Belcher & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing
   in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy (pp. 293-312). Nor-
   wood, NJ: Ablex.

Fischer, K. (2011). Admissions offers to foreign students at US graduate schools
   climb at a faster pace. Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from http://
   chronicle.com/article/Admissions-Offers-to-Foreign/28700

Fredericksen, E. (2006). Educating a multilingual professional workforce: A
   progressive vision. Professional studies review: An interdisciplinary journal,
   2(2), 27-35.

Frodesen, J. (1995). Negotiating the syllabus: A learning-centered, interactive
   approach to ESL graduate writing course design. In D. Belcher & G. Braine
   (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy
   (pp. 331-350). Norwood, NJ: Albex.

Hall, J. (2009). WAC-WID in the next America: Redefining professional iden-
   tity in the age of the multilingual majority. WAC Journal, 20, 33-49. Re-
   trieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/journal/vol18/index.htm

Heinrich, K. T., Neese, R., Rogers, D., & Facente, A. C. (2004). Turn accusa-
   tions into affirmations: Transform nurses into published authors. Nursing
   Education Perspectives, 25, 139-145.

Johns, A. M. (2002). Destabilizing and enriching novice students' genre theo-
   ries. In A. M. Johns (Ed.), Genre in the classroom: Multiple perspectives (pp.
   237-246). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Kubota, R., & Lin, A. (2009). Race, culture, and identities in second language
   education: Introduction to research and practice. In R. Kubota & A. Lin
   (Eds.), Race, culture, and identities in second language education: Exploring
   critically engaged practice (pp. 1-23). New York: Routledge.

Leki, I. (2007). Undergraduates in a second language: Challenges and complexities
   of academic literacy development. New York: Erlbaum.

Matsuda, P. K. (2006). The myth of linguistic homogeneity in US college com-
   position. College English, 68, 637-651.

                                                                                                363
Fredericksen and Mangelsdorf

National Center for Education Statistics. (2011). Degrees conferred by sex and
   race (Data file). Retrieved from http://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=72

Norris, C. & Tardy, C. (2006). Institutional politics in the teaching of advanced
   academic writing: A teacher-researcher dialogue. In P. K. Matsuda, C. Ort-
   meier-Hooper, & X. You (Eds.), The politics of second language writing: In
   search of the promised land (pp. 262-279). West Layfayette, IN: Parlor Press.

Raimes, A. & Jerskey, M. (2009). Universal keys for writers (2nd ed.). Boston,
   MA: Wadsworth.

Steinert, Y., McLeod, P., Liben, S., & Snell, L. (2008). Writing for pub-
   lication in medical education: The benefits of a faculty development
   workshop and peer writing group. Medical Teacher, 30, 280-285. doi:
   10.1080/01421590802337120

Swales, J. M. & Feak, C. B. (2011). Navigating academia: Writing supporting
   genres. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Swales, J. M. & Lindemann, S. (2002). Teaching the literature review to in-
   ternational graduate students. In A. M. Johns (Ed.), Genre in the classroom:
   Multiple perspectives (pp. 105-199). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Thaiss, C. & Zawacki, T. M. (2006). Engaged writers, dynamic disciplines: Re-
   search on the academic writing life. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

University of Texas at El Paso Center for Evaluation and Institutional Research.
   (2012). Enrollment by gender and ethnicity. Retrieved from http://cierpdata.
   utep.edu/OnlineFactBook/FAC_Enroll_EthGender.aspx

Wiens, K. (2012). I won't hire people who use poor grammar. Here's why.
   Harvard Business Review. Retrieved from http://blogs.hbr.org/cs/2012/07/i_
   wont_hire_people_who_use_poo.html

APPENDIX A

Course Contract

   For English 5316, you will design most of your writing assignments. You
will list these assignments along with due dates in a contract that you will cre-
ate. In this contract, you will spell out what you are assigning yourself to do
each week. Unless I tell you otherwise, you must produce at least five pages
a week. This is to help you write continuously and without procrastination;
substantive revisions count toward that five page count, so you might turn in a
five page revision one week of the same content you submitted the week before.
Your documents should be word-processed, using 12 point font, and standard
1-1 1/2 inch margins.

364
                                                                             Graduate Writing Workshops

   You will produce two copies of your contract, with the same assignments
but addressed to two different readers.

   Contract I: For your major professor to sign. This is an agreement between
   you and that professor outlining what you hope to accomplish this semester.
   Contract II: For your English 5316 writing team members and professor.
   This contract will be signed by team members and by me and will help us
   ensure that you stay on track.
   You will turn in a copy of both contracts to me and will upload a copy of
your contract to Blackboard by ____.
   Please do not give a copy to your major professor until I have approved it.
   Your writing assignments should be based on what you want to accomplish
this semester. For example, if your goal is to revise your thesis/dissertation, then
you will assign yourself ten or more pages of revision a week. If your goal is to
write a journal article for publication, then you'll assign yourself part of the
article to draft (or revise) each week. If you are new to your field, you might
want to work on summarizing and analyzing journal articles, so your contract
assignment could be to summarize several articles a week or write one analysis
a week. If you are doing research, you might choose to prepare an annotated
bibliography and a literature review.
   Your contract should include opportunities for you to write and rewrite
(revise, proofread, and edit). Challenge yourself when you design your contract.
Know that the harder the work, the more you will gain from the experience.
If you need to adjust your contract later in the semester, you may do so by
discussing revision with me and then submitting a revised contract to me and
your team members. You do not have to resubmit the revision to your major
professor.
   At the end of the semester, you will compile your finished work into a port-
folio and present all or a portion of your portfolio to the class. Your portfolio
will include all of your contract assignments plus all of the prewriting, drafting,
revising, and editing you do in the course of the semester. You may produce
either a paper portfolio or an e춑ortfolio--or some combination of the two. You
will have models of each form to use as guidelines, but you are free to innovate
as well.

APPENDIX B

Student Survey

   Thank you for agreeing to answer these questions about English 5316,
Graduate Writing Workshop. Your answers will help us describe this course to

                                                                                                365
Fredericksen and Mangelsdorf

other students and faculty around the country. As a result, other universities
may begin offering their own Graduate Writing Workshops.

  1. What degree are you seeking at UTEP?
  2. What is your major field of study at UTEP?
  3. How many times have you taken English 5316: Graduate Writing

       Workshop?
   In the following questions, please give us feedback about this course.
  4. What did you think of the contract grading system in which you decided

       on the projects you would complete for the course?
  5. What classroom activities were useful to you? Check all that apply.

         Content peer review groups
         Proofreading peer review groups
         Journal analysis
         Vocabulary exercises
         Punctuation practice
         Grammar lessons
         Readings on style differences in various fields
         Readings about World Englishes
  6. If there were other activities that you found useful that were not men-
       tioned in the previous question, please list them here.
  7. What are your thoughts about working with students in different fields?
       To what extent, if any, did this benefit you?
  8. Tell us your thoughts about working with students who had different
       language backgrounds (some monolingual English, some who learned
       English as a second language, and so on). To what extent, if any, did this
       benefit you?.
  9. What improvements, if any, did you see in your writing as a result of
       English 5316? Choose all that apply.
         I have a better understanding of the types of writing done in my

            field.
         I know more about what my audience expects from my writing.
         I improved my ability to understand academic material in English
         I can organize my writing better.
         I know more about how to discover and gather ideas.
         I know more about how to revise my ideas.
         I can do a better job of giving feedback on my peers' writing.
         I have a better vocabulary.
         I make fewer errors in my writing.
         I know more about how to correct errors in my writing.

366
                                                                         Graduate Writing Workshops

10. If there were other improvements in your writing that weren't listed in
    the previous question, please list them here.

11. What drawbacks, if any, did you find with English 5316?
12. What recommendations do you have for improving English 5316?
13. Would you recommend English 5316 to another student?

      Yes
      No
      Don't know
14. What is your language background? Choose all that apply.
      I am monolingual English.
      I can speak in two languages (including English).
      I can speak in more than two languages (including English).
      I can write in more than two languages (including English).
15. In addition to English, what other languages do you know?
16. Do you consider yourself totally bilingual in two languages? If so, which
    languages?
17. What is your country of origin?
18. How long have you been in the US?
    Thank you for helping us with this project!

                                                                                             367
CHAPTER 15

TEACHING WRITING IN A
GLOBALLY NETWORKED
LEARNING ENVIRONMENT
(GNLE): DIVERSE STUDENTS AT A
DISTANCE

Jennifer Lynn Craig
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

As institutions of higher education strive for global outreach and in-
novative distance technologies make that mandate feasible, globally
networked learning environments (GNLE) increasingly enroll linguis-
tically and culturally diverse students in university courses in which
the ability to write in advanced disciplinary English is necessary for
their success. However, this expectation is often difficult for diverse stu-
dents to meet, especially when their learning takes place in a distance
environment. In this case study, data is presented from three cohorts
of linguistically and culturally diverse graduate students who partici-
pated in seminars held in a distance environment. The seminars were
designed to help students to successfully complete their master's theses in
engineering manufacturing at the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy (MIT) in Cambridge, Massachusetts. A writing-across-the-curric-
ulum (WAC) pedagogical approach was deemed "very useful" although
student data revealed students' initial lack of familiarity with WAC
strategies as well as their persistent difficulties with grammar, syntax,
usage, and organization. This chapter suggests that there is an oppor-
tunity for writing specialists to expand writing pedagogy in ways that
include the rich linguistic and cultural presence of diverse students, ad-
dress a full range of L2 writing challenges, and when required, mini-
mize the effects of distance technology on student learning.

   The Singapore-MIT Alliance, established in 1998, is a globally networked
learning environment (GNLE) enabled by digital technology, and within that

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.15                            369
Craig

environment, several educational collaborations have taken place. The Master
of Engineering in Manufacturing degree (M.Eng) was one such collaboration
between the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), the National
University of Singapore (NUS), and Nanyang Technical University (NTU).1
In this one-year graduate program, international students came to MIT for a
semester to begin their graduate coursework and then returned to Singapore
to continue their coursework over synchronous video while also completing
a research internship in a manufacturing company in Singapore. Throughout
the M.Eng graduate program, students used synchronous and asynchronous
distance technology to interact with their MIT faculty, faculty in Singapore,
their internship project advisors, and other groups of students.

   The M.Eng (2000-2010) program illustrates a noteworthy characteristic of
GNLEs. In contrast to a traditional distance education model in which academic
material is packaged and then streamed from a source to a distant classroom
or perhaps accessed asynchronously through academic websites, GNLEs are
interactive cyberspaces that use technology to initiate and facilitate participation
and collaboration between education, research, and industry partners in a
globalized context. While globalization itself may be a contested term, Starke-
Meyerring (2010) provides a useful working definition: "the increasing
interdependence and integration of social, political, cultural, and economic
processes across local, national, regional, and global levels" (p. 261). In a GNLE,
students are linked in meaningful ways to peers, instructors, industry professionals,
and to communities from diverse contexts in order to share knowledge making
practices across borders (Starke-Meyerring, 2010). Rather than an export
model of learning, GNLEs tend to be multi-faceted environments in which "a
constellation of social and cultural factors" creates not only opportunities for
research, education and collaboration but also opportunities for language and
literacy development (Hawisher, Selfe, Guo & Liu, 2006).

   In fact, language is central to successful participation in a GNLE precisely
because the globalized environment requires such "an unprecedented level of
interaction between individuals from diverse language and cultural backgrounds"
(Melton, 2008, p. 185). In addition, language (written and oral) in a GNLE is
likely to be disciplinary in its content and to include a range of genres, audiences,
and contexts as well as a full spectrum of second language (L2) challenges to
be addressed. Clearly, a GNLE with its diverse students and their multiple
objectives is a learning environment in which writing specialists and English
language teachers are essential to student success. But a key question is what
writing pedagogy is effective in the GNLE environment? What commonly held
assumptions about teaching writing must be examined and modified in order to
successfully teach with writing in a distance environment with diverse students?

370
                                                                            Diverse Students at a Distance

   In this teacher-based research, I describe the challenges encountered in the
Singapore-MIT GNLE as I used WAC pedagogy to help students to complete
their master's theses in engineering manufacturing. I present data from student
surveys that allowed me to understand student responses to the WAC pedagogy
used in the GNLE classroom, and that helped me to minimize the combined
effects of distance technology and linguistic and cultural diversity. In closing, I
reflect on the ways in which my teaching practices were modified as a result of
my cumulative experience in the distance classroom and the increased awareness
of my previously unexamined assumptions.

WRITING THE M.ENG THESIS IN
THE SINGAPORE-MIT GNLE

   My work with the students in the M.Eng program began in 2008 at the
request of the M.Eng program directors. They and the thesis advisors were
dissatisfied by the quality of the theses that the students submitted. According
to the engineering faculty's assessment, the documents were characterized by
multiple, significant errors that ranged from rhetorical and organizational
problems to sentence-level errors. There were semester-long English as a Second
Language (ESL) courses offered by MIT's Department of Foreign Languages and
Literature in which students could enroll during their semester in Cambridge.
However, although these courses focused on writing and oral presentation, the
courses were judged by most students to be either too long or not sufficiently
focused on thesis preparation to meet their needs. Also, since these courses did
not count toward the coursework in their fast-paced degree program, students
were reluctant to enroll. (See Fredericksen & Mangelsdorf 's [this volume]
description of the graduate writing course they developed to address these kinds
of challenges.) In addition, M.Eng students usually did not avail themselves
of the services of the MIT Writing and Communication Center. When the
students returned to Singapore, there were no writing support services available
to them at NTU. Thus, each year, many student theses required substantial
faculty editing and hasty student revision before the documents were acceptable
for submission. Not surprisingly, this process was very stressful both for the
students and for their advisors.

   The factors contributing to the students' difficulties in writing their theses
were multiple. First, some of the contributing factors were systemic. The
pace of the one-year degree program and internship was rapid with students
completing their research at their internship company in Singapore even as they
were attempting to analyze data and also to write about it.

                                                                                                371
Craig

   In addition, there was no stable writing process in place that led to thesis
preparation; frequently, the advisors were receiving a first draft of the thesis very
late in the summer and only days before the document had to be submitted
for acceptance. The reasons for this delay varied. Without a structured pace,
many students left the writing task until the last minute. From the advisors'
perspective, some were preoccupied with their own research and travel while
other advisors reportedly did not want to look at the material until the student's
research was "complete." Several advisors appeared to track student progress
through the oral progress report meetings, a practice that often gave them an
illusory sense of how well written the thesis would be. Also, several advisors
persisted in the belief that writing the thesis was a simple transcription of reality
("just write down what you did!") rather than perceiving the rhetorical and
organizational challenges of this task. Lastly, a few advisors were themselves
multicultural and multilingual and thus their guidance on thesis preparation
varied, confusing students whose peers were receiving different instructions.

   Another factor that complicated the thesis writing task was the composition
of the M.Eng cohorts in those years. Most of the students were from Asian
countries, and many of them reported that they were non-native speakers
of English (in 2008, 80%; in 2009, 100% and in 2010, 82%). They were
academically-gifted, high-achieving students, and most of them spoke English
at an advanced level. However, they were unfamiliar with the genre of the US-
based thesis and particularly with the way the M.Eng thesis was written. Given
the high percentage of students writing under pressure in a second or other
language, it was not surprising that the results were often poorly organized and
full of errors.

   Although MIT has a highly successful WAC program at the undergraduate
level, there is no similarly comprehensive approach to writing at the graduate
level. However, because of my familiarity with L2 writing issues, my experience
using WAC pedagogy with engineering students, and my willingness to teach
with distance technology, I was asked (independent of my role with the MIT's
undergraduate program) to develop resources to help the M.Eng students
improve the quality of their theses.

The M.Eng Thesis Writing Seminar

   Writing-across-the-curriculum pedagogy relies on several fundamental
practices: a draft and revision process, short and targeted instruction, the use of
writing conferences and peer review, and the use of writing-to-learn activities
that help students discover ideas, learn material, and strengthen critical
thinking. Thus in developing the thesis writing seminar, I incorporated these

372
                                                                            Diverse Students at a Distance

common WAC strategies, establishing a writing process that helped students
write and revise their theses in two stages. Using synchronous video technology
in a classroom at MIT, I facilitated three 3-hour seminars in which I gave brief
lectures about the thesis genre followed by writing workshop activities and peer
review sessions. After the second seminar, each student submitted the first half
of his/her thesis that I read and commented upon. With synchronous video, I
held writing conferences to discuss my comments and answer their questions.
Then after the third seminar, students submitted a revised first half of their thesis
along with the second half of their thesis. Again, each student received written
comments on the draft, and writing conferences were held over synchronous
video. Students then incorporated my comments into a revised draft that went
to their advisors for technical review. Based on the advisor's comments, final
revisions were made. Subsequently, when I again taught in the M.Eng program
in 2009 and 2010, I held team writing conferences because I had discovered
that students had many issues in common and also that students who were less
confident writers seemed to benefit from the support of their peers. All writing
conferences-- individual or team--were held either over synchronous video or
over SkypeTM.

   Each year, my interaction with the students began with a short face-to-face
(F2F) meeting in January before they returned to Singapore. At that meeting, I
introduced myself, tried to learn something about each of them, and explained
the work that we would do together in the GNLE. Following that initial
meeting, I stayed in contact with them via email, and I occasionally attended
the cohort meetings that the M.Eng director held via synchronous video. The
thesis writing seminars, drafting cycle, and writing conferences began in late
April as students entered their full-time internships and concluded in early
August as the thesis advisors took over the last stage of the technical review. My
interaction with individual students varied depending on their needs. I saw the
stronger writers chiefly in the seminar sessions and writing conferences while I
spent more time interacting individually with less skillful writers on email and
in several cases, in Skypeconferences.

Facing Challenges in the M.Eng Thesis Seminar

   Despite my familiarity with WAC pedagogy, my years of teaching writing
to engineering students, and my experience with L2 students, I immediately
noticed a different atmosphere as I led the M.Eng seminars and worked with
the M.Eng writers. It seemed much more difficult to get to know the students
and to establish the rapport that is so fundamental to a writing classroom. As I
investigated, I began to examine three of my own assumptions: that "knowing"

                                                                                                373
Craig

the culturally and linguistically diverse students was a straightforward task; that
"writing" means the same thing and is taught the same way in different global
contexts; and that synchronous distance technology is a clear channel that
transmits information completely and accurately.

Assumption 1: "Knowing" the M.Eng Students Would be a Straightforward
Task

   As I began to work with the M.Eng students, I noticed that synchronous video
classroom sessions and writing conferences had a distinctly different atmosphere
than I had observed when using WAC strategies in F2F classrooms with either
L1 or L2 students. The M.Eng students clearly had animated relationships with
one another; I could see them --during the break or as the seminar ended--
talking or joking with one another on camera (but out of microphone range).
However, during class, they took their seats in the classroom silently and for the
most part, sat quietly, listening to the short lectures that I gave. When I initiated
active learning activities, peer review, or group discussions, they complied
hesitantly. It was rare for any student to ask a question or even to respond to my
prompting. In writing conferences where I met them on a smaller screen in a
smaller room, they were similarly reserved. Students often sat quietly, staring at
their individual draft; getting a discussion started was painfully difficult.

   When I asked students to write to me about their professional plans or
past experiences or their hopes for the seminar, most students easily shared
their responses over email. Some writers even became chatty as they shared
what it meant to them to write in a second language--stories that they had
hesitated to volunteer at first (see, for example, Zawacki, Hajabbasi, Habib,
Antram & Das, 2007). But in the classroom, they remained silent and slow to
act although basically cooperative. Although we made progress on the thesis
drafts, that, too, was slow. Clearly, in that first summer, I did not know how
to establish the interactive, student-centered dynamic that is common in most
of the WAC-based classrooms in which I have taught. However, other insights
into the M.Eng writers' experience in learning and using English helped me
understand their reserved classroom presence.

Assumption 2: "Writing" Means the Same Thing in all Contexts

   To learn more about the students' experience with writing in a GNLE, I
surveyed the first cohort of students at the end of the summer, 2008, and in
that survey, I asked if they were native or non-native speakers of English. Yet
that way of phrasing the question failed to give a full picture of their English

374
                                                                            Diverse Students at a Distance

language learning experiences or their language profile. When the question was
phrased differently in the surveys of 2009 and 2010, an expanded picture of the
M.Eng writers' identities emerged. Rather than describing themselves chiefly as
"non-native" speakers of English, most of them detailed their multiple abilities
in several other languages other than English and documented their competency
in varying roles and relationships as they navigated the global environment,
shifting languages as they went (Canagarajah, 2006; Hall & Navarro, 2011).

   Although the surveys did not ask for detailed information about the methods
by which they had learned English, data in 2009 and 2010 revealed that English
was a second language for most of them. Since most of the students were not
from Anglophone countries (e.g. India) nor from locales where English was
an official language (e.g. Singapore, Bangalore), it seemed probable that most
students had been taught English from an English as a Foreign Language (EFL)
pedagogical perspective, an approach that is based on language acquisition
strategies in all four communication modes with an emphasis on achieving
linguistic correctness.

   In each of the annual surveys (2008-2010), I asked about the students'
familiarity with WAC approaches used in the seminar, and their responses were
illuminating. For example, approximately one third of the respondents had never/
rarely experienced active learning, peer review, or group activities in the classroom.
Almost 75% of the respondents had only rarely/sometimes been in active, informal
discussion with their teacher. More than half of the respondents had never/rarely
participated in a writing conference. Also, more than half of the respondents had
only rarely/sometimes received written comments on a written draft.

   However another question about their level of comfort with WAC strategies
revealed that most students had adjusted quickly. Well over 50% of the
respondents reported that they had become very comfortable/comfortable with
informal discussion between student and teacher, with active learning in class,
with writing drafts of the thesis, with receiving teacher comments on drafts,
and with revising writing based on those comments. (It should be noted that
each year one or two students did rate themselves as uncomfortable with WAC
methods.)

   Thus, the reticent classroom behaviors that prompted my inquiry were
understandable when illuminated by the data showing students to be largely
unfamiliar with the informal give-and-take of a WAC classroom, active
learning activities, and writing conferences. What had seemed like their lack
of engagement could be better understood as their uncertainty as they tried
to figure out what it was that I wanted them to do and how they should do
it successfully. As Ferreday, Hodgson, and Jones (2006) note in their work on
networked learning environments, participants in a new learning situation

                                                                                                375
Craig

often perceive (the new situation) as "alien" and their "actions which could be
interpreted as resistance and/or reticence ... are an expected part of learning ... a
new way of being in the world" (p. 237). Yet the M.Eng students' responses to
the question about comfort suggested that despite the "alien" nature of the WAC
activities, they were able to actively adapt to new expectations, "strategically
realigning themselves and investing in the practices" of the unfamiliar context
(Rich, 2005, Para. 10). In fact, their ability to adapt within the short time frame
of the thesis seminars was further illustration of their ability as multi-competent
users of language.

   However, despite the draft and revision cycle, writing conferences, and peer
review work and the improved thesis drafts, "writing" for the M.Eng students
still meant writing correctly at the sentence level. As I show in Table 1 on the
writing difficulties students reported on the survey (see the Appendix), more
than 25% of respondents in each year (2008-2010) rated the challenge of writing
correctly as difficult/very difficult. They also reported difficulty in writing clearly
and concisely and in organizing complex information. In writing conferences
and as I read drafts, I observed that writers with less control over the language
displayed difficulty in developing enough correct prose to convey their thoughts
fully. The more skillful writers could write at greater length but still struggled
with sentence-level errors as they wrote about progressively more complex
material. (See Phillips [this volume] for an account of the same phenomenon
in the writing of the graduate student that she followed in her longitudinal case
study, which she attributed to the U-shaped learning curve).

   Because the thesis document was an official document of record, error-filled
prose was not acceptable. Thus my comments to the writers had to address
not only the larger features of the genre, rhetorical strategies, and information
organization but also to provide direct feedback at the sentence level (Ferris,
2009). Such extensive commenting would be relatively unusual in WAC practice
since a teacher would typically rely on more indirect methods to help the writer
locate and then address the error in a revision. However, as experienced writing
and EFL/ESL teachers know, second language writers who are creating and
refining large amounts of disciplinary English are less likely to locate errors
easily (even though they usually can address them when they do). In addition,
the fast pace of the M.Eng degree program did not allow the time for students
to review and revise at a leisurely pace.

   In addition, the M.Eng writers tended to lapse into colloquial English. It
was one challenge for them to learn the features of the genre and the rhetorical
purposes of each section while writing clearly and correctly and another to
acquire the appropriate register (Hall & Navarro, 2011). Again, achieving the
appropriate style and tone for their thesis required time and experience.

376
                                                                            Diverse Students at a Distance

Assumption 3: Distance Technology Transmits Information Completely and
Accurately

   Entering a new classroom, any teacher must do as I did --begin to know the
students and explore the students' backgrounds and expectations--if the teacher
is to create a productive learning environment. Yet what proved challenging in
the M.Eng GNLE was the way in which a distance environment with a highly
technical interface affected my usual WAC teaching approach.

   Synchronous distance technology succeeded in that it made our global
interaction possible. Still, the 12-hour time difference had a strong influence
since the students and I were always at the opposite ends of our day. When I
taught in the evening in Cambridge, the GNLE students were barely awake;
when I taught in the early hours of my morning, they were tired from a day at
their internships and the evening struggle through Singapore rush hour traffic.
In addition, we were affected by separate cultural rhythms that were invisible to
one another. Even our weather was different, an oddly affecting factor. When
there were drastic events (in 2008, earthquakes in China that disrupted some
students' villages; in 2009, the suicide of a roommate), it took a measurably
longer time for me to "read" the effects on the faces of the distant students, to
discover the causes, and to offer support. But aside from major life events, there
were also myriad small details of life that affected our moods and behaviors in
the classroom: regional holidays, politics, institutional policies and patterns.

   Temporal distance also meant that we struggled with what Herrington
(2004) calls "real-time dominance" (p. 204). The simplest email exchange
had to be timed carefully to account for sleep and internship schedules, and
the most basic act of uploading documents for class work had to include an
unusually large margin of time. Despite my best intentions (and theirs), it
remained a challenge for us to override our actual sense of time (Herrington,
2010). Throughout the seminar schedule, time continued to be the intractable
"distance" that had to be actively managed.

   On the surveys, most students reported that it was not difficult to learn to
write a thesis in this distance environment (2008, 82.4%; 2009, 85.7%; 2010,
58.3%).2 Yet even state-of-the-art technology embodied what Winner (1986)
calls the "politics of the artifact," referring to the ways in which "man-made
systems ... require or ... (are) compatible with particular kinds of relationships ...
and the arrangements of power and authority ..." (p. 20). For example, at times,
the sound quality in our exchange was indistinct enough to make it difficult
for me to understand a student and, if I asked for clarification, that request
was often disconcerting for the student since, in this case, technology made
the problem worse. In a F2F setting, I could have made the request quickly,

                                                                                                377
Craig

quietly, and with little fuss (Herrington, 2004). However, in the electronic
classroom, my voice seemed to boom from a large screen (volume being beyond
my control), inadvertently suggesting some lapse on the part of the student.

   At times, a camera in Singapore was poorly focused, thus making it difficult
for me to see facial expressions of students to gauge their reactions. Also, a
time delay (perhaps 30 seconds) sometimes occurred, making our interaction
clumsy and slightly asynchronous. Trying to correct these distractions and even
to use the classroom interface involved negotiation with technicians who were
in the background, manipulating and managing the connection. I appeared to
be alone in the "sending" classroom, but in reality, I was team-teaching with
invisible facilitators who had their own concept of what was going on and who
were not always quick to understand what I needed.

   The constraints of technology also had dictated the set up of the Singapore
classroom. Rich with computers, keyboards, microphones, and screens, the
classroom had been arranged with rigid desks and tautly strung cables. Chairs
were bolted down in front of the desks. This physical setup could not easily
incorporate active learning or peer review activities. Moreover, when students
re-grouped to pursue these activities, they moved away from microphones so
I could not monitor their interactions. In addition, the Singapore classroom
configuration produced an intimidating effect since when a student clicked a
button at his/her desk to ask a question, the camera then zoomed in on him/her,
projecting an image on a larger screen. Not surprisingly, questions or comments
were infrequent from students, most of whom were strong but perhaps not
confident speakers of English.

   I observed the ways in which technology cramped what McNair and Paretti
(2010) call the "relational space" in which frequent dialogue (teacher-student
and student-student) shapes skills and guides practice as student writers
establish voice and identity and also a sense of ownership over their work. As
noted, student-student dialogue was often constrained by the physical layout of
the room while the teacher-student dialogue was also affected by the technical
interface. Moreover, technicians opened and closed the screens through which
we communicated precisely at the beginning and end of the seminars since the
technology channel was expensive to maintain and since other classes often
were scheduled. Thus the students and I were deprived of the marginal time
that experienced teachers know is valuable in getting to know students and
assessing any difficulties occurring in the course. The distance technology could
not transmit completely the thousands of smaller cues (e.g. body language, tone
and register of voice, eye contact) by which we create our identities and also
"read" the identities of others in F2F spaces. In fact, the distance classroom with
its mix of virtual and actual realities made it a challenge for students' identities

378
                                                                            Diverse Students at a Distance

to emerge and also to establish a kind of social presence within the classroom--a
presence that practitioners know is particularly valuable in writing-intensive
and disciplinary classrooms in which students are learning to use language as
emerging professionals (Farrell & Holkner, 2004; Ferreday, Hodgson & Jones;
2006; Grabill, 2007; Jrvel & Hkkinen, 2005; McNair & Paretti, 2010).

ADDRESSING THE CHALLENGES OF TEACHING
WRITING IN THE M.ENG GNLE

   As I noted earlier, the refinement and expansion of the WAC pedagogy that
I used were cumulative as I reflected on my own assumptions and observed my
students, trying new strategies and also taking data from each cohort in annual
surveys.

   First, based on my expanded understanding of the M.Eng students as multi-
competent users of English and other languages, I developed and regularly used
a specific active learning activity to explore students' language profiles, their
language learning histories, and their experiences in using written and oral
English. (See the appendix in Zenger et al. [this volume] for an example of one
such language questionnaire.) In 2008, students gave me information about
their language profiles anonymously, but subsequently, I asked students not
only to document all the languages that they used and where and how they used
them but also to verbally share their language history with me and with their
peers. They did this exercise openly and eagerly. This activity also paired well
with student self-assessment (sent to me confidentially) and my greater insight
into their needs and also their anxieties about completing the thesis. Even
more important, the establishment of student writing identities and language
histories also led easily to a discussion of the differences in writing pedagogies
experienced in their home countries, in other countries, and at MIT.

   Second, understanding that most of the M.Eng students were unfamiliar
with WAC strategies, I explained more extensively what we were going to do
and why we were going to do it. I talked to them about my expectations, e.g.
describing typical student behaviors in writing conferences. I talked more
about how to be a useful peer reviewer. I also included explicit explanations
of my objectives in written assignments posted on the academic website. I had
always introduced classroom activities and written out the assignments, but I
had assumed a certain level of student familiarity. Now, I assumed that they
were unfamiliar with WAC strategies, and structured more time for questions
so that I could check for comprehension. Moreover, instead of merely asking
for questions verbally, I invited electronic "muddy cards" sent to me during the

                                                                                                379
Craig

break in class. In a F2F classroom, students would hand in the "muddy card"
(an index card with a question or a key point that required further explanation)
at the end of class. However, in the distance environment, the paper-based
technology was replaced by a quick email. Questions continued to be rare, but
the invitation was important.

   WAC strategies did not address all the problems that the M.Eng writers
faced, however. Even these proficient speakers of English struggled to control
written language as they grappled with complex thesis material (See Table 1).
Therefore, borrowing from EFL strategies, I included gap fill exercises to help
the writers choose more appropriate verbs and transitional phrases, more closely
approximating the register of the thesis (Swales & Feak, 2004). I developed a
style sheet to help the writers consistently use key terms and learn specialized
vocabulary, a strategy more common to English for Specific Purposes (ESP)
practice than WAC practice. I also developed a strategy for commenting
on linguistic features of the writing while still concentrating on content,
organization, and coherence, and I shared this strategy with them (Ferris,
2009). Although such intervention would be relatively uncommon in most
WAC contexts, it was clear that many of the M.Eng students could not locate
the errors in their prose in the time available to them. However, characteristic of
many multilingual students, most students could correct those errors once they
did notice them. (See Siczek & Shapiro [this volume] for another description of
the merging of TESOL and WAC pedagogies).

   Students not only welcomed my attention to sentence-level error, they
expected it. I had described the differences between the pedagogies of EFL and
WAC, but for many of them, the attention to grammatical correctness remained
central to their expectations of what writing teachers were supposed to do (a
trend also noted by Fredericksen & Mangelsdorf [this volume]). As I helped
writers locate sentence-level errors, however, another cultural assumption was
revealed. I assumed that my comments on sentence-level error were helpful but
not as essential as the development and organization of substantive material.
However, some M.Eng writers had a different perspective, assuming that once
they had corrected errors and perhaps substituted more formal verbs or inserted
some transitions, the revision was complete and the document was improved.
Moreover, some M.Eng writers (especially the less skillful ones) assumed that
I would correct all the sentence-level errors in their documents. They clung
to this idea as the deadline came closer, despite my insistence that they take
responsibility for their final drafts. In the end, some less able writers turned to
skilled peers for a final proofreading and editing cycle or in one or two instances
to their thesis advisors who quietly corrected or revised final drafts of documents,
a long-standing but rarely acknowledged practice (Jordan & Kedrowicz, 2011).

380
                                                                            Diverse Students at a Distance

   Third, realizing that the technical interface affected our interactions, I
developed the habit of talking about the technology, not just through it, so that
the slight hindrances were acknowledged between us rather than ignored. For
example, my observation that having a camera focus on them when they wanted
to ask a question was not always pleasant brought grins and nodding of heads
and made it more likely that they might send the muddy card or write to me
after class time. Or once in a while, I asked for a volunteer to help me remember
to upload specific material at a certain time. This small activity transferred some
responsibility to them in addition to proving valuable to me (the volunteers
never failed to be diligent with their reminders!).

   In addition, to create more social dimension, I began classes with warm-up
activities in which I elicited information from each student about weekend activities
or internships. In a F2F classroom, I would have done this activity informally and
in the few minutes before class, but here I learned to structure it as part of the class.
Also I shared a little more personal information about my own activities than I
might usually have done. This relatively brief exchange of details was culturally
interesting to me and to them, as well. The result was a little more conversation in
the classroom; they relaxed a bit and began to show their individual personalities,
styles, and senses of humor. I also assigned short pieces of personal writing to help
me understand them better as writers and then I responded to that writing.

WHAT THE M.ENG STUDENTS FOUND
USEFUL OR DIFFICULT

   Curious about the students' assessment of the usefulness of WAC strategies,
I asked the M.Eng students to rate the usefulness of various resources.3 Table 2
(see Appendix) shows the respondents strong preference for interactive WAC
strategies (writing conferences, commented drafts) and also shows how valuable
they find the involvement of disciplinary faculty in the writing process.

   In written comments, students observed:

         I found it very helpful that we constantly had someone
         reminding us about writing the thesis.

         I learned a lot from the conference with the writing
         instructor and the draft thesis returned by her and by the
         MIT advisor.

         I liked the writing conferences.

                                                                                                381
Craig

         I benefited most when the writing teacher talked about the
         various purpose of each part of the sections.

         ... it was a wonderful and fruitful experience.

   The seminar series appeared to help the M.Eng writers improve their theses.
Although the usual difficulties of writing about technical material in a second
or other language persisted for these writers, the overall organization and focus
of the theses were much improved, and the program administrators were
enthusiastic. Student responses on surveys and in individual emails showed a
strong, positive response to the seminar and indicated their satisfaction with
their theses. However, students also reported on what they still found difficult.
Table 1 (see the Appendix) gives insight into the linguistic challenges that these
strong users of English still encountered as they wrote their theses--the use of
correct grammar and punctuation, word choice and vocabulary, writing clearly
and concisely, and organizing complex disciplinary material.

REFLECTION ON PAST AND FUTURE WORK

   Each year (2008-2010), the M.Eng writers and I worked our way toward
a successful thesis for nearly all students. Some aspects of the seminar series
were reassuringly familiar to me: young adults developing as professionals by
writing about disciplinary material in an authentic and meaningful context.
But some aspects remained challenging: the cold eye of the camera focused
on distant students who appeared hesitant and reserved; the lack of relational
space common in F2F classrooms but cramped in the distance setting; and the
stubborn sentence errors persisting even in the improved thesis drafts.

   These challenges of fast-paced, high-stakes engineering writing certainly
presented learning opportunities for the M.Eng writers. For me, those
challenges deepened the ways in which I came to understand diverse students
as I became increasingly attuned to their multiple and subtle differences as well
as their considerable strengths. Just as importantly, those challenges prompted
me to refine the pedagogy I used with the diverse students in a distance setting.
While my teaching practice remained grounded in well-tested, successful WAC
principles, those familiar approaches became more multi-faceted and more
inclusive of L2 writing issues. The challenges that had puzzled me at first turned
out to be opportunities for professional development and insight.

   The teacher-based research presented here highlights possible opportunities
for WAC practitioners and WAC program administrators for teaching with

382
                                                                            Diverse Students at a Distance

writing in culturally and linguistically diverse distance and F2F classrooms.
In addition to representing valuable sites for professional growth and future
research, these opportunities also point to contexts in which WAC pedagogies
are very much needed. These new contexts, however, demand that we become
aware of our implicit assumptions and our--and our students'--cultural biases.
To do this, we must identify the strengths that diverse students bring: their rich
language histories, multiple competencies, and a wide range of objectives for
their use of language (Ferris, 2009; Johns, 2001). And it is essential that we
develop sound writing pedagogies--F2F and online--to reach an increasingly
diverse student population (Ferris & Thais, 2011). This endeavor means
reading the scholarship in ESL and L2 writing and then adding and refining
concrete skills that allow us to combine a language acquisition approach with
familiar WAC writing pedagogy (Canagarajah & Jerskey, 2009; Cox, 2010;
Cox, 2011; Leki, 1992; Matsuda & Jablonski, 2000; Zawacki & Cox, 2011,
among others). As WAC practitioners, we must also become more adept at
managing various technologies and multiple screens not only in GNLEs but
also in a range of distance environments, adjusting WAC approaches to fit the
challenges and constraints of those environments. As universities fulfill their
mandate for global outreach and for curriculum enhancement through online
access, learning to work well with technology and at a distance is becoming a
valuable skill for all teachers.

   These distance opportunities will require some re-vision of ourselves as
practitioners, asking us to be more innovative, receptive to change, and flexible
in our approach. Yet WAC practice, itself, has exhibited all these characteristics.
Over the years, WAC has come to include not only writing but also oral
communication, graphical communication and an increasing range of multi-
modal literacy. The new opportunities described here--teaching writing to
diverse students in globally networked learning environments--represent the
next steps in expanding WAC pedagogy to meet the needs of all of our students.

NOTES

1. This collaboration was funded from 2000-2010. Although the M.Eng pro-
gram continues, it is no longer part of the Singapore-MIT Alliance and no
longer taught over distance technology.
2. Data indicates that, in 2010, more students reported that they found it diffi-
cult to write a thesis in a distance environment. However, no other information
gathered explains their response on the survey and other factors (advisor influ-
ence, project success, L2 abilities, team dynamics) may have been influential

                                                                                                383
Craig

3. Other resources were assessed in the survey, but this chapter focuses on sev-
eral resources common to WAC pedagogy.

REFERENCES

Canagarajah, A. S. (2006). Toward a writing pedagogy of shuttling between
   languages: Learning from multilingual writers. College English, 68(6), 589-
   604.

Canagarajah, A. S., & Jerskey, M. (2009). Meeting the needs of advanced mul-
   tilingual writers. In R. Beard, D. Myhill, J. Riley & M. Nystrand (Eds.), Sage
   handbook of writing development (pp. 472-488). London UK: Sage Publica-
   tions.

Cox, M. (2010). WAC and second-language writing bibliography. WAC Clear-
   inghouse. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/slw/bib.cfm

Cox, M. (2011). WAC: Closing doors or opening doors for second language
   writers? Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
   atd/ell/cox.cfm

Farrell, L., & Holkner, B. (2004). Points of vulnerability and presence: Know-
   ing and learning in globally networked communities. Discourse: Studies in the
   cultural politics of education, 25(2), 133-144.

Ferreday, D., Hodgson, V., & Jones, C. (2006). Dialog, language and identity:
   Critical issues for networked management learning. Studies in Continuing
   Education, 28(3), 223-239.

Ferris, D. R. (2002). Treatment of error in second language student writing. Ann
   Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Ferris, D. R. (2009). Teaching college writing to diverse student populations. Ann
   Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Ferris, D. R., & Thaiss, C. (2011). Writing at UC Davis: Addressing the needs
   of second language writers. Across the Disciplines, 8(4), Retrieved from http://
   wac.colostate.edu/atd/ell/ferris-thaiss.cfm

Grabill, J. T. (2007). Writing community change: Designing technologies for citi-
   zen action. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.

Hall, J. (2009). WAC/WID in the next America: Redefining professional iden-
   tity in the age of the multilingual majority. WAC Journal, 20, 33-49. Re-
   trieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/journal/vol20/hall.pdf

Hall, J., & Navarro, N. (2011). Lessons for WAC/WID from language learn-
   ing research: Multicompetence, register acquisition, and the college writing
   student. Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
   atd/ell/hall-navarro.cfm

384
                                                                            Diverse Students at a Distance

Hawisher, G. E., Selfe, C. L., Guo, Y., & Liu, L. (2006). Globalization and
   agency: Designing and redesigning the literacies of cyberspace. College Eng-
   lish, 68(6), 619-636.

Herrington, T. K. (2004). Where in the world is the global classroom project?
   In J. R. Di Leo. & W. R. Jacobs (Eds.) If Classrooms Matter (pp. 197-210).
   New York & London: Routledge.

Herrington, T. K. (2010). Crossing global boundaries: Beyond intercultural com-
   munication. Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 24(5), 516-539.

Jrvel, S., & Hkkinen, P. (2005). How to make collaborative learning more
   successful with innovative technology. Educational Technology, 5, 34-39.

Johns, A. M. (2001). ESL students and WAC programs: Varied populations
   and diverse needs. In S. H. McCleod, E. Miraglia, M. Soven & C. Thaiss
   (Eds.), WAC for the new millenium: Strategies for continuing writing across the
   curriculum (pp. 141-164). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Jordan, J., & Kedrowicz, A. (2011). Attitudes about graduate L2 writing in
   engineering: Possibilities for more integrated writing instruction. Across the
   Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/ell/jordan-
   kedrowicz.cfm

Leki, I. (1992). Understanding ESL writers: A guide for teachers. Portsmouth,
   NH: Boynton/Cook Heinemann.

Matsuda, P. K., & Jablonski, J. (2000). Beyond the L2 metaphor: Towards a
   mutually transformative model of ESL/WAC collaboration. Academic Writ-
   ing, 1. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/aw/articles/matsuda_jablon-
   ski2000.htm

McNair, L. D., & Paretti, M. C. (2010). Activity theory, speech acts and the
   "doctrine of infelicity": Connecting language and technology in globally net-
   worked learning environments. Journal of Business and Technical Communi-
   cation, 24(3), 323-357.

Melton, J. (2008). Beyond standard English. In D. Starke-Meyerring, & M.
   Wilson (Eds.), Designing globally networked learning environments (pp. 185-
   199). Rotterdam: Sense.

Rich, S. (2005). Linguistically and culturally diverse students' perceptions of
   successful classroom practices in a UK graduate program. Across the Disci-
   plines, 2. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/lds/rich.cfm

Starke-Meyerring, D. (2010). Globally networked learning environments in
   professional communication: Challenging normalized ways of learning,
   teaching, and knowing. Journal of Business and Technical Communication,
   24(3), 259-266.

Swales, J. M. & Feak, C.B. (2004). Academic writing for graduate students: Es-
   sential tasks and skills (2nd ed.). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

                                                                                                385
Craig

Winner, L. (1986). The whale and the reactor: A search for limits in an age of high
   technology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Zawacki, T. M., Hajabbasi, E., Habib, A., Antram, A. & Das, A. (2007). Valu-
   ing written accents: Non-native students talk about identity, academic writing,
   and meeting teachers' expectations. Fairfax, VA: Diversity Research Group,
   George Mason University.

Zawacki, T. M. & Cox, M. (2011). Introduction to WAC and second language
   writing. Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
   atd/ell/zawacki-cox.cfm

APPENDIX

Table1: What M.Eng students found difficult as they wrote their
theses

Element                                 2008             2009             2010

Using correct grammar, punctuation,     "difficult/very  "difficult/very  "difficult/very
and spelling                            difficult"       difficult"       difficult"
Choosing right words                    31%
Writing clearly and concisely                            30%              24%
Organizing complex material             46%
                                        62%              45%              41%
                                        58%
                                                         61%              63%

                                                         61%              66%

Table 2. What M.Eng students found helpful as they wrote their
theses

Activity                                2008 (n=15) 2009 (n=13)_ 2010 (n=17)

Writing conferences with                "helpful/very    "helpful/very    "helpful/very
communication instructor                helpful"         helpful"         helpful"
                                        66%              74%              76%
Drafts commented by
communication instructor                84%              76%              100%

Verbal suggestions from thesis advisor  73%              58%              83%
                                        85%              64%              90%
Drafts commented by thesis advisor

386
CHAPTER 16

CAMPUS INTERNATIONALIZATION:
A CENTER-BASED MODEL FOR ESL-
READY PROGRAMS

      Karyn E. Mallett and Ghania Zgheib
      George Mason University

Historically in US higher education, the WAC-driven push for insti-
tution-wide integration of writing into the curriculum has not been
met by substantive language support for L2 writers. In this article,
a language-supported approach to campus internationalization is de-
scribed, contributing to discussions on innovative ways in which the
nation-wide WAC agenda might adapt to growing international en-
rollments. The model presented - the ACCESS program - is an emerg-
ing ESL-ready program that has benefitted from the guidance of a
well-connected team of writing specialists across the university, includ-
ing WAC, L2 writing, and ESL/applied linguistics faculty. Research on
the ACCESS program is provided, the results of which showcase ways
in which faculty and students benefit from a program structure that is
comprehensive, realistic, and transferrable to other contexts across the
university. The authors conclude by suggesting that the institutional
energy that goes into developing language-supported programs for in-
ternational students should open the door to wider conversations about
the language and writing needs of multilingual students across cam-
pus, and the faculty who teach them.

   In the introductory chapter of WAC for the New Millennium, McLeod and
Miraglia (2001) present a number of issues and questions related to the staying
power and evolutionary potential of WAC programs given multiple nationwide
changes affecting higher education throughout the US. Indeed, these questions
are addressed with some degree of urgency given that they are presented in response
to Walvoord's (1997, p. 70) call for WAC to "dive in or die" and to Haworth's
(1997, p. A14) call for public institutions, in general, to become "architects

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.16                         387
Mallett and Zgheib

of change." With resolution to endure and adapt, McLeod and Miraglia ask,
"How will it grow and change - what new forms will WAC programs take, and
how will they adapt some of the present program elements and structures to the
changing scene in higher education?" (p. 4). One partial answer to McLeod and
Miraglia's question is for WAC, L2 writing, and ESL/applied linguistics faculty
to cultivate purposeful, strategic program-building collaborations that clearly
support institutional goals for campus internationalization. Specifically, an
improved effort to build and showcase intentional alliances with other writing
and language specialists on campus could lead to new forms and/or dimensions
of WAC programs, fostering greater depth of current WAC structures and a
greater range for WAC applications. Further, such strategic program-building
collaborations within small, high-profile programs for heavily-recruited
multilingual students may lead to the promotion of an integrated network of
a team of experts who can advise the university on how best to address a wider
scope of need among diverse populations of developing student writers across
disciplines, L2 writers included.

   While WAC strives to create and sustain a community of writing-pedagogy-
minded faculty across the curriculum, formal collaboration with L2 writing
and ESL/applied linguistics faculty can add depth and perspective to the WAC
agenda with regard to institutional support for a wider range of student writers
and the faculty who instruct them. This point resonates among WAC scholars
(McLeod, 2008; Zawacki, 2010; Cox, 2011) as well as among L2 writing schol-
ars, including Matsuda (2001). WAC leaders have recently signaled a shift in
the profession, moving multilingual-writing-related issues from the periphery
toward the center of conversation through reflections on the international and
global-oriented WAC agenda. Presenting "The Future of WAC" plenary address
at the Ninth International Writing Across the Curriculum Conference (IWAC),
McLeod (2008), with regard to the Bologna Process1 and its potential effects on
transnational writers and their teachers, concluded,

         This means that there will be--in fact, already is--a huge
         increase in the use of English as a lingua franca (if we may call
         it that) in the world, and an accompanying increase in the
         teaching of academic English as a second, sometimes a third
         or fourth language. Of course, students from other countries
         will bring with them not only linguistic but also cultural
         differences. What sort of institutional structures will be put in
         place to support these students and their teachers? How can
         our WAC experience in North America be helpful, and how
         can we learn from our international colleagues' experience?

388
                                                                              Campus Internationalization

   Further signaling a growing concern for a "writing pedagogy of inclusion"
among WAC scholars in the field, Zawacki's (2010) plenary address at the
IWAC Conference urged greater collaboration among stakeholders and the
development of a more complex, global-oriented, ESL-ready framework for
WAC programs, suggesting that,

         In comparison to our L2 students, we faculty have quite
         some distance to travel as we negotiate our expectations for
         the writing they do in our disciplines. In our negotiations--
         with student writers, with faculty, and with stakeholders
         inside and outside of our institutions--the question we need
         to ask is not "What is good-enough writing?" but rather
         "What is good writing as it mirrors the professional goals
         of our students, the work places they want to enter, and the
         variety of Englishes people are using there?" In the process,
         we may learn to hear and value the written accents our L2
         students bring to our classrooms.

   Certainly, given the context of these messages, McLeod's and Zawacki's recent
attention to issues of transnationalism, internationalism, multilingualism, and L2
writing gives credence to the goal of locating and fostering sustainable models for
a WAC platform that effectively anticipates diverse populations of multilingual
writers. But how? What does a "pedagogy of inclusion" entail, pragmatically
speaking? Is the emergence and evolution of such a pedagogy affected by the trend
to internationalize in higher education? How do internationalization initiatives
affect WAC, L2 writing, and ESL/applied linguistics programs (as well as their
relationships with one another at the institutional level)? We note in regard to the
latter a critique made by Leki (2003) in "A Challenge to Second Language Writing
Professionals: Is Writing Overrated?" in which she draws attention to potential
adverse outcomes resulting from heightened (and often mandated) institutional
focus on student writing across the curriculum (e.g. writing proficiency testing,
writing intensive courses). In "WAC: Closing Doors or Opening Doors for
Second Language Writers?," Cox (2011) investigated Leki's claim by reviewing
scholarship on the intersection of WAC and L2 writing, asking,

         Is it possible that WAC administrators and scholars, like our
         colleagues in L2 writing studies and first year composition,
         place the same overemphasis on writing? Have we paid more
         attention to the potential benefits of integrating writing into
         curricula than the possible costs to some students? If we are

                                                                                                389
Mallett and Zgheib

         paying attention, what possible costs for L2 students should
         we be attending to?

   In response, we point to language-supported internationalization initiatives
such as the ACCESS program as interesting contexts for WAC, L2 writing, and
ESL/applied linguistics faculty to consider as they look for innovative ways to
construct a writing pedagogy of inclusion that opens doors for L2 writers.

   Presenting an L2 writing perspective with regard to constructing an inclusive
WAC approach, Matsuda (2001) concludes,

         In order to provide adequate writing instruction for all
         students, including second-language writers, all WAC
         programs must become "ESL ready"; that is, everyone involved
         in WAC initiatives--including WAC administrators, writing
         consultants and writing fellows as well as faculty across the
         disciplines who use writing in their courses--needs to recognize
         the presence of second-language writers, to understand their
         characteristics and needs, and to prepare themselves for the
         challenge of addressing the needs of those students. To practice
         WAC, then, is to practice ESL. Yet, ultimately, second-
         language writers are not the only ones who benefit from the
         efforts to develop more inclusive WAC programs. Such efforts
         can, in the long run, contribute to the further democratization
         of US higher education for all kinds of students. (n.p.)

   While we fully agree with Matsuda, we note that, even among those WAC,
L2 writing, and ESL/applied linguistics faculty most keen to collaboratively
construct an ESL-ready program, developing such a comprehensive WAC
platform takes time, incentive, and funding. The questions are many (e.g.,
should collaboration take place at the committee or program level and in
what form?), the task is particularly difficult (i.e., preparing faculty across the
disciplines to confidently incorporate more meaningful writing in their classes
and comfortably assume a more linguistically-complex set of students), and
the incentive for ESL-ifying WAC may not be obvious to many or even most.
Further, one must question the sustainability of collaborative efforts, given
faculty/administrator turnover and institutional support (or lack thereof ) for
the ongoing maintenance, revision, and/or expansion of faculty development
trainings, campus outreach, collaborative research projects, resource-
development, etc. Still, the goal seems worth the challenge given the potential
for making a positive impact across campus. But how and where to get started?

390
                                                                              Campus Internationalization

   With these goals and questions in mind and in order to examine the
conditions for implementing and sustaining a language-supported approach to
internationalization and its potential contributions to the evolving notions of
"ESL ready," "pedagogy of inclusion," and "the further democratization of US
higher education for all kinds of students," we focus in this chapter on one such
initiative, the ACCESS program, which is a program for first-year international
students as they enter discipline-specific and major courses, administered
through the Center for International Student Access (CISA) at George Mason
University. Our "ESL-ready" model - ACCESS - has been built with the goal
of "opening doors" for the international students we recruit and the faculty
from across the curriculum who participate in teaching the courses. While the
goal of the research we conducted was primarily to address questions related
to program effectiveness, the writing-related data we present are intended to
showcase programmatic elements and potential research-guided implications
for this writing-rich approach to internationalization in US higher education
institutions.

   We begin with a description of the ACCESS model focusing in particular on
tangible ways in which WAC, L2 writing, and ESL/applied linguistics specialists
have collaborated. Then we turn to a description of our research methods and
findings, which we have organized according to the benefits of this collaborative
approach for students and faculty as well as areas where improvements need to
be made. In describing the ACCESS model and our writing-related data, we
aim to address two wider questions: 1) What role does/might WAC play in an
ESL-ready program model for language-supported campus internationalization?
And, echoing Cox (2011), 2) How does a language-supported approach to
internationalization open doors for participating faculty and L2 writers that WAC
institutionalized practices may have inadvertently closed in the past? Finally, by
showcasing features of and research on the ACCESS model - a program for
heavily-recruited international students2 for which much institutional energy
has been invested -we argue for the institutional support systems needed in
order for these and other populations of multilingual students to succeed.

LANGUAGE-SUPPORTED INTERNATIONALIZATION: A
CENTER-BASED MODEL FOR ESL-READY PROGRAMS

   While the recent trend in US higher education has been campus
internationalization, institutions have differed in their approach: some
internationalization initiatives tend to favor a more de-centralized, bottom-up
approach whereas others are designed to be more centralized, often implemented

                                                                                                391
Mallett and Zgheib

from the top down. CISA, formed in 2010, partially in response to George
Mason University's own established goals for campus internationalization3, was
formed by and is directed out of the Provost Office. Although CISA is certainly
administered as a centralized, top-down program, its reliance on existing faculty
and departmental/program structures has fostered an on-the-ground, bottom-
up spirit in many ways. CISA is unique in its approach and structure, and such
particularities are important to consider in light of their potential effects on
language and writing support/development for the international students who
participated in this study. Further, such programmatic elements are important
for WAC, L2 writing, and ESL/Applied Linguistic specialists to consider if
potential implications from this study are to inform collaborations and/or
program development at other US universities; for, while the CISA model is
built upon the foundation of available resources and collaborations particular
to George Mason, it is possible to establish (or begin strategically planning to
establish) effective models that are built upon substitutable institution-specific
resources elsewhere. To understand our model, such macro-level conditions for
successful language-supported internationalization need to be made clear here.

   First, rather than partnering with an outside, for-profit company that
promised to recruit and provide language and academic content instruction
to 700+ new international students per year, CISA is the result of a home-
grown initiative (i.e. a "do it yourself " model). At its inception, a new CISA
directorship position was created and filled by a candidate with strong prior
administrative leadership experience and vision for realistic and thoughtful
campus internationalization. In addition, CISA, along with the university's
English Language Institute (ELI), an intensive-English program, signed
an institutional memorandum of understanding4 which outlined a joint
partnership for administrating and staffing two language-supported programs
for two targeted international student populations: the ACCESS program
for academically-qualified5 undergraduate students scoring below the direct
admission English language proficiency requirement6 and the Bridge-English
Enrichment Track (Bridge-EET) program for academically-qualified graduate
students scoring below program-determined English language proficiency
requirements. The writing-related research reported here is focused exclusively
on data collected from faculty and students involved with the ACCESS
program in order to more narrowly consider issues particular to undergraduate
L2 writing/writers and the faculty who teach them.

   Second, on the macro-level, the conditions for effective, collaboratively-
constructed internationalization at Mason have been fostered by a process of
pooling campus resources and soliciting input from language- and writing-
focused specialists across campus. For example, significant contributions with

392
                                                                              Campus Internationalization

regard to ACCESS program structure and course sequencing were made by
the director of the Mason WAC program, the director of the composition
program, and the assistant director for language development for the ELI/
CISA. Additionally, and of particular significance, these three programs came
together to develop a new course design and curriculum outline for a year-
long composition course (English 121/122) developed to meet the writing and
language needs of incoming ACCESS students, and co-taught by composition
and ELI faculty.

   A third distinguishing feature of the ACCESS model is the program's novel
approach to language-supported internationalization through curricular and
instructional innovation. As a program that supports first-year students as they
enter discipline-specific courses and courses in their majors, ACCESS students
take a full-time academic course load (28 credits) toward a bachelor's degree
during the year-long program (for a list of set ACCESS year courses, see Table
16.1). Depending on a variety of factors, one or two of the courses throughout
the year are major courses while the others are general education courses or
courses considered general electives in which students are enrolled by ACCESS
cohort group. As outlined in Tables 16.1 and 16.2, ACCESS students receive
varied forms of embedded, curricular language support in addition to full
ACCESS to designated writing center tutors.

   As is evident in Tables 16.1 and 16.2, from a language-acquisition
standpoint, ACCESS students engage in a year-long program wherein they are
asked to comprehend (e.g. listening and reading) and produce (e.g. speaking
and writing) English in the context of academic study, providing natural
content, contexts, and motivation for improved language proficiency and
marked growth in content knowledge. For the students, writing is supported
in content courses, in language-supported courses, and through significant use
of the university writing center ESL-trained tutors. Further, student learning is
central to the program, sustained by cross-course and cross-semester sequencing
and alignment of language skill development and academic skill reinforcement,
a shared responsibility among all involved faculty and undertaken through
CISA orientations, monthly faculty meetings, course coordinator meetings,
curriculum committee meetings, ongoing materials development project
meetings, etc.

   Beyond this sensible, strategic linking of academic and linguistic goals for
student development, the ACCESS program also supports faculty development,
relying on collaboration and input from language and writing specialists across
campus. As is outlined in Table 16.3 in Appendix A, language and writing
specialists on campus have been utilized as resources to help design, implement,
and revise several structural and curricular components of the ACCESS program.

                                                                                                393
Mallett and Zgheib

Table 16.1 First Semester - CISA ACCESS Program7

Course              Credits8  Abbreviated Description of Course and Language
                              Support
ENGH 121:           3*
                              General education course. Co-taught, year-long
Enhanced English              composition course for ACCESS students instructed
                              by a rhetoric/composition faculty and ELI faculty.
Composition I                 Course introduces students to the writing process, the
                              conventions of academic writing, writing as a tool for
UNIV 100: Fresh- 1            developing critical thinking, and the research process
man Transition to             through a specified course theme (e.g. the purpose
College I                     of the university), focusing heavily on developing
                              reading, writing, grammar, and vocabulary-building
COMM 100:           3*        strategies throughout the year. Both instructors are
                              present in each class meeting and work closely to-
Public Speaking               gether to plan assignments and lesson plans, develop
                              materials and grading rubrics, provide feedback on
PROV 103:           1         student writing, and assign grades to student work.

Academic Language             General elective course. Transitional course for
                              freshmen, focuses on introducing and developing
Support for Public            academic skills (e.g. reading strategies, test-taking,
                              study skills, etc.) and student development (e.g. time
Speaking                      management, health, relationships, etc.).

PROV 106: Ameri- 3*           General education course introducing students to
can Cultures                  various contexts and approaches to public speaking in
                              the US Class sessions are taught by communications
Math course (per 3            faculty and supported by an ELI faculty member who
placement exam)               attends each class session, shares in grading/feedback
                              for students' written preparation and oral assign-
                              ments, and teaches students in a language support
                              course immediately following each communications
                              class meeting.

                              Language support course for ACCESS students
                              which meets for 50 minutes following each COMM
                              100 class meeting and is taught by ELI faculty
                              member. Course focuses on the development of those
                              linguistic skills pertinent to upcoming assignments/
                              speeches in COMM 100, differentiating instruction
                              according to student ability/need.

                              General education course. Introduces students to
                              anthropology through observations and analysis of
                              American cultures. Course taught by anthropology
                              faculty.

                              General education course, determined by placement
                              exam.

394
                                                                              Campus Internationalization

Appendix A provides an overview of some such tangible, collective efforts among
CISA, ELI, WAC, and composition program faculty/staff in preparation and
throughout the ACCESS pilot year. As is noted in Table 16.3 in Appendix A,
several collaboration-focused, sustainable aspects of the ACCESS program have
been incorporated into its overall structure, including joint course observations;
faculty hiring, staffing, and evaluation tasks; faculty training/orientation; and
faculty curriculum and advisory committees. Collectively, such tasks require
that those language and writing specialists first involved with the theoretical
construction of the ACCESS program stay involved as the program evolves

Table 16.2 Second Semester -CISA ACCESS Program

Course             Credits  Language-supported Aspects
                   3*
ENGH 122:                   General education course. See description above.
Enhanced English            Second half of year-long course.
Composition II

UNIV 100: Fresh- 1          General elective course. See description above. Sec-
man Transition to           ond half of year-long course.
College II
                            General education course, introducing students to
HIST 125: World 3*          the field of history through the analysis of economic,
History                     cultural, and political evolution across various regions
                            of the world. Class sessions are taught by history
PROV 104:          1        faculty and supported by an ELI faculty member
                            who attends each class session, shares in grading/feed-
Academic Language           back for students' written preparation, and teaches
                            students in a language support course immediately
Support for World           following each World History class meeting.

History                     Language support course for ACCESS student which
                            meets for 50 minutes following each HIST 125 class
Research Methods 3*         meeting and is taught by an ELI faculty member.
                            Course focuses on the development of those linguistic
Major course       3        skills pertinent to upcoming reading/writing as-
                            signments in HIST 125, differentiating instruction
                            according to student ability/need.

                            General education course. Introduces students to the
                            research process, focusing on question-based inquiry
                            around a course theme (e.g. global hunger).

                            Major course, determined with advisor approval.

                                                                              395
Mallett and Zgheib

and grows. In addition, as enrollments in CISA programs increase, added or
new faculty who teach for the Center are oriented to these sustainable practices
in which they are engaged in discussions about language learning, writing
instruction, and the multilingual experience. In short, the ACCESS model
carries with it many aspects that WAC, ESL/applied linguistics, and L2-writing
specialists might consider valuable in the construction of an operationalized
ESL-ready program, through which an emerging pedagogy of inclusion is
developed and distributed among faculty across the disciplines.

   In a variety of ways, then, the ACCESS structure presents itself as a potential
ESL-ready model through which academic faculty receive training on and
experience with teaching multilingual students while ACCESS students benefit
from particular programmatic and curricular innovations that have been tailored
to the generalized academic, linguistic, and cultural needs of international
students. Further, it should be noted that one significant aspect of the Center-
based, centralized approach to language-supported internationalization is its
potential for transfer as participating faculty take their pedagogical training and
experience teaching multilingual students with them into future classrooms
with other student populations. Finally, we note that the program has assumed
responsibility for retaining ACCESS students at the university after program
completion, therefore spurring conversations about additional and modified
support structures that may be needed for these students in the near future.
This next phase, we anticipate, will be a clear point at which we can all shift to
discussions around writing-intensive courses and writing in the disciplines at
the upper division of undergraduate education, with the needs of all L2 writers
included.

OUR STUDY

   While the ACCESS program model seemed like a promising way to open
doors for international students, there was certainly a need to gather quantitative
and qualitative data from faculty and students involved in the 2010-2011 pilot
year of the program in order to gauge actual student and faculty perspectives
on program design and effectiveness in order to inform additional program
development and revision. In response to these needs, we began conducting
IRB-approved longitudinal research as we sought to answer our driving research
question, "How do ACCESS students' perceptions of their academic, linguistic,
and cultural experiences compare with ACCESS-affiliated faculty perspectives
on teaching multilingual students across the ACCESS-included disciplines?"

396
                                                                              Campus Internationalization

While drawing on this larger study, content for this chapter is focused on data
that address writing instruction, including surveys, interviews, and analyses
of samples of student writing and faculty feedback. Generally-speaking, the
purpose of the overall research project was to gather a variety of data from
participants in order to help us determine if the structures and resources that
we had collaboratively put in place were perceived by both participant groups
as helpful and why or why not. We also wanted to know if and how teaching
in the ACCESS program was pedagogically challenging and/or rewarding for
faculty and why or why not. Finally, in order to explore the potential for a
stronger institutional link between the WAC program and language-supported
internationalization on campus, we wanted to gather data that would help us
address the two main questions we noted at the outset of the chapter regarding
the role WAC might play in an ESL-ready program and how the programmatic
approach described above might open doors for participating faculty and L2
writers that WAC may have inadvertently closed in the past.

Participants

   Participants for the student-focused study included 18 undergraduate
students enrolled in the pilot year of the CISA ACCESS program at George
Mason University, 91% of whom were classified as international students by the
university. Of these, 70% were male, 59% hailed from a Gulf nation, and 70%
spoke Arabic as a first language. Forty-eight percent had attended the ELI prior
to matriculation into the ACCESS program. Thirty-five percent were interested
in studying business, 25% engineering, and 10% global studies. The remaining
participants were undeclared majors by the end of the ACCESS year.

   Faculty participants included seven faculty members teaching courses in
which ACCESS students were enrolled (i.e. courses were either ACCESS-
exclusive, sheltered courses or open, lecture-style classes in which the ACCESS
students were integrated among other enrolled freshmen). Faculty came from a
range of academic disciplines, including history, communications, anthropology,
higher education, English, and ESL. Three of the seven participants were
English department9 and ESL faculty; the remaining four faculty had no prior
formal training in teaching multilingual writers. Each of the participating
faculty members had elected to teach in the ACCESS program, which included
faculty orientation and training on teaching L2 writers provided through
CISA. Further, each of the participating faculty members had some form of
prior cross-cultural experience (e.g. living/traveling overseas, studying abroad in
college, participating in the Fulbright program in another country, etc.).

                                                                                                397
Mallett and Zgheib

Writing-related Data

Surveys and Interviews

   The surveys generally had 8 to 12 questions and included multiple choice,
ranked, and open-ended question types. The questions directed students to
report on their perceptions of language usage, proficiency developments, cultural
adjustments, relationships with domestic and other international students,
written feedback from faculty, academic challenges, suggestions for program
revisions, and engagement with writing and writing assignments. Questions
asked of faculty focused on their perceptions of academic, linguistic, and cultural
challenges faced by students; experiences teaching in the program generally;
perceptions of student progress; reflections on their preparation to teach
multilingual students; suggestions for revisions to the program; experiences with
providing feedback on student work; etc. Interviews with faculty and students
were semi-structured and consistent across all students per initial, mid-year,
and final interviews. Faculty were only interviewed once toward the end of the
program year. Interviews generally averaged 30-45 minutes each and were audio-
recorded. All interviews were transcribed by either one of the co-researchers or
our graduate research assistant. Survey data and transcribed interview data were
coded by the co-researchers according to emerging, developing themes within
a framework of larger questions with branching sub-questions. Some data were
coded under multiple themes if relevant to multiple questions/sub-questions.
Co-researchers worked together to code data thematically in the beginning
stages of data analysis until normed at 93% consistent coding.

Samples of Student Writing and Teacher Feedback on Student Writing

    Three samples of student writing with teacher responses were collected from
faculty throughout the year. Faculty were also asked to submit course syllabi,
descriptions of major assignments, and grading rubrics. The writing samples
were varied, including journal entries, essay- and short-answer-format midterm
and final exams, reflection papers, language development portfolios, narrative
essays, argumentative essays, and more.

Students' Entrance, Midyear, and Exit Language Proficiency Tests

   All students in the ACCESS program were required to take the same
test--AccuPlacer ESL--three times during the year. The proficiency test is

398
                                                                              Campus Internationalization

computer-based with listening, reading, writing, grammar, and vocabulary
sections. A separate oral interview was conducted by ELI faculty to gauge oral
English proficiency. The test was self-paced and timed, administered by ELI
faculty in a computer lab. Students had two hours to complete three sections of
the test each time. All sections of the computer-based portions of the test were
rated by AccuPlacer, though ELI faculty also conducted a normed, human
rating according to five dimensions for the writing component of the test.

DATA ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION

   As is detailed in the ACCESS program description above, this writing-rich,
language-supported approach to campus internationalization does not simply
give lip service to the particular needs of L2 writers. Real-time language support
is woven into the ACCESS program through curricular, pedagogical, and
programmatic support structures in recognition of students' language learning
goals. These realistic language-related goals are determined by language and
writing specialists, including WAC, L2 writing, and ESL/applied linguistics
specialists at the institution. Further, they are jointly communicated to the
faculty and to the students. While there may certainly be locally-determined
causes to forego real-time, in-class language support for multilingual students
(e.g., expense, lack of ESL-trained faculty, lack of willingness among academic
faculty to co-teach, etc.), data from this study support our claim that both
faculty and students benefit from such an opportunity to address language-
related issues as they arise. In short, participating in ACCESS allows all involved
the opportunity to explore what it means to administer, teach, and learn in an
emerging ESL-ready program. We are confident that the experience will foster
the long-term vision for an ESL-ready campus that is supported in strategic
ways by a team of writing specialists, including WAC, L2 writing, ESL/applied
linguistics experts.

Benefits and Challenges for Faculty
Teaching in the ACCESS Program

   As is evident in survey responses, interviews, and teacher feedback on student
writing, academic faculty who participated in the ACCESS program learned about
the value of language-supported internationalization, fostering new teaching
practices that more fairly and realistically consider the needs of L2 writers; in
short, we found that ACCESS faculty developed more thoughtful pedagogical

                                                                                                399
Mallett and Zgheib

practices. Our goal is that they will carry the ACCESS experience forward as they
teach mixed populations of students across the disciplines in the future.

   In an early faculty survey, we asked about the roles writing played in their
ACCESS courses. In response, faculty described varied purposes for assigning
writing, e.g. writing to engage with content, to critique peers' written/oral
work, to reflect on academic and cultural events/experiences, to engage in
critical thinking, to develop research questions, to outline lecture/reading
content, to develop written English accuracy at the sentence level, and to
develop well-structured and supported positions. In response to a question
about their expectations for student writing, faculty generally stated that they
expected students to make clear, cohesive, and relevant arguments; use evidence
to support their claims; and demonstrate marked improvements in both
English fluency and accuracy throughout the ACCESS year. Interestingly but
not surprisingly, composition and language support faculty responses tended to
include additional more general expectations for students as developing writers
beyond their ACCESS courses that highlighted their concern that the writing
skills they were teaching would transfer beyond the ACCESS year as well as
their sense of accountability for such transfer, e.g. "I need to prepare them for
writing next year." Asking faculty to articulate the importance and purposes
for writing in their courses was a meaningful exercise because it also opened
the door to more in-depth reflections on their approaches to writing pedagogy
throughout the year.

   One important element of that approach, according to our interview data,
was the role played by the language-support instructors; namely, academic
content faculty noted the relief they felt in being able to defer (at least early on)
to the language specialists to address ACCESS students' language development
goals/challenges directly. ELI faculty appreciated the opportunity to plan and
deliver authentic content-based instruction in coordination with a content-
area expert. Because we found that during the pilot year content-area faculty
may have marked but not attempted to explain grammar errors, the following
year we introduced them to different approaches to corrective written feedback
and error treatment with the goal of helping them approach language-related
issues with a set of approved, research-backed feedback methods. When asked
to report on the most effective forms of collaboration among ACCESS faculty,
83% of faculty said that they communicated regularly with one another outside
of class about course-related issues, 33% of academic and language support
faculty reported that they co-planned daily lesson plans, and 16% of academic
and language support faculty reported that they communicated with one
another about specific students/student issues on a weekly basis.

400
                                                                              Campus Internationalization

   While the option of language-supported content instruction for multilingual
students is not available outside of the ACCESS program, we suspect and hope
that the varied forms of collaboration among language-support and academic
faculty that took place during the ACCESS year may encourage academic faculty
to modify their approaches to teaching in the future in order to accommodate
their new, heightened awareness of the needs of multilingual students across the
curriculum. Although we do not have hard data to support this assumption at
this point in our study, participating faculty reflections toward the end of the
ACCESS year suggest that revisions to their general pedagogical approach are
affected by the ACCESS teaching experience. For example, the participating
ACCESS faculty member teaching the world history course reflected on
ACCESS student progress and the degree to which his own pedagogical
approach and course requirements may have affected student progress:

         Well, again, ultimately the most challenging aspect was
         that a few kids just didn't improve as much as I would have
         liked them to. I mean, most of them did, really, so I wasn't
         despairing, but I had the sense most of them were working
         pretty hard. I can't prove that about all of them, but I'm sure
         some of them must be a little frustrated. I mean, I think
         a history course in the first semester of this program is by
         definition very challenging because it's a lot of reading and
         it's a fair amount of writing...I think it's difficult for all
         concerned. And when a few students just don't quite break
         the barriers that you could see were there when they first
         started...you feel sad...you think, "Could I have done better
         with this?"

   Similarly, the composition instructor reflected on collaboration with
language-support faculty and her own pedagogical approach throughout the
ACCESS program as she considered future applications:

         I realize that I haven't really adapted my pedagogy for a
         while, like I've been teaching the same kind of people, groups
         of people.... Anyway, I was just reflecting the other day on
         my own teaching and I see how I can strengthen it in general,
         not only for international students...just in general how I
         can better balance rhetorical skills with language proficiency.
         I've never ever known how to do that. I've always been sort of

                                                                                                401
Mallett and Zgheib

         like ignorant of the language thing and what helped students
         with that.... But now I realized like "I know how to do that.
         I've learned how I can merge the two more effectively."

   In addition, the ELI language support faculty member, who provided
support for the oral communication course, offered this reflection:

         ...I think [teaching in the ACCESS program) is also good
         for instructors. You have a number of instructors who maybe
         came from different environments where there wasn't that
         kind of international mix. So they come in, I think, with
         certain assumptions about what students will understand
         and how they will interact with the curriculum. And that
         gets changed when you bring in different perspectives from
         different students. So I think it's very healthy for them as well
         - makes all of us better teachers.

   As is evidenced in these quotes from participating pilot-year instructors,
one faculty-oriented benefit of the ACCESS program is that it opens doors for
faculty to reflect on pedagogical practices in a way that more accurately accounts
for the presence of L2 writers in courses across the disciplines. Further, due to
the on-scene presence of language-support faculty, the ACCESS model appears
to provide a structure by which academic faculty can feel supported themselves
as they explore and experience what it takes to teach a more linguistically and
culturally diverse set of students.

   While more could be said about the curricular and pedagogical adjustments
and revisions made by faculty throughout the year, we would like to mention
that 100% of participating ACCESS faculty reported that they decided to
make significant pedagogical adjustments throughout the year in order to teach
the ACCESS students. Specifically, 66.6% of participating faculty reported in
surveys that they modified their teaching methods in order to better fit the
ACCESS group needs by making one or more of the following adjustments:
providing students with more sample work; providing students with more
outlines; slowing down the pace of the course; and providing students with
more foundational skills in advance of a particular content lesson. In addition,
ACCESS faculty reported other forms of pedagogical adjustments during final
interviews, such as more thoroughly explaining assignment components and
deliverables and introducing students to culture-based knowledge/resources
needed to appropriately address assignments/projects. (For more examples of
the ways in which faculty across the curriculum make adjustments to writing

402
                                                                              Campus Internationalization

pedagogy for L2 students, see Hirsh, Nielsen, and Ives et al. (this volume). For
advice for creating linguistically and culturally inclusive pedagogy, see Cox (this
volume). One hundred percent reported a desire to teach in the program again
the following year and described ways they planned to adjust their teaching,
even though, as the world history professor said,

         Frankly [teaching in ACCESS] was more work that I'm used
         to. I don't mind that, but that's the difficult part. I mean, I
         had more students turning in drafts of papers. I've always
         had a policy where students could turn in drafts, but frankly,
         American students turn in maybe 10%. But these kids, some
         of these kids were turning in three or four drafts each. I was
         [also] trying to put more into the organizational clarity of the
         course, and it was work. I think it was good for me to have
         that, so I'm not complaining, but it was work.

   One additional challenge ACCESS faculty encountered with regard to
teaching with writing had to do with providing feedback on ACCESS student
written work, particularly sentence-level feedback. When asked about the
importance of grammatical accuracy for success in their course on the week
8 survey, 66.7% of faculty said that accuracy was "very important," 16.7%
said "important" and 16.7% said "somewhat important." (For more on faculty
perspectives on sentence-level differences in L2 student writing, see Zawacki
& Habib and Ives et al. [this volume].) As we could see in their feedback on
student papers, however, they clearly struggled throughout the year with how
best to address grammatical accuracy in order to help student writers improve.
Some teachers, for example, provided direct correction (i.e. words crossed
out and "correct" words written in by the teacher) so that students could see/
correct the errors in their writing; some left all sentence-level feedback to the
language-support instructors and focused exclusively on the students' ability
to engage the course content; some tried different methods throughout the
term, sometimes calling attention to grammar errors and other times ignoring
them. In interviews, most acknowledged some unease with regard to addressing
grammar issues. For example, the freshman transition instructor, who has a
background in music and higher education, told us,

         And so when I gave an assignment and the students wrote
         something, I said [to myself ], "Oh, well I need to judge this
         for their thinking rather than how they're writing it." So that
         was a big adjustment for me and I found myself, like, getting

                                                                                                403
Mallett and Zgheib

         together with grammar books and making sure I was trying
         to review the correct markings...and I really struggled with
         this idea of, you know, ... that this class is about really just
         being thoughtful and applying what you're learning and more
         experiential stuff. So I didn't want to cross their thinking
         by making lots of edits on their papers, but I felt like they
         needed that because they're still working on [accuracy].

   Notably, however, grammar did not seem to be a focus in teachers' end
comments on papers. Nearly all of the end comments we analyzed addressed
issues related to the content, organization, development, or support of
ideas throughout the students' writing. Even when faculty opted to provide
feedback in one form on sentence-level errors in the text, end comments were
overwhelmingly positive and encouraging, offering praise, even if mixed, to the
student for demonstrating specific signs of good academic writing, e.g. from the
world history teacher: "...you have a clear conclusion [although] your evidence
points in several directions..." and, for another student, "...not bad. Good
data. The main problem is you don't quite take a position on the question as to
whether [they are the] same civilization or not."

   Although faculty tended to downplay grammar in their feedback on student
papers, in the week eight survey, 83.3% requested additional professional
development in the form of a workshop on providing effective feedback on
student written work. Thus, it may be the case that some participating faculty
wanted to provide more thorough sentence-level feedback and hold students
accountable for grammatical accuracy as the semester(s) progressed, but felt
unsure of their own ability to guide this aspect of student writing, especially
given the fact that faculty were also aware of the researchers' interest in L2
writing issues. In response to this request, faculty and student orientations
were modified the following year to include more information and practice on
giving/interpreting sentence-level teacher feedback on student writing.

Benefits to ACCESS Students of a Language-Supported Program

   ACCESS students also clearly benefited from and recognized the value of
the innovative curricular and pedagogical approaches to language-supported
content instruction. As we'll show, they also demonstrated marked language
proficiency growth as an outcome. In response to survey and interview questions
about their feelings of satisfaction with the ACCESS program, many students
noted that they felt particularly satisfied with instruction that was provided
through collaborative faculty efforts. When asked for suggestions for program

404
                                                                              Campus Internationalization

revisions, 26.7% of students recommended adding longer language support
class meetings while 33% requested that more team-taught classes be made
available for future ACCESS years. Some student comments included:

         It seems very good and I learned a lot from the passing few
         weeks!! I really can see that the ACCESS program doing
         good for us.

         What I cherish the most about the [language-support] class
         is the writing process, not just the grammar part, it's the
         writing. [The instructor] really helps me develop my writing
         skills; like, not in a way just how to write, but how to write
         to think, how to be a good thinker to be a better writer. You
         know what I mean? Yeah, so I like that we get both.

         I feel that all of our teachers are doing a great job in
         explaining to us the subjects and taking the time to see if
         we understand more and if we need any help. I think if the
         support classes were still on next semester as well it will be
         much better, though.

   These comments were further reflected in the data from the participating
students' exit interviews in which they were asked to consider how they might
have done had they been directly admitted rather than going through the
ACCESS program. Their responses reflect an awareness of how the program
structure helped them to be successful as they entered discipline-specific and
major courses:

         Education wise, I would've been, I guess I can say, a little bit
         lost, because I got a lot of support here and I like it. It makes
         me feel safe, maybe, and I think I am now ready to go, on
         my own...I guess.

         I'm a whole different person right now .... Something
         changed me here. I just, I really changed here, this year. I've
         become, like, I work harder. I just think ... more honestly
         and do things more, not just honestly, but just from the
         bottom-up. I write what I think is right. At home, I just
         write things because I have to do it. A lot of things have
         changed me here, but something has to do with writing.

                                                                                                405
Mallett and Zgheib

   Further, the positive impact of embedded language support on ACCESS
students was evident in the students' overall growth in language proficiency
by the end of the year10. Put simply, a basic concern for the pilot year group
of ACCESS students was whether or not the program structure and language-
support elements would "work" in terms of providing an environment in
which students' English language proficiency would improve. The results of
standardized assessments of student English language proficiency were combined
with a Language Acquisition Portfolio project that students constructed during
the year-long English composition course11. These language-focused data points
were added to an overall, individual student profile that included student
performance in all ACCESS/major courses and a student-developed portfolio.
Taken together, the data show that all students made significant progress,
moving from an average "intermediate" level of language proficiency to an
average outgoing "low-advanced" level of language proficiency, according to
a scale we developed to streamline ELI placements and set entrance scores for
CISA12. Thus, with regard to student progress, these progress results were in line
with our program expectations for general and writing proficiency growth and
were deemed realistic goals given the context and time for language learning.
Generally, students in the pilot year said they felt satisfied with their overall
progress but somewhat frustrated with the pace of such progress, as might be
expected. With regard to program design and built-in language policies, these
results were significant because they supported our pilot year hypothesis that
"low advanced" language proficiency would be an achievable, realistic goal for
student language development.

DATA-DRIVEN PROGRAMMATIC REVISIONS

   While the ACCESS program structure certainly resulted in many positive
outcomes for participating faculty and students, pilot-year data from this study
helped to identify several programmatic features in need of further development.
Generally-speaking, research data contributed to discussions around the
need for program-wide quality control as ACCESS transitioned from pilot-
year program creation/launch to later phases of program revision/expansion.
Specifically, in order to strengthen and sustain the quality of ACCESS during
this transitional time, a three-pronged approach to program sustainability was
suggested and established: faculty development, materials development, and
curriculum alignment.13 Further, the program director made the decision to
revise the program structure by creating "course coordinator" positions for lead
faculty who have taken on the responsibility of ensuring cross-section and cross-

406
                                                                              Campus Internationalization

course curriculum alignment. In addition, themes that emerged from the data
were converted by the researchers into data-driven discussion questions and
were presented to all pilot-year ACCESS faculty and consultants (including
the WAC director and composition director) at the end-of-the-year program
retreat.

   The first revision for ACCESS faculty development was to integrate
opportunities for faculty to reflect on the importance and purpose of writing in
their courses as well as the ways in which they might make their expectations
for student writing more transparent to students in their assignments, rubrics14,
and use of models. It was clear from the student-generated and faculty-
generated data that both groups would benefit from opportunities to clarify
faculty expectations for ACCESS student writing. On the one hand, students
repeatedly expressed confusion over academic faculty expectations for student
writing. An example of such confusion is evident in one student's interview
reflection as she tries to explain her awareness that faculty have different
expectations, and that, in some way she still can't quite articulate, these change
the way she's supposed to structure her writing:

         Like the writing, Oh my gosh, [the English course] has
         developed my writing a lot because I knew before that I
         could deliver an idea, but not in the way that my [other]
         different teachers had expected. Like, ... if you have the
         river and there are stones you have to put down so the reader
         could jump across the river, then ... my ideas are like the
         stones and I develop them, but it's like I need to know from
         my [other] teachers where the river is going. I need to move
         the stones so that the water can go through smoothly like the
         teacher expects, and the reader can still jump across my ideas.

   When student participants were asked to explain why faculty expectations
might differ across the various ACCESS courses (i.e. why rubrics and feedback
might differ, depending on the course), they had nearly nothing to say. In
fact, they generally laughed when asked in the interview to think aloud about
possible reasons for differing faculty expectations of student writing and when
asked the same question in a student survey, text boxes were either left blank or
filled in with a question mark (e.g. "??"). Such data suggest that students had a
developing sense that faculty expectations certainly differed across courses, but
that there was no clear sense of how or why such differences existed. This finding
aligns with other studies in the fields of WAC (Thaiss & Zawacki, 2006) and L2
writing (Gentil, 2011), supporting the recommendation that faculty can and

                                                                                                407
Mallett and Zgheib

should purposefully guide students' early awareness of differing purposes and
expectations for student writing across disciplines.

   In response to these data, the second revision to ACCESS faculty development
has been to suggest that faculty expectations for student writing (including an
explanation of why/how those expectations are determined by the discipline,
the department, or the individual instructor) be made more transparent to
students. In short, we want to encourage ACCESS faculty to see that helping
students identify and meet these differing expectations is the responsibility of
both the disciplinary faculty and the composition/language support faculty,
not just the latter. By taking time during the faculty training sessions to have
these types of conversations around discipline, department, and/or individual
expectations for student writing - those that are different and those that are
similar - we hope that faculty will clarify for themselves the particularities
of their expectations. Further, we hope that these new understandings will
transform participating faculty's approach to teaching with writing both in and
beyond the ACCESS program and, as a result, will help students to transfer
both writing skills and an awareness of disciplinary differences when they write
in and beyond the language-supported ACCESS courses across the disciplines.

   Finally, the third revision made to the ACCESS faculty development has
been to include a workshop session on providing sentence-level feedback to
student writing, primarily through corrective written feedback (Ferris, 2009)
and the use of a coded error feedback chart. In short, just as we wanted all faculty
across the disciplines to feel that they were responsible for communicating their
expectations for student writing, we also wanted faculty to develop some strategies
for sentence-level feedback given that they had, in fact, identified grammatical
accuracy as an important feature for successful completion of the course.

   Together, these three revisions allow the opportunity for participating faculty
to explore the realities, complexities, and opportunities of language-supported
internationalization and teaching with writing. While our plan is to follow
these faculty throughout the coming years to determine if/how they apply what
they have learned through the ACCESS teaching experience to other teaching
contexts at Mason, we anticipate that this experience and these resources will
affect their overall approach to teaching, writing pedagogy included.

CONCLUSION

   Based on the ACCESS model programmatic elements described above, we
believe that our university is emerging as a leading institution for a center-
based, language-supported approach to campus internationalization. While

408
                                                                              Campus Internationalization

CISA is in no way a perfect program, we see potential for sensible, realistic
program growth and sustainability. Further, for the architects of the ACCESS
model, it has been an interesting exercise in the practical application of cross-
field theories. Whether we are WAC, L2 writing, ESL/applied linguistics, or
other participating academics, we all want to provide a worthy education for
these students through a positively-oriented plan for internationalization. We
want both faculty and students to feel supported and guided by best practices
for the teaching and learning of writing. Yet, no guidebook for collaboratively
constructing a successful ESL-ready model that incorporates the best of what
we know as WAC, L2 writing, and ESL/applied linguistics professionals exists.
As a result, we have had to be creative and patient. We have also had to set aside
some disciplinary divisions in order to focus on co-building something new.

   In relatively recent years, some have argued that the national WAC-driven
push for institution-wide integration of writing into the curriculum has generally
cost L2 writers a great deal simply because there have not been enough language-
support structures in place to aid in the proficiency development of such writers.
If multilingual students are not provided the resources and support needed to
improve language proficiency while WAC is encouraging more and more intensive
integration of writing throughout the curriculum, the problem for L2 writers is
obvious. However, based on the ACCESS model program design and the pilot
year ACCESS program data, we believe that language-supported approaches to
internationalization can help level the playing field for L2 writers, introducing
students to language and writing resources and strategies and preparing them to
effectively engage in writing across the curriculum once they leave our program.

   In the end, by working together on these smaller programs designed
specifically for recruited multilingual students who generally pay high tuitions
and for whom the university is strategically invested, there is potential to
establish a well-connected team of writing experts and an ESL-ready model
program structure that is comprehensive, realistic, and transferrable to other
contexts across the university. Further, the institutional energy that goes into
developing these programs should open the door to wider conversations about
the language and writing needs of multilingual students across campus.

NOTES

1. The Bologna Process is generally known for standards-focused reform
among European nations, the results of which have had a major impact on EU
higher education systems with regard to university administration, comparabil-
ity/transferability of credits/degrees, and higher education qualifications.

                                                                                                409
Mallett and Zgheib

2. Primarily F1 Visa holders at the undergraduate and graduate levels who do
not consider English the primary language of communication. To be clear, the
authors purposefully aim to highlight the fact that these students are pursued
by university admissions.
3. "The University will develop more fully its leading role as a global univer-
sity.... [It will] expand the number of international students by at least 20%
while improving the integration of international and domestic students in ex-
tracurricular as well as academic activities." - George Mason's 2014 Strategic Plan,
Goal 5
4. This partnership between CISA and the ELI has meant that language in-
struction has not been outsourced, but rather, it has been built upon the foun-
dation of an IEP that has been part of the university for the past 30 years.
This aspect of the program is noteworthy because the local partnership - which
carries less of a personnel risk for the university - is considered simple inter-
departmental collaboration rather than an internal/external merger of sorts;
further, both responsible parties have been able to comfortably assume of each
other a fair degree of sensitivity to and familiarity with the institutional culture
in general, and with potential complexities tied to campus internationalization
in particular.
5. Students are deemed academically-qualified by the Office of Admissions
upon review of applicants' high school transcripts (translated and evaluated by
outside companies, if needed) and SAT test scores. Admission requirements for
Access students are in line with general admission requirements for all appli-
cants to the university.
6. Access students come into the program with an overall score of B1 on
the Common European Language Reference (CEFR) scale and Bridge-EET
students come into the program with an overall score at the B1 or B1+ level
(depending on differing graduate program requirements). A thorough discus-
sion of language assessment measures and scales is beyond the scope of this
paper; suffice it to say that Access students generally enter the program with
intermediate-level overall language proficiency whereas students who enter the
university via direct admission typically demonstrate low-advanced language
proficiency at minimum.
7. Access courses that are tied to language support are shaded in order to
distinguish them from the Access courses that are part of the program but not
directly linked to language support/instruction.
8. Courses for which students receive general education credits are marked in
this column with an asterisk(*).
9. Of significance, the participating English faculty member also taught the
stretched composition course, English 121/122 , and is the former director of

410
                                                                              Campus Internationalization

the university writing center where she had created an "opt-in" program specifi-
cally designed for L2 writers. This instructor came to the program having done
prior research with the director of the WAC program on multilingual writers'
experiences writing across the curriculum and in the disciplines. Finally, she
herself is a multilingual writer.
10. Similar growth in overall language proficiency was demonstrated during
the second year of the program as well.
11. Additionally, students were provided language reports and consultations
with ELI faculty following each language assessment in order to clarify program
expectations for language development and to supplement students' strategies
for language learning if need be.
12. We aligned the Common European Framework of Reference (CEFR) with
commercial language proficiency testing measurements (e.g. TOEFL, IELTS,
PTE, etc.) for the purpose of streamlining admissions/placement decisions
around English language proficiency at the ELI and CISA. Generally-speaking,
students coming into Access needed to demonstrate a B1, intermediate profi-
ciency, on this scale while students successfully completing the program needed
to demonstrate a B2, low-advanced, proficiency. Due to length restrictions for
this chapter, we are unable to go into detail with regard to these assessments/
measures; however, the authors can be contacted for additional information on
this topic.
13. Faculty development and materials development were prioritized as year-
two areas of focus while curriculum alignment was identified as a year-three
priority.
14. Interestingly, we found that even when faculty provided rubrics along with
their assignments, students needed help understanding how to use the rubric in
to address the assignment effectively.

REFERENCES

Cox, M. (2011, December 21). WAC: Closing doors or opening doors for sec-
   ond language writers? Across the Disciplines, 8(4). Retrieved August 17, 2012,
   from http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/ell/cox.cfm

Ferris, D. R. (2009). Response to student writing: Implications for second language
   students. NY: Routledge.

Gentil, G. (2011). A biliteracy agenda for genre research. Journal of Second
   Language Writing, 20, 6-23.

Haworth, K. (1997, April). Report urges colleges to inspire students and im-
   prove teaching. Chronicle of Higher Education, A14.

                                                                                                411
Mallett and Zgheib

Leki, I. (2003). A challenge to second language writing professionals: Is writing
   overrated? In Barbara Kroll (Ed.), Exploring the dynamics of second language
   writing (pp. 315-332). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Matsuda, P. K. (2001). Opening statement: Academic.Writing forum: Con-
   necting WAC and ESL? Academic.Writing, 2. Retrieved August 29, 2012,
   from http://wac.colostate.edu/aw/forums/fall2001/

McLeod, S., & Miraglia, E. (2001). Writing across the curriculum in a time of
   change. In S. H. McLeod, E. Miraglia, M. Soven, & C. Thaiss (Eds.), WAC
   for the new millennium: Strategies for continuing writing-across-the-curriculum
   programs (pp. 1-27). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

McLeod, S. H. (2008). The future of WAC - Plenary Address, Ninth Inter-
   national Writing Across the Curriculum Conference, May 2008 (Austin,
   Texas). Across the Disciplines, 5. Retrieved August 28, 2012, from http://wac.
   colostate.edu/atd/articles/mcleod2008.cfm

Thaiss, C. & Zawacki, T. M. (2006). Engaged writers and dynamic disciplines:
   Research on the academic writing life. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Walvoord, B. E. F. (1997). In the long run: A study of faculty in three writing-
   across-the-curriculum programs. Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Zawacki, T. M. (2010). Researching the local/writing the international: Devel-
   oping culturally inclusive WAC programs and practices. Plenary talk at IWAC
   2010, Bloomington, IN. Retrieved from http://www.iub.edu/~wac2010/za-
   wacki.shtml

APPENDIX

Table 16.3: WAC, L2 Writing, and ESL/Applied Linguistics collaborative
tasks

Task                                     CISA        ELI/   WAC       English
                                         Director &  CISAA  Director  Composition
Providing students with a wide vari-     Staff                        Program
ety of co-curricular, extra-curricular,
and complementary programming,                                        
including ACCESS-specific student
and faculty orientations, Peer Learn-
ing Partners, academic advisors,
cultural excursions, Living Learning
Community activities, etc.

412
                                                           Campus Internationalization

Task                                   CISA         ELI/   WAC       English
                                       Director &   CISAA  Director  Composition
Development of new content-based       Staff                         Program
English for Academic Purposes
(EAP) curricula/materials to sup-                   
port two general education courses
(PROV 104 to support World                                           
History and PROV 103 to support
Public Speaking) specifically for AC-
CESS students.

Development and revisions of
co-taught, stretched, and enhanced
English 121-122 specifically for AC-
CESS students.

Hiring, staffing, and observations of

all ACCESS faculty.*                                                 

Conducting training sessions for
CISA faculty across the disciplines
on approaches to written feedback   
on multilingual writers' work.

Assessing and reporting on lan-
guage proficiency (initial, midyear,
and exit) for all enrolled ACCESS 
students.

CISA Faculty Committees to                                           
determine and revise program-wide
academic and language policies as
well as major curricular and pro-
grammatic changes (e.g., Curriculum 
Committee, Language Acquisition
Committee, Advisory Committee,
etc.).

A Assistant Director for Language Development & ELI Language Support Course Faculty

B Director & English Faculty Teaching CISA Courses

                                                                                     413
CHAPTER 17

RECONSTRUCTING
TEACHER ROLES THROUGH
A TRANSNATIONAL LENS:
LEARNING WITH/IN THE
AMERICAN UNIVERSITY OF
BEIRUT

Amy Zenger
American University Beirut

Joan Mullin
Illinois State University

Carol Peterson Haviland
University of California, San Bernandino

Drawing on US theories and practices to rethink writing instruction
in English at the richly multilingual American University of Beirut
(AUB) challenged our assumptions about teaching writing both in
Lebanon and in the US. We use this experience to reconsider how exist-
ing work in composition, WAC/WID, and L2/multilingual/translin-
gual scholarship should shape the education of students and faculty in
each of our universities; how we need to work reciprocally in language-
rich sites such as AUB to further develop translingual pedagogies; and
how we must rethink objectives and designs of all of our WAC/writing
center/writing programs.

   Anchored in our own observations and beliefs about teaching English in
multicultural settings and buttressed by the work of Canagarajah (2006),
Horner et al. (2011), Pederson (2010), and others, this chapter charts Carol
and Amy's process for rethinking writing instruction in English at the American

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.17                       415
Zenger, Mullin, and Haviland

University of Beirut (AUB), both for students and for faculty. However, the
process undertaken in the context of Lebanon demonstrates how those of us in
other countries, particularly in Anglophone-based systems, might benefit from
stretching our own assumptions about writing and writing instruction. This
initial work in turn had immediate implications for Joan's ongoing research
questions, several of which she and Carol had shared. Thus we began our
collaborative work on this project, which has challenged all three of us to think
differently about how we teach--and might better teach--writing courses in
Lebanon, in the US, and elsewhere.1

   As Joan and Carol collaborated on their current projects of studying knowledge
construction across borders and the role of literacy brokers/gatekeepers in
fostering or barring mutual collaboration, links became clear between their work
and how writing was being conceptualized with students and faculty at AUB.
Likewise, the rich experiences Amy and Carol used to recreate their WAC courses
clearly exemplified how Joan and Carol encouraged writing center practices to
shift. When Lillis and Curry (2010) published their work on how Anglo-centric
expectations had infused international publication and academic performance
expectations, all three of us saw the parallel expectations operating in writing
programs and writing centers whose supporting theories are built on similar
monolingual assumptions. Just as WAC, genre and cultural historic activity
theories alerted compositionists to their singular vision of writing, causing a
major shift in writing instruction at US universities from the 70s on, so too we
saw how the use of multilingual, transnational perspectives must shift--indeed is
already shifting--writing within disciplines. In our individual and collaborative
work within multilingual settings, we had to consider not only how existing
work in composition, WAC/WID, and L2/multilingual/translingual scholarship
should shape the education of students and faculty in our own universities, but
also how we need to work reciprocally in language rich sites such as AUB to
further develop translingual approaches to language difference, to add to our
understanding of pedagogies for multilingual writers, and to rethink objectives
and designs of all of our WAC/writing programs.

LANGUAGES IN LEBANON AND AT AUB

   Due to its complex history, geographical location at the intersection of
three continents, and travel-prone population, Lebanon has long been a deeply
multicultural and multilingual society. Today, the number of Lebanese citizens
who live in a very wide range of locations abroad is reputed to be three times
larger than the number of those who live within the boundaries of this small

416
                                                                             Reconstructing Teacher Roles

country; dual citizenships are quite common. Arabic is the official language
of Lebanon, but family, social, and work connections often must often be
maintained across geographic and linguistic boundaries, and Lebanese children
may learn more than one language at a very early age. The two most prevalent
non-Arabic languages are French and English--French as a legacy of the French
mandate that ended in 1943, and English because of its global currency in
business and scholarship. Armenian also figures as a strong minority language in
the national language landscape, and it is used primarily within the Armenian
community, which faithfully preserves the language at home and in school.
While English is commonly heard in the capital city, Beirut, it is not spoken
everywhere, and often it is used only in very specific places, in very specific
ways. Only recently have scholars begun to research attitudes towards these
various languages in Lebanon, and to observe how these languages interact and
are used for different purposes (Diab, 2006; Shaaban & Ghaith, 1999, 2002).

   Language policy in Lebanon reinforces the propensity towards multilingualism
by structuring it into the school curriculum. Almost all children are required
to learn Arabic, French, and English, although programs vary according to the
weight accorded to each of these languages. Any one of the three can be the
principal language of instruction, while the other two are relegated to ongoing
foreign language courses. Similarly, in the many universities in Lebanon,
instruction may take place in English, French, or Arabic. Furthermore,
pedagogical approaches tend to gravitate, loosely speaking, towards ways of
teaching that may be associated with the language of instruction: for example,
a French-educated student not only learns in French, but also tends to write in
genres and use textual conventions that are more commonly found in French
schools. (For a description of a similarly linguistically rich writing and teaching
environment in a graduate program at a Swedish-medium institution, see
Lavelle & Shima [this volume].)

   One additional twist, which is very relevant to writing instruction, is the
fact that Arabic is a diglossic language. The formal written and spoken forms
of Arabic that students learn in school are quite different from the spoken
dialects that they learn at home in their families. Formal Arabic, which is shared
across all Arabic speaking cultures, has a rich literary and linguistic tradition
and high prestige; spoken Arabic dialects, however, vary considerably from
one country to the next, and tend to be a much more oral phenomenon. The
diglossic character of Arabic means that for Lebanese students, all writing may
be experienced as somehow already "foreign," even in Arabic. Because of new
media, this phenomenon has changed recently: Lebanese Arabic is written
using Latin characters and numerals (for text messaging) or Arabic characters,
commonly seen, for example, on Facebook, in billboards, or in graffiti.

                                                                                                417
Zenger, Mullin, and Haviland

LANGUAGE INSTRUCTION AT AUB

   The impetus for reviewing writing instruction at the American University of
Beirut (AUB) has long been underway, first as part of the long rebuilding process
that was undertaken after the fighting in the 1975-1990 civil war in Lebanon
had stopped, and, later, in response to the urgings of accreditation reports (US
accreditation for the university was awarded in 2004 by the Commission on
Higher Education of the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools).
Since its inception in 1866, the university has had a highly sensitive relationship
to universities in the United States. Its institutional documents anchor it in
American liberal arts models of education, and it is bound to address the
requirements and concerns of accrediting bodies situated in the United States; at
the same time a commitment to serving local needs and communities has been
embedded in the institution's purpose from the outset. Thus, the institution has
continually negotiated competing and overlapping objectives, values, cultures,
and practices as it interprets structures and approaches often generated in the
US and performs them in the context of Lebanon and the Middle East-North
Africa region.

   Unlike the US context, where the assumption of a monolingual English
language culture must be countered with strong arguments, in Lebanon, the
multilingual character of society is abundantly evident. Teachers at AUB expect
students to have complex language identifications and a personal history with
two or more written languages, in addition to one or more spoken Arabic
dialects. In fact, it is very rare to encounter a student who speaks and writes
only in English. The multilingual reality is reflected to some extent in the
curriculum: To satisfy general education requirements, students are required to
take communication skills courses both in Arabic and in English. (A "foreign"
language is not required.) In all courses at AUB, however, except for Arabic
and the few foreign language electives, English is the medium of instruction, a
status it acquired in 1882. Until then, the primary language of instruction had
been Arabic. In the last annual report of his long career, college founder and
president Daniel Bliss (1902) reflected on the decision to shift to English, citing
three important motivating factors: a desire among students to learn English;
the difficulty of enrolling non-Arabic speaking students from other parts of the
region, such as Persian or Turkish students; and a lack of Arabic textbooks in
technical fields, such as chemistry or modern medicine--a lack that professors
of the college had sought to remedy by writing and publishing Arabic textbooks
themselves, but which they found too overwhelming to address successfully.
According to Jeha (2004), when a debate over Darwinism led to the abrupt
departure of several medical school faculty members in 1882, new professors

418
                                                                             Reconstructing Teacher Roles

could not be found who were fluent enough to lecture on technical subjects in
Arabic. As Jeha explains, the move to hire English-lecturing faculty--driven
by practical necessity--sealed the shift to English as the principle language of
instruction; however, the historical complexity of the language policy in the
university has meant that debates around this issue have always been, and still
remain, very alive.

   This unique language environment of Lebanon has shaped instruction
at AUB in several ways, at least from our perspective as American-educated
compositionists. One salient effect is the fact that existing core required
courses are framed primarily as instruction in language, rather than in writing
or composition. For example, the required communication skills courses are
named "Academic English" and "Advanced Academic English"; the courses
in Arabic are called "Readings in Arabic Literature" or "Readings in Arabic
Heritage." While composition programs in US colleges and universities are
broadly conceived as "writing" programs (in English), instruction in writing
at AUB derives from English language teaching, and along with listening,
speaking, and reading, it has historically been conceived as only one of the
several skills important for learning the language. While requiring instruction
in two languages acknowledges multilingualism, in one sense, the isolation of
the two programs from each other does not reflect the actual language identities
of the students, who in everyday practice move freely between the two, as well
as French, several local Arabic dialects, and other languages, as the occasion
demands.

   A third important phenomenon we have noticed is that the tendency to
relegate the teaching of writing to English instructors, a familiar attitude in
US universities, is magnified at AUB, perhaps because approximately 75%
of the faculty learned English as a foreign language. Despite extraordinary
fluency and very high levels of proficiency, which allow faculty to teach and
publish prolifically in their fields in English, a strong perception remains that
commenting and assessing the language of a written document-- "the English"
--can only be the province of English instructors.

   Horner and Trimbur (2004) note that "assumptions about language
that were institutionalized around the turn of the century, at a high tide of
imperialism, colonial adventure, and overseas missionary societies, have become
sedimented in the way we think about writing pedagogy and curriculum" (p.
608), and the same is true at AUB. Here, students are eager to participate in
world economies and scholarship, which entails using both spoken and written
English, but instruction at AUB, as in most places in Lebanon, remains limited
by traditions that focus on conveying rules and conventions for constructing
academic texts. Students' lived experience with languages, language acquisition,

                                                                                                419
Zenger, Mullin, and Haviland

and cultural rhetorics largely figures as an obstacle to their fluency, as a source of
errors and deficiencies: thus students who are "weak in English" are positioned
by teachers and policy makers as academic outsiders with problems, rather than
as knowledge constructors. Although these practices conveniently maintain
traditional and tidy hierarchies and allow status-quo gate keeping, they
perpetuate a conservative rather than generative understanding of language,
and they silence the contributions that multilingual students can make to
language research and to knowledge in their own disciplines. Engaging with the
traditional language policy in the AUB allowed us to see in high relief the failure
of all of our writing courses to creatively address the needs and abilities of our
students. Along with Canagarajah and Jerskey (2009), we wondered, "What
kind of pedagogy would accommodate the emerging realizations of literacy,
identity, and competence in the context of globalization and postmodern
thinking?"(p. 482).

WORKING TOWARDS A MULTILINGUAL
WRITING PEDAGOGY IN ENGLISH 300:
TRANSLINGUALISM AS DISCIPLINARY WRITING

   To explore these questions, Carol and Amy began their initial research
within the language rich cultures of AUB in the spring of 2010 with MA/PhD
students in two course sections of English 300: Writing in the Disciplines, an
academic writing course for graduate students. These English 300 students were
beginning graduate programs across the university, in nursing, engineering,
computer science, public health, math, agriculture, and many other fields.
Graduates primarily of Arabic- or French-language medium universities
in Lebanon and the wider Middle East-North Africa region, they had been
required to take the course, based on the scores they had received on an English
language proficiency exam (88-96 on the internet-based TOEFL or equivalent
scores on other tests). This placement at once flagged them as "low proficiency"
users of English, yet inducted them into a high-stakes situation, as they would
very shortly be expected to present their research, compose theses, and write
for publication in English. Many students had very limited experience with
academic writing in any language, much less in English. (Almost uniformly,
they apologized, particularly to "American" faculty, for their "poor English," in
terms that reflected pride, frustration, and embarrassment.)

   Before 2007, when English 300 was first added to the curriculum, entering
graduate students who were required to take English courses had been placed
into the core Communication Skills courses, where they studied side-by-

420
                                                                             Reconstructing Teacher Roles

side with undergraduate students. Taking an undergraduate pre-requisite
made students ineligible for Graduate Assistantships, however. Moreover, the
undergraduate courses were neither tailored to graduate students' academic
needs nor amenable to their more mature approaches to learning. The new,
3-credit course was designed to provide students with key academic writing
and reading skills that they could situate within their disciplines. John Swales
and Christine Feak's text, Academic Writing for Graduate Students, provided the
guide for exercises and assignments. Students were asked to compose texts that
followed common patterns in academic writing (in the language of Swales and
Feak, these were identified as: defining; problem/process/solution; critiquing;
summarizing; and reporting research). Sessions with information librarians
provided an introduction to searching library sources, and the course also stressed
learning to document sources appropriately. Informal writing was practiced in
the form of journals and reflective essays. The course was offered through the
Communication Skills Program, but differed from the other courses (which are
almost all taught by Instructors), in that it could only be taught by a faculty
member holding a doctoral degree.

   As we began to implement the most current version of AUB's English
300 syllabus, we became aware of the mismatch between pedagogies that
define students as deficient and that focus on what they can't do and our own
observations of how much these English 300 students actually could do with
language. As we watched them move across languages, sites, and mediums, we
became convinced that we should begin by discovering more of what they did
know about written and spoken languages, about cultural conventions, and
about disciplinary rhetorics. And so we began to reconsider the traditional roles
of these courses and of ourselves as literacy gatekeepers or promoters and instead
worked toward Lillis and Curry's description of literacy brokers 2 with both
students and faculty. However, as we observed our students' linguistic expertise
as well as their "English deficits," we found the term "broker" challenged our
own pedagogical inclinations. Although still a position of power, as is a broker,
we chose to think of our role as reciprocal: facilitating knowledge construction
required all participants to learn as well as teach. Instead of capitalizing on
students' image of themselves as inadequate, as needing to be filled with
grammatical and syntactic information, we began thinking about where we
might shift the usual "professors export information; students import it" ratio;
in short, we reversed this ratio and began importing their complex language
histories into the work of the course, and into how we think about our own
(new) identities as collaborative literacy brokers.

   While most key assignments for writing remained essentially unchanged
(a literacy narrative, summaries of reading, an annotated bibliography, and a

                                                                                                421
Zenger, Mullin, and Haviland

full research proposal), we added new ones; more importantly, we sought to
change our role as instructors within the dynamics of the course. We asked
students to write and reflect upon their language histories with a language
use questionnaire (See Appendix A), which students completed online and
then discussed in class. The introduction of the questionnaire and subsequent
discussions provided students with a venue to acknowledge and share what
they knew about language, explain usages derived from French or Arabic, or
articulate the different ways political scientists, nurses, or engineers present data,
as well as the perceived need for revised English instruction in this course and in
the emerging writing initiative (WAC/WID). The small but significant shift in
the course design fostered instruction that views English as an additional rather
than replacement language, instruction that positions multilingual students
as informants rather than as problems, instruction that changes faculty's
gatekeeping function to that of collaborative literacy brokers. (For much the
same reasons, a language use questionnaire is also an essential pedagogical
element in the graduate writing support courses described by Craig and Lavelle
& Shima [this volume]. The latter also describe the ways in which faculty work
to foster a view of cultural and linguistic differences as resources not deficits.)
Our seeking to be instructed by our students affirmed them as rhetorical agents
who are "always doing things that make a difference. Unlike subjects, agents
are defined neither by mastery, nor by determination, nor by fragmentation.
They are unique embodied, and autonomous individuals in that they are self-
organizing, but by virtue of that fact, they, as well as the surround with which
they interact, are always changing" (Cooper, p. 425). As instructors, we acted
as "observers" and "reflective practitioners," but not as observers of students
as subjects who must be corrected. Listening to our students' conversations
before and after class showed us the verbal flexibility that allowed them to fit
elements of three or more languages into a single coherent conversation. Instead
of subjects to be studied for ways in which we as instructors could intervene,
students became the linguistic agents with whom we, as literacy brokers, would
be working.

   Our education began with students' responses to the language questionnaires
in which they disclosed how much they knew about language. They detailed
rich and complexly layered processes of both simultaneously and sequentially
acquiring two, three, four, or five languages. Their descriptions of their
current languaging practices showed them selecting and combining from
these languages to engage with different audiences and settings. For example, a
political science student reported that she and her husband, both Syrian, speak
chiefly in English because although they both learned Arabic as their home
language, he had had most of his schooling in English and is more comfortable

422
                                                                             Reconstructing Teacher Roles

speaking and writing it. She speaks English also with domestic help, but with
her parents she speaks Arabic if it is personal--but English for everything else.
Several students described home-related differentiations, speaking Arabic with
grandparents, French with parents, and English with domestic help (who are
usually migrant workers from Sri Lanka, the Philippines, or Ethiopia), as well
as campus differentiations, depending upon whether school was conducted in
Arabic, French, or English. Several also noted that, in their workplaces, they
most often spoke a mix of Arabic and English but wrote most often in English.
Their texting practices were a mix of Arabic and English, most often a mystery
to both their English and Arabic speaking professors! As observer-teachers in
reflective practice, we provided the ground on which we mirrored to students
what they already knew about negotiating context-specific expectations, but
they in turn continually challenged our own tendency to "teach to" them as
"students." They enacted multilingual theories with their linguistic acuity, and
in turn they contributed to our own understandings of the ways disciplines and
languages interacted.

   In class, we watched two electrical and computer engineering students, one
Armenian/Syrian and the other Lebanese, both contribute to class discussions
and write sophisticated papers in English. They also ably contrasted the ways
their ECE journals in different subfields review literature with the ways their
Lebanese nursing student counterparts described the same moves in nursing
journals. As they described these journal articles, they also observed significant
differences in Arabic, French, and English rhetorics. For example, they cited many
instances in which Arabic or French logic simply didn't translate into English,
and they offered word counts to illustrate what they called the "parsimony"
of English and the "elaboration" of Arabic and French. Finally, they noted an
important pedagogical implication of these differences as they reflected that
assignments written in English seem to invite very open exploration while those
in French stipulate both what data mattered and how it should be displayed.
These articulations became for us a language of instruction within the class,
taken up by us as teachers rather than substituted with a pre-formed rhetorical
frame; the more we refrained from naming student reflections, the more our
own opportunities as brokers and agents grew--and were exchanged.

   Even our seemingly simple responses to interrogate rather than correct
produced generative interchanges that more fruitfully pointed to the laminations
and subtle meanings that are carried in the grammar and the structure of
language/thinking. As a Lebanese public health student described writing a
grant proposal for a daycare center for elderly Alzheimer's patients, she showed
a thoughtful sensitivity to the Lebanese family constructs. As she watched
middle-aged parents struggle to accommodate the shift from women being

                                                                                                423
Zenger, Mullin, and Haviland

mostly at home and available to care for aging parents, to men and women
working outside of their homes, leaving no one at home to provide that care, she
was mindful then that her proposal would need to be sensitive to this cultural
shift if elder daycare were to be acceptable. She was equally mindful of her
English instruction when she was editing, often carefully telescoping her many
elaborated Arabic phrases into more succinct English constructions. Thus, to
limit the number of times she repeated "caring for patients who have dementia,"
she began writing "caring for demented patients." As the writer read her text
to the class, Carol was unsure whether this was accurate in Lebanon so asked
how they would react if someone said that their grandmother had dementia:
the students said "sad." "How about if someone said that she is demented," she
asked: they said "mad"--and everyone laughed as the student commented that
knowing the English rules doesn't always produce correct usages.

   In return, our students' descriptions of how languages "feel" helped us
understand and explain some of the ways language embeds cultural habits and
shapes assertions. When asked which languages they liked best, many students
said that they like Arabic because it "feels good in their ears," because they
"don't have to think to use it," and because it is richly elaborated. They like
French because it is "elegant and classy," and they like English because "it gets
straight to the goal," is compact, easy, and very useful in many workplaces.

   Asking about language histories, habits, and feelings allowed the conversations
in class and the written comments on papers to focus on understanding how
language and texts work and feel and sound, in particular contexts, and to avoid
reinforcing teaching that simply conveys rules, conventions and norms that
the students must learn to emulate. Talk in the classroom could draw on the
knowledge that students brought with them about their languages and previous
writing experiences, as well as on the differences among their various disciplines.
Just as important, that instructors' acts of asking positioned them as agents/
learners along with their students: repositioning ourselves in the classroom,
repositions students in as mutually interactive knowledge-builders engaged in a
process of mutual negotiated literacy brokerage.

   Beyond "interesting," these students' responses helped us think more
seriously about that "elaborateness" that Western English conventions
undercut, ones that might better be interrogated to avoid losing what might
be otherwise lost in the bargain; about the rhythms and music with which
different languages and rhetorical styles are infused--the tones that color and
convey concepts as well as word choice; about exporting Western notions
of argument and conflict, and questioning the act of negatively tagging the
"non-linear," or "lack of transitions." A linear, generally deductive, and thesis-

424
                                                                             Reconstructing Teacher Roles

driven argument pattern, based on Artistotelian logic, carries with it forms of
thinking, ways of questioning and producing knowledge, practices of debate
and contestation, expectations of transitions that are not the only ways to build
or present knowledge. Yet the very assumptions inherent in how an argument
must be made and must proceed, the ones driving this article, may not be the
best for approaching issues, raising questions, building knowledge upon which
non-western cultural practices are built (Lipson & Binkley, 2009). Challenging
the monological mode of constructing communication reframes teaching,
learning and communicating as a simultaneously interlingual and interlogical
series of inventions that emerge from meshed interactions.

   It can be argued that framing the work of this course primarily in terms
of collaborative language study and of constructing knowledge in chemistry,
nursing, or political science, rather than as "learning English," also afforded
the means to alter how students were perceived by others, how they viewed
themselves as users of language, and how the work of the literacy classroom
could be represented in a different way--focusing on participation in a social
discourse, rather than as a display of discrete skills. Drawing on the work of
James Gee and Brian Street, Canagarjah and Jersky point out:

         We do not write only to construct a rule-governed text...
         Multilingual writers benefit from a pedagogy that allows
         writing to go beyond narrowly defined processes of
         text construction. Writing becomes instead a rhetorical
         negotiation for achieving social meanings and functions.
         In other words, writing is not just constitutive; it is also
         performative. .... We write to achieve specific interests,
         represent our preferred values and identities, and fulfill
         diverse needs. (pp. 482-483)

   A performative model of writing, and the agency it assumes or allows in
the writer, also emerges in the work of Gunther Kress and other members of
the New London Group. According to Kress and Jeff Bezemer (2009), "Text
making is a semiotic act in which meaning is the issue in every aspect, because
it is also a social act with social consequences"(p. 171). The implications of
this assertion for writing and writing instruction is that "[c]omposition seen
as competent performance is replaced by design, seen as the attempt to make
constantly varying rhetorical purposes effective" (p. 171). This definition
counters approaches that confine writing to a narrow performance of skills,
approaches that inevitably categorize writers according to the skills they lack,

                                                                                                425
Zenger, Mullin, and Haviland

while excluding the evident capabilities that they do possess as irrelevant, a
consequence that is especially searing for writers like the English 300 students,
who have been officially marked as "weak" in English.

   A few aspects of the English 300 course worked to undermine the assumption
that texts are static, objective, containers of information, and to represent them
instead as performative acts of a particular sort. Adding a second required textbook
was valuable in this respect because dissonances between the two texts used
allowed new perceptions of meaning-making to emerge. We paired Rewriting:
How to do Things with Words, by Joseph Harris with the Swales and Feak text.
At the start of the semester, students analyzed how authors of each of the books
represented "academic writing" and compared their two extended definitions.

   A model of academic writing that draws on the concept of performativity
is at the core of Harris's text. In his "Introduction," Harris describes how his
understanding of academic writing, and his desire to provide new terminology
for the things writers do when they are composing, is indebted to his powerful
encounter with John Austin's book Doing Things with Words:

         In this book [Harris writes] ... Austin argues that in thinking
         about language his fellow philosophers have long been
         overconcerned with decoding the precise meaning or truth
         value of various statements--a fixation that has blinded them
         from considering the routine yet complex ways in which
         people use words to get things done: to marry, to promise,
         to bet, to apologize, to persuade, to contract, and the like.
         Austin calls such uses of language performatives and suggests
         that it is often more useful to ask what a speaker is trying
         to do in saying something than what he or she means by it.
         While I don't try to apply Austin's thinking here in any exact
         way, I do think of myself as working in his mode. (p. 3)

   Harris is intent on describing academic writing in terms of what writers are
doing to affect a particular project that interests them. By contrast, Swales and
Feak base their representation of academic writing, as well as the textbook's
information, tasks, and instructions to student writers, on extensive knowledge
of, description, and analysis of, the features of published academic texts. The
textbook reveals patterns of organization and language use pertinent to academic
writing in any field, and it focuses on supporting writers as they construct
similar texts themselves. While Swales and Feak's representation of academic
writing tapped into familiar assumptions students brought with them about
writing, Harris's discussion challenged these assumptions, and it introduced

426
                                                                             Reconstructing Teacher Roles

new ways to think about how texts respond to and shape contexts. Founding
our work in the class on an animated analysis of these two approaches helped
shift expectations about the course and about writing for all of us.

   For example, previous assignments had followed a traditional trajectory of
writing summaries, analyses, reports, and critiques, with only tacitly assumed
ties to students' majors or professions. One of the new writing projects, an
interview with a faculty member in the student's field, contributed significantly
to students' understanding of writing as a social act, rather than as a set of
discrete skills. Students read an article published by one of their professors and
then met with the professor to discuss his or her work as an author. Asking the
faculty member about the research itself as well as the process of doing and
reporting the research invited students and faculty to think about how writing
constructs their fields or professions, about how forms prescribe what may and
may not be said, about the implications of having most research activity based
in English-only sources. The interview showed students how texts were often
composed as an integral part of a broader discourse, and could be viewed not as
a "product" but as a medium, often produced collaboratively, for participating
in ongoing cycles of research and discussion in their fields. As one student wrote
in her end-of-semester reflection, "Research and looking for new inventions
and new technologies to help our community is my aim and these projects
can't be proven to be true unless they are documented in papers accompanied
with experiments and results that show their efficiency and applicability." Her
realization echoes the observation made by Canagarajah and Jersky: "Texts are
not just context-bound or context-sensitive. They are context transforming" (p.
483). Viewing her work as a writer as integral to her work as a designer of green
energy technology allowed this student to perceive the texts she composes as
ways to participate in her field, and to weigh the effectiveness of the language
and other features of the text according to this purpose.

   Finally, course assessment also worked to support a shift from perceiving
texts in static ways to seeing them as performative, and to frame conventions,
rules and standards as constructions that can be useful or contested. Unlike
undergraduate communication skills courses, English 300 was graded on a
pass/fail basis. For instructors, assessment meant determining whether work
presented and participation could be "Passed"--accorded the equivalent in US
terms of a 2.2 grade point average. In one respect, the relatively undemanding
requirement made room for the circumstances of this student population, who
are often full-time employees, graduate assistants or parents, as well as being
students. We found that the pass/fail assessment allowed all of us to focus on
commenting and discussion, by removing the effect of this grade on the general
grade average. Ironically, by allowing us to encourage more risk-taking, and

                                                                                                427
Zenger, Mullin, and Haviland

to keep attention from fixating on texts as objects to be graded, this form of
assessment actually supported more sophisticated student writing. Recently,
we have also instituted a grading contract, based on the work of Danielewicz
and Elbow (2009), to further reinforce the goals for the course. The contract
recognizes the agency of students by defining key aspects of the course, such as
revising, responding to others, and being present, not as teacher expectations,
but as student responsibilities; a passing grade is guaranteed to the student from
the outset, as long as the clearly articulated responsibilities are fulfilled.

GOING FORWARD, CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES:
AUB'S CAMPUS-WIDE WRITING INITIATIVE

   The lessons learned in the process of rethinking English 300 have continued
to inform teaching and program design at AUB, and they have been carried by
Joan and Carol to their US institutions. We believe that--from the inception of
the program for faculty to the new relationship between student agent-brokers
and instructor broker-students--they also provide useful models for us all, and
we invite our readers to imagine their own contexts operating similarly and to
equally imagine the subtle shifts that might occur as a result.

   At AUB, in 2010 and 2011, Carol and Amy began the larger project
of designing the university's approach to language instruction across the
disciplines, a project that the provost and General Education Committee
were enthusiastic about because of recommendations in a recent accreditation
report, and because they had been awarded a three-year Andrew W. Mellon
Foundation grant to establish a campus-wide writing program. Indeed,
the strong endorsement of increased emphasis on writing, mandated in
new General Education requirements and widely advocated by the faculty,
presented an opportunity for constructive engagement with policies and
attitudes represented by "English" and "writing." This approach to constructing
a local WAC/WID/CAC program drew on well-established programs in the
US. However, it was particularly important to help administrators and faculty
assume roles that foster reciprocal knowledge construction and underscore
student contributions to learning, to stress social views of literacy that
represent writing in performative terms, and to assert the value of situating
English not in isolation but in relation with the several other languages that
are present in the AUB context and that are used by multilingual writers. (See
also Lavelle & Shima [this volume] for a discussion of how faculty conveyed
to international graduate students their value as intellectual contributors to

428
                                                                             Reconstructing Teacher Roles

knowledge construction, including setting priorities for reading and taking a
"let-it-pass" approach to lingua franca surface errors.)

   While administrators and faculty initially looked to us as importers of
knowledge about WAC/WID programs to AUB, we believed that accepting
this role unambiguously would belie all that we claimed to have learned from
our work with English 300 students. Thus, in the process of establishing
the new writing program, key moments have arisen when this theoretical
stance--to construct knowledge about writers collaboratively, to conceive of
multilingualism as an asset, and to think transnationally--shaped decisions
in critical ways. One important decision arose in relation to how additional
General Education writing courses were conceived. Just as English 300 students
had been seen as deficient and needing language repair via an "English" course,
undergraduate students across the disciplines were seen as deficient writers,
particularly in English, and the initial guidelines proposed they take two more
"English" courses, delivered in ways that did not participate in or "detract" from
the work of their majors. We came to these discussions with the scholarship of
our own fields, and we also thought about the commitments to being good
brokers we had made to our English 300 students. Thus, we listened carefully
to deans' and chairs' descriptions of their students' linguistic failings, but we
also urged them to consider the language expertise AUB students and faculty
possess and to consider alternate instructional models that might engage
students as biologists, nurses, nutritionists, computer engineers, and public
health workers. Again, as we took seriously our roles as brokers rather than
importers, we were able to learn alongside administrators and faculty as they
thought about the writerly moves they made as professionals and then the ways
they might create parallel moves for students--with support from the writing
center and the teaching-learning center. In this process, they and we discovered
ways that intentional and visible work with writing might be part of already
existing courses. By the end of this process, the General Education guidelines
had been revised to require that each student take two courses within the major
that embed explicit disciplinary writing instruction.

   The development of ongoing courses to satisfy the General Education
guidelines is work that progresses slowly. In individual and small group meetings,
Amy and Carol (as well as Joan and Carol in the US and other sites) have
thought alongside colleagues in other disciplines about how writing constructs
and is constructed by their fields. Only then were they--and we--able to see
how, even though it might be untidy and time-consuming, embedding writing
in existing courses--using writing for those courses' purposes--was more likely
to be "real" for students and sustainable for faculty. To do this work required

                                                                                                429
Zenger, Mullin, and Haviland

redefining efficiency, for us, for our colleagues, and for our students. It meant
lots of "front-loading": selecting in each major at first just one course that all
students would take and that embodied many of the habits and concepts of
the major. It meant rethinking that course in terms of language functions, of
why, how, and with whom writing typically is done in the field as well as the
implications of those habits and features for the discipline and its participants--
and then how these moves might be incorporated in students' projects. It meant
facing the uncomfortable recognition that sometimes disciplines' traditions
conserve unwarranted power or simply no-longer-existing technologies and
need to be challenged. It meant trying--and both succeeding and failing.
Mutual high points occurred when faculty experienced the "aha" moments of
realizing how much writing they already were teaching and saw how making
their writerly moves more visible might move students toward more expert roles
as biologists or geologists. They then also began to incorporate elements of the
base course into their other courses and to watch for the effects of these courses
in students' senior projects.

   The writing initiative, which reports directly to the provost, has been
positioned within the already-existing WAC/WID-oriented Writing Center,
a choice that Amy and Carol recommended, for it provides a hospitable and
ongoing physical and intellectual location for both students and faculty. To
date, 35 faculty members have been directly involved with the development
of the courses they teach. In the first three semesters of implementation, 19
pilot courses have been taught at least once, in Agriculture and Food Sciences,
Engineering and Architecture, Nursing, and Arts and Sciences, even as more
continue to be developed. The courses have enrolled approximately 1,550
students, and have been supported by 2,800 hours of writing center meetings.
At the end of three years, we project that faculty will have designed and taught
at least one course in each major in which students look seriously at the ways
multiple kinds of texts and authors, including themselves, construct both
schooling and professional work in their disciplines.

   Preserving the important lessons learned in English 300 as this large program
continues to unfold calls for strategic approaches that can ensure that pedagogical
values remain central to its work. Faculty development is at the heart of the new
writing initiative, and thus as writing center staff meet with course instructors,
they not only function as literacy "brokers," but they also introduce current
scholarship on multilingual/translingual writing into readings and discussions.
Also, inspired by the broker role of learning from or with students and faculty,
the writing center and English department are collaborating to conduct a
four-year longitudinal research project to study writing, writing practices, and
representations of writing of students and faculty members.

430
                                                                             Reconstructing Teacher Roles

   The education of writing center tutors represents another important area
for strategic engagement with writing instruction across the university, an area
in which to forward social theories of literacy and multilingual writers and
practices that support them. In addition to the formal, intentional discussions
of shared readings and tutoring observations in the writing center, meaningful
encounters often occur without planning. Recently, for example, a group of
electrical engineering students came to the writing center to discuss a report on
their project to design a control system for a hard drive. They questioned the
value of discussing the report with a writing center tutor, since, "it has hardly
any English--it is mostly formulas and figures." When tutors explained that the
visit was an occasion to discuss the effectiveness of their whole report, including
language and the social context in which it circulates, students engaged in a very
lively discussion (in English and Arabic) about revisions.

   As we work in AUB's consortium of writing program faculty, writing initiative
faculty and administrators, writing center staff, and students (both as tutors and
authors), this transnational view of language anchors a pedagogy that asks what
students and faculty know about languages and disciplinary structures. As we
have studied the answers to these questions, both we and our colleagues have
found them to generate thoughtful ways to build on multilingual knowledges.
For example, aware that although AUB's language of instruction is English and
much professional work takes place in English, neither faculty nor students
function in an English-only world. Like the English 300 public health student,
most faculty and students work across multiple languages. They interview
clients, talk to patients, write grants, read local and global rules of governance,
negotiate contracts, and design agricultural reforms in these several languages
but also as translinguals or transnationals, using a mix of English, Arabic(s),
French, and other languages. With a more nuanced consideration of their own
translingualism, they notice how Lebanon's linguistic practices reveal age and
class positions as they hear the public performances of the Lebanese Symphony
announced in English and the Chamber of Commerce-sponsored performances
announced in French--all in the same Catholic church on a French-speaking
university campus. They think amid linguistic and cultural conventions and
patterns, transforming both local sites and global practices.

   Embedding writing within existing courses rather than "adding English
courses," is shifting the focus away from English and onto a social, performative
view of writing that allows faculty to invest in the project in ways that did
not appear to be possible before. Already some faculty teaching the writing-
embedded courses have taken the opportunity--and the challenge--of
engaging with and arguing about the shift away from "English" and towards
constructing meaningful texts. And, in fact, these conversations are occurring

                                                                                                431
Zenger, Mullin, and Haviland

with students in classes and with faculty in Teaching and Learning seminars as
well as informally in the faculty dining room. Further, to support faculty and
students with these projects, administrators have also seen the value of investing
in a more broadly conceived writing center that can provide an ongoing home
for this richer work with writing.
GOING FORWARD: BEYOND AUB

   The three of us are optimistic about these projects and look forward to
expanding them at AUB and with other colleagues in other sites. As the AUB
program develops the second round of writing-embedded courses, we will
continue to study the ways that multilinguals move from using their several
languages, yet compartmentalizing each language's words, idioms, and rhetorical
patterns, to more cross-fertilized languages, each bearing traces of the other
and ultimately being changed by these exchanges. We will look to the work
of Berry, Hawisher, and Selfe (2012) to reshape the ways the academy reads

Figure 16.1 Poster produced by graduate business students

432
                                                                             Reconstructing Teacher Roles

multilingual students' writing and likewise the ways that those students' writing
enriches the writing of monolingual academics, both faculty and students. We
will watch for shifts in the ways instructors' assessments differentiate between
errors in meaning and those errors that native speakers might notice but that
don't interfere with meaning. We will look to outsider "errors" that indicate
different ways of expressing ideas and that make visible the point that language
offers many ways of making sense. For example, the three of us adopted one of
Carol's English 300 student's "errors" that expanded our use of "discipline" and
"field" into "meadow" and began referring to the "meadow" of composition
and rhetoric; in doing so, we meant to suggest that we should see our field as
capacious, open to different seedlings, participants, and languages.

   We conclude with a poster produced by AUB's graduate business students
(see Figure 16.1, previous page). Just as they are challenging themselves in the
text of the poster to move beyond dreams to reconstruct Lebanon's business
practices, we are eager to act more visibly and emphatically upon the implications
of transnational language work.

   Finally, we want to add to the position statements asserting students' rights
to their own languages, the recognition that multilingual students in particular
have much to offer monolinguals and monolingual-based writing programs. It
is our responsibility to seek out opportunities for dialogue and collaborative
inquiry, such as ours, as we construct a richer understanding of translingualism's
possibilities for our students and for our programs.

NOTES

1. At AUB, Amy has been a faculty member in the English Department since
2004. Carol, a professor of English at California State University, San Ber-
nardino, received a spring 2010 appointment as AUB Visiting Professor of Eng-
lish and an additional appointment in spring 2011. Her assignment, to embed
writing in the majors as part of a revised General Education program, included
co-teaching a graduate writing course with Amy. Joan, professor of English at
Illinois State University, has been engaged in transnational scholarship through
her work with writers and writing instruction in multiple institutions in and
outside the US. The authorial "we," thus represents Amy and Carol when they
report on AUB, but all three speaking collaboratively out of their engagement
with multi/translingual issues.
2. For further use of the term "literacy broker", see Lillis and Curry, 2010; see
also Mullin, Haviland, and Zenger, 2012.

                                                                                                433
Zenger, Mullin, and Haviland

REFERENCES

Berry, P. W., Hawisher, G. E., & Selfe, C. L. (2012).Transnational Literate Lives
   in Digital Times. Logan, UT: Computers and Composition Digital Press/
   Utah State University Press. Retrieved from http://ccdigitalpress.org/trans-
   national/

Bliss, D. (1902). Thirty-sixth annual report of the Syrian Protestant College to
   the Board of Managers 1901-1902. Archives and Special Collections, Jafet
   Library. American University of Beirut.

Canagarajah, A. S. (2006 ). Toward a writing pedagogy of shuttling between
   languages: lLarning from multilingual writers. College English 68, 589-604.

Canagarajah, A. S. & Jerskey, M. (2009) Meeting the needs of advanced multi-
   lingual writers. In R. Beard, D. Myhill, J. Riley, & M. Nystrand, M. (Eds.)
   The SAGE Handbook of Writing Development (pp. 472-488). London: Sage.

Cooper, M. (2011). Rhetorical agency as emergent and enacted. College Com-
   position and Communication, 62(3), 420-449.

Danielewicz, J., & Elbow, P. (2009). A unilateral grading contract to improve
   learning and teaching. College Composition and Communication, 61(2), 244-
   268.

Diab, R. L. (2006). University students' beliefs about learning English and
   French in Lebanon. System: An International Journal of Educational Technol-
   ogy and Applied Linguistics, 34(1), 80-96.

Gee, J. P. (1990). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses. Critical
   perspectives on literacy and education. London: Falmer Press.

Harris, J. (2006). Rewriting: How to do things with texts. Logan, UT: Utah State
   University Press.

Horner, B., & Trimbur, J. (2002). English only and U. S. college composition.
   College Composition and Communication, 53, 594-630.

Horner, B., Lu, M-Z., Royster, J. J., & Trimbur, J. (2011). Language difference
   in writing: Toward a translingual approach. College English, 73, 303-321.

Jeha, S. (2004). Darwin and the crisis of 1882 in the medical department (S.
   Kaya, Trans.). Beirut: American University of Beirut Press.

Kress, G., & Bezemer, J. (2009). Writing in a multimodal world of representa-
   tion. In R. Beard, D. Myhill, J. Riley, & M. Nystrand (Eds.) The SAGE hand-
   book of writing development (pp. 167-181). London: SAGE Publications.

Lillis, T. & Curry, M. J. (2010). Academic writing in a global context: The politics
   and practices of publishing in English. London: Routledge.

Lipson C. S. & Binkley, R. A. (Eds.). (2009). Ancient non-Greek rhetoric. An-
   derson, South Carolina: Parlor Press.

434
                                                                             Reconstructing Teacher Roles

Mullin, J., Haviland, C. P., & Zenger, A. (in press). Import/export work? Using
   cross-cultural theories to rethink Englishes, identities, and genres in writing
   centers. In B. Horner, & K. Kopelsen. (Eds.), Reworking English in Rhetoric
   and Composition: Global Interrogations, Local Interventions. Louisville, KY:
   University of Louisville Press.

New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social
   futures. Harvard Educational Review, 66, 60-92.

Pederson, A. M. (2010). Negotiating cultural identities through language:
   Academic English in Jordan. College Composition and Communication,
   62(2),283-310.

Shaaban, K. & Ghaith, G. (2002). University students' perceptions of the eth-
   nolinguistic vitality of Arabic, French and English in Lebanon. Journal of
   Sociolinguistics, 6, 557-574.

Shaaban, K. & Ghaith, G. (1999). Lebanon's language-in-education policies:
   From bilingualism to trilingualism. Language Problems and Language Plan-
   ning, 23, 1-16.

Swales, J., & Feak, C. (2004). Academic writing for graduate students: Essential
   tasks and skills (2nd ed.). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

APPENDIX A

   AUB Language Questionnaire (reformatted for space reasons)

   We are interested in learning more about your language experiences as we
adapt this and other courses to build on AUB students' multilingual strengths.
We will aggregate responses anonymously. Thank you for participating.

I. Your languages
    First language:
         Age ____ Teacher ____ Speak? ____ Read? ____ Write? ____
    Second language:
         Age ____ Teacher ____ Speak? ____ Read? ____ Write? ____
    Third language:
         Age ____ Teacher ____ Speak? ____ Read? ____ Write? ____
    Fourth language:
         Age ____ Teacher ____ Speak? ____ Read? ____ Write? ____
    Others?

                                                                                                435
Zenger, Mullin, and Haviland

II. Speaking
      What language(s) do you speak at home and with whom? Siblings?
         Parents? Grandparents? Domestic help?
      What language(s) do you speak with your friends?
      What language(s) do you speak at school and with whom? Classmates?
         Professors?
      What language(s) do you speak in any work situations and with whom?
         Peers? Managers?

III. Reading
      In which languages do you read for which specific school purposes? For
         example, you might read engineering reports in English and political
         science analyses in Arabic?
      In which languages do you read for work or professional purposes?
      In which languages do you read for "everyday" purposes, such as order-
         ing from a menu, installing a printer, learning about the day's news
         (either online or in print)?
      In which languages do you read for pleasure?

IV. Writing
      Do you think that your writing practices are different when you write
         in the different languages you use?
      For example, when you do exploratory writing (drafting, listing, free-
         writing), what languages do you use?
      When you talk about your writing with classmates, writing tutors, or
         professors, what languages do you use?
      When you write in English, do you think in Arabic or French and then
         translate words or ideas?
      Think about writing specific academic papers in English (summaries,
         literature reviews, critiques, or proposals): What organizational or rhe-
         torical forms seem "correct" to you? Where did you learn those forms?
         Does anything surprise/frustrate you when professors ask you to use
         other forms?
      How does the kind of text you are producing (email, texting, twitter)
         change your writing?

V. Thinking:
      What language(s) do you "think" in?

436
                                                                             Reconstructing Teacher Roles

VI. Language Attitudes
      What language(s) do you like best and why?
      How do you think that your language background shapes your lan-
         guage preferences?
      When you say, "We do it this way because we were educated in French"
         (or Arabic, or any other language), what does that mean to you?
         How does that experience make you think or speak or write or read
         differently?
      What else about language practices do you think that your English 300
         faculty should know?

                                                                                                437
CHAPTER 18

WRITING HISTORIES: LINGUA

FRANCA ENGLISH IN A SWEDISH

GRADUATE PROGRAM

      Thomas Lavelle and Alan Shima
      Stockholm School of Economics

       This chapter presents a case study and analyzes the institutional prac-
       tices that affect the success or failure of multi-lingual masters students
       writing theses at a Swedish university in a history program where lin-
       gua franca English is the language of instruction. Drawing upon inter-
       views, questionnaires, policy documents and the theses themselves, this
       analysis of a lingua franca writing environment examines the effects of
       policy on high-stakes writing, the value of aligning assessment policy
       and practices, and the function of support, expectations and supervi-
       sion in a writing/learning community. The central argument is that in
       many respects this graduate history program succeeds in its educational
       mission, particularly its engagement with disciplinary writing, but in
       one key respect it fails. The principal failure is its relatively low and
       generally slow thesis-completion rate. The successes include reading and
       assessment strategies that both prioritize disciplinary knowledge mak-
       ing and remain consistent with lingua franca communication strate-
       gies, thesis supervision and topic selection that support a difference-
       as-resource culture and finally proactive support for a multilingual
       writing environment that includes not only instruction for student
       writers but also faculty-development initiatives for their teachers.

   Roads to Democracy is an English-medium, two-year master's degree
program offered by the Department of History at Uppsala University in
Sweden. For successful candidates, the program culminates in the completion
of a 60-80 page master's thesis. It is these theses and the institutional context
in which they are written and assessed that provide the focal points of this
study. An overwhelming majority of Roads to Democracy (Roads) students

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.2.18  439
Lavelle and Shima

are second-language writers of English, which in this setting functions as
an academic lingua franca, not least because relatively few of them speak
Swedish, the dominant language of governance, undergraduate teaching and
routine administration at Uppsala. In this sociolinguistic context certain
structural and curricular features of this program combine with its students'
complex mix of backgrounds to foreground several key challenges facing both
second-language disciplinary writers, in this case junior scholars of history,
and the department committed to educating them. Therefore, in what follows
we present the program as a case study in which we describe and analyze
institutional practices that, in part, create the conditions under which second-
language thesis writers work. As with other case studies, its value for writing
scholars and writing-program managers rests upon the degree to which the
challenges described and practices analyzed here prove to be relevant and
transferable to other settings.

   One such challenge revolves around assessment. The roots of this challenge
lie ultimately in the decision by the History Department at Uppsala to offer
an English-medium master's program. This has obliged the program faculty
and leadership to articulate and enact a set of assessment criteria and priorities
that, on one hand, maintain the academic standards of the department, the
university and the wider disciplinary community and, on the other hand, fairly
evaluate a student population that arrives in Sweden, largely from abroad, with
many distinct types and levels of disciplinary, linguistic and general academic
preparedness.

   A second challenge concerns the relevant scope for disciplinary scholarship,
simply put, what counts as a suitable thesis topic. Just as their earlier assessment
practices had evolved largely in a monolingual and academically homogeneous
setting, the selection of thesis topics and research questions in the Uppsala
department also traditionally reflected northern European priorities and
practices. Under the influence of a new student body and a new curriculum,
thesis advisors from the Roads faculty have been obliged to reconsider these
practices.

   Along with assessing and framing the apprentice scholarship in Roads
master's theses, the department faced the challenge of defining and
implementing a suitable level of second-language writing support, a practice
not widely established in Swedish universities when these efforts began. The
relevant choices here involved the precise nature, structure and level of intensity
for this support. This was a move into uncharted waters for a department of
history and may represent a redefinition of the department's relationship with
its students.

440
                                                                                           Writing Histories

AIMS AND METHODS

   Given these focal points, the overarching purpose of this chapter is to
analyze departmental responses to the challenges outlined above, all of which
emerge as a consequence of internationalized graduate studies conducted
through lingua franca English, and where possible to trace the affects of those
responses on the writing of master theses in English. In describing challenges
and analyzing responses, we draw upon data collected over a year-long period
during which our engagement with the Uppsala Department of History
straddled emic and etic perspectives. With both authors working as visiting
instructors in academic writing and one consulting with the department more
generally on its transition from a monolingual Swedish to bilingual Swedish-
English academic organization, our roles gave us access to students, faculty
and program administrators, but it also made us participants in local efforts
to improve student writing and to support departmental efforts to enhance
student learning.

   From this vantage point, we collected data of five types. One was a writing-
inventory questionnaire distributed to 20 student writers that asked about their
range of languages, their experience with using those languages academically
and their academic or professional writing experience in English and in their
other languages; 19 of 20 students responded anonymously. A second type
consisted of face-to-face interviews with 12 students (eight women and four
men), five of whom had not been asked to complete the writing inventory; these
interviews were of limited value as the students saw us more immediately as
instructors than as researchers and were reticent in expressing judgments about
the program. A third was a series of five interviews with faculty members (five
men and one woman), four face to face and one via email; all five are tenured
at Uppsala University, three in the Department of History, two others belong
formally to other departments but teach Roads courses and advise and assess
theses; four are native speakers of Swedish and one a native speaker of English.
A fourth data type was the set of all 15 theses completed and fully processed by
the university (i.e. approved by the thesis advisor, graded by a faculty assessor,
examined in a public seminar, and archived in the library); we read graded and
archived copies, which proved to be valuable points of departure in interviews
with faculty informants. Finally a fifth data source was documentary, the Roads
curriculum and a series of departmental and university policy documents.

   While our semi-embedded standing in the Uppsala History Department
provided opportunities for data collection and dialogue, we chose this particular
case study because it illustrates an increasingly important institutional context

                                                                                                441
Lavelle and Shima

for second-language disciplinary writing. In the Roads program English is a
transnational academic lingua franca, a setting where "English is neither the
local language nor that of most of the international students" (Maruanen, 2006,
p. 125), and, in Roads, international students outnumber Swedes by far. It is
in such settings that we can expect speakers and writers, listeners and readers to
employ communicative strategies and exhibit attitudes ascribed to lingua franca
users in contact situations, including flexible codes, semantic negotiations,
tolerance of temporary unintelligibility and expectation management
(Canagarajah & Wurr, 2011). Most generally, "the principle behind all these
strategies is alignment. Multilinguals cannot come ready with all the codes they
need for an encounter .... What multilinguals aim to achieve therefore is an
alignment of the language resources they have with the purposes in question"
(p. 5).

   This setting, therefore, differs from the writing environments that most
often frame studies of either discipline-specific student writing or the writing
of second-language academic writers. Typically those studies address North
American, Anglophone contexts, for instance the anthologized papers in
collections (Belcher & Braine, 1995; Casanave & Li, 2008; Matsuda, Cox,
Jordan & Ortmeier-Hooper, 2006; Zawacki & Rogers, 2012), reference guides
(Bazerman et al., 2005), and individual studies (e.g. Connor & Mayberry, 1995;
Janopolous, 1995; Magno & Amarles, 2011; Seloni, 2012). Some theoretical
studies do adopt a more comparative and international perspective, particularly
those addressing the role of genre in L2 and WAC (e.g. Hyland, 2003; Johns,
2011). And there are of course valuable case studies of WAC or disciplinary L2
writing drawn from outside North American contexts (Bacha & Bahous, 2008;
Emerson, MacKay, Funnell & MacKay 2002; Li, 2010; Pedersen, 2011), but
these studies describe and analyze either individuals or broadly homogeneous
groups of academic writers. One notable exception is Harbord's study (2010)
of L2 English writing programs in central and eastern European universities,
but the scale of his study--eight universities in six countries--and its focal
points--the evolution of programs and courses and their interplay with writing
in the local language--lead to descriptions and findings of a markedly different
character from the narrower, localized case presented here. In brief, this analysis
of a lingua franca writing environment can add to what is already known from
more familiar contexts about the effects of policy on high-stakes writing, the
value of aligning assessment policy and practices, and the function of support,
expectations and supervision in a writing/learning community. Our central
argument is that in many respects the history program under description
succeeds in its educational mission, particularly its engagement with disciplinary
writing, but in one key respect it fails.

442
                                                                                           Writing Histories

THE PROGRAM AND ITS STUDENTS

   At the program-level this educational mission has three dimensions that in
some respects dovetail well with its student body and in other respects do not.
One is internationalism. A second reflects the objectives of traditional academic
history, and a third can be characterized as a critical activist pedagogy applied
to the study of democracy and democratic institutions.

   The Department of History launched the program at a time when
universities across Europe (European Higher Educational Area, 2006) and
across Sweden (European Higher Educational Area, 2010) were compelled to
internationalize. The internationalist dimensions of Roads' mission are evident
in its organizational and curricular structure as well as in its student body.
Uppsala developed and operates the program in collaboration with two partner
universities, Coimbra in Portugal and Siegen in Germany. Each university grants
its own degree for this program; however, free exchange programs, common
on-line courses and a commitment across all three institutions to lingua franca
English instruction underscore the international nature of Roads. A mandatory
exchange underscores it further, requiring at least 15 credits (half a semester's
full time study) of the 120 total from one of the partner universities (Uppsala
University, 2011b).

   The students successfully recruited to the program were even more broadly
international. Most cohorts had no Swedes, and students enrolled from Albania,
Armenia, Bosnia, Burma, Cameroon, Canada, China, France, Germany,
Hungary, Iran, Italy, S. Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Poland, Portugal, Russia,
Turkey, and the United States.1 With this internationalization came the need
for lingua franca English, and Roads students entered the program speaking
many different varieties of English and greatly varied kinds of experience with
it.

   As academic historians, the Uppsala faculty has a mission to train
modern comparative historians, specialists in the complex field of democratic
development. In Roads they aim to "give [students] insights into the
development of democracies in Europe" and help them "develop a broad,
comparative understanding of the mechanisms behind democratic transitions,
[so they] will be able to assess present-day democratic developments on both
the national and the supra-national level" (Uppsala University, 2011a).

   The program also acknowledges that an understanding of democracy
is multidisciplinary. The partner program in Siegen is run by the political
science department and learning objectives for Roads theses explicitly call
for interdisciplinary theorizing (Uppsala University, 2011b). This cross of
disciplinary and interdisciplinary objectives complicates recruitment--an

                                                                                                443
Lavelle and Shima

undergraduate degree in history is not an admission requirement--and almost
certainly means that Roads students come differently prepared for the task of
writing a master's thesis supervised and assessed by a community of professional
academic historians.

   Beyond its internationalist and disciplinary mission, there are signs that the
program also carries out a critical and activist educational mission. The program
description identifies the aim of making students "aware of the fragility of
democratic institutions and the importance of citizenship and participation
in the democratic process" (Uppsala University, 2011b). Even more directly,
one faculty informant explained in his interview that for him extending an
historical understanding of democratic institutions to students from countries
where democracy was relatively new, emerging, or still to come represented part
of the program's raison d'tre.

QUALIFIED SUCCESSES

   The successes described next are qualified successes to be sure, but the analysis
shows that history faculty and program managers in Uppsala largely succeed
in creating an environment where diversely prepared students can learn and
practice scholarly writing in a lingua franca setting. The principal qualification
is that the program has a relatively low and generally slow thesis-completion
rate. By spring of 2011, of 32 theses that could have been completed, only 15
had been fully processed by the university (a completion rate of roughly 47%),
and it is that set of fifteen that provides the basis for discussing theses and their
assessment. With a program launch in 2005, 2007 was the earliest projected
completion date, and one thesis was completed that year, tellingly perhaps,
by an American Roads graduate and L1 writer of English. Seven more were
completed in 2008, three in 2009 and four in 2010.

   As the following section on assessment shows, by establishing assessment
priorities firmly anchored in disciplinary knowledge making, Roads faculty
generally avoid narrow, surface driven ways of reading the students' work
and the most damaging kinds of negative expectations associated with these
ways of reading (Zamel, 1995; for a counterexample, see Craig's [this volume]
discussion about the expectation for error-free English in theses written by
Singapore students enrolled in the MIT-Singapore transnational master's
in engineering program.) These ways of reading are consistent with lingua
franca communicative strategies and also speak directly to the disciplinary
mission of training apprentice historians. The section on thesis topics argues
that the program uses the required theses to support a difference-as-resource

444
                                                                                           Writing Histories

culture of the kind advocated by Canagarajah (2002). This happens largely by
encouraging thesis research questions that both engage thesis-writers' national
or cultural identity and utilize primary source material written in students' first
(or other) language. In addition, by working with source material inaccessible
to historians who read only English or Swedish, Roads thesis writers step into
roles where they can make relevant contributions to a research community.
Moreover, this engagement with primary material that addresses democracy in
their own national context speaks directly to the department's critical/activist
mission.

   The section on lingua-franca-writing support follows the departmental
leadership's trajectory of proactive support for their relatively new groups of
students. This entails not only some explicit training in disciplinary writing
for its graduate students, but also faculty development activities that prepare
instructors for work with more diverse international students. The rationale
for and limitations of this trajectory are described and discussed below, but
irrespective of its limits, training of this kind promotes the kinds of teaching
and teaching environments advocated by Zamel (1995) and Kim (2011) or
anticipates the kinds of coping strategies described by Leki (1995) and thereby
also promotes Road's internationalist mission.

Qualified Success with Thesis Assessment: Values and Priorities

   Fair and educationally relevant assessment transparently aligns intended
learning outcomes with student performance (Biggs & Tang, 2007; Elmgren
& Henriksson, 2010; Ramsden, 2003). The Uppsala history department
articulates learning outcomes for Roads theses that follow straightforwardly
from the overarching disciplinary objectives described above and project into
a set of explicit grading criteria. Faculty assessors, who by rule cannot have
supervised the thesis in question, then apply those criteria. The department's
success lies in its having created an approach to thesis assessment--essentially
ways of reading--that maintains quality standards, supports disciplinary
learning and acknowledges the complexity of this group of writers.

   The intended learning outcomes (ILOs) defined for a Roads thesis set a
high disciplinary standard. They cover historiographical theories and methods,
theoretical input "from other social sciences used in the study of democracy," the
framing of research topics and questions, scholarly treatment of both primary
and secondary sources, and writing in English "using correctly the various types
of writing used in history and the social sciences" (Uppsala University, 2011b).
Well aligned with these ILOs are seven published grading parameters: knowledge
of historical context; research problem; theories and methods; source criticism;

                                                                                                445
Lavelle and Shima

contextualization of research problem; use of terminology; and textual features
(Uppsala University, 2009). Prior to 2011 the department applied a seven-
step grading scale, A through F and Fx, a version of Incomplete. Subsequently
the university has reverted to the three-step scale long used in Swedish higher
education, Pass with Distinction, Pass and Fail. The theses under review were
all graded on an A-F scale, and in formulating and publishing descriptors for
the seven parameters, the department elected to specify only the levels A, C, E
and F. Faculty informants reported widespread confidence that assessors could
identify B and D quality work inductively on the basis of the other descriptors.
Finally the department applies the same grading criteria to all three of its
master's programs, Roads to Democracy, Early Modern Studies, and a history
specialization within a humanities program, and therefore in principle makes
no distinction between theses written in English or Swedish.

   In institutional terms, each thesis approved on the basis of these criteria
is a success. They conform to university guidelines set by the Faculty of Arts
and meet Department of History requirements. Moreover, their authors have
earned their advanced degrees and continued their personal and professional
pursuits, in several cases as PhD candidates in well regarded programs in the
UK, in the US, in Sweden or in the thesis writer's home country.

   Seen purely as textual artifacts, however, nearly all the theses reviewed are
flawed. Most show a variously rich and variously dense set of surface errors.
Some are repetitive. Some rely heavily on long quotations and summaries of
source material. Many fail, at some point or points, to maintain the textual
"flow" advocated in graduate writing guides such as Swales & Feak (2004,
pp. 26-30). A few even adopt, in key passages, the homiletic stance or voice
attributed by David Bartholomae (1985) to inexperienced American academic
writers, suggesting that for some apprentice historians, especially those writing
history in a second language or relatively new to scholarly writing, it remains
difficult to consistently "take on the role--the voice, the persona--of an
authority whose authority is rooted in scholarship, analysis, or research" (p.
136), even when their authority is rooted in scholarship, analysis and research.
(See Lancaster [this volume] for a discussion of the role of stance-taking in
creating authority in discipline-specific writing). In other words, these texts
hold few surprises for writing specialists accustomed to working with L2 or
lingua franca writers of English. What may be surprising is how these flaws are
contextualized by academic historians in Uppsala.

   In a lingua franca environment seeing theses purely or primarily as textual
artifacts would be inappropriate, and readers in the Roads program contextualize
them in richer ways, ways that downplay surface-level inaccuracies, coherence
gaps and repetitiveness. The history faculty value theses as "evidence of

446
                                                                                           Writing Histories

intellectual work," a term that does not appear in departmental documentation,
but recurred regularly in faculty interviews. While difficult to define precisely,
evidence of intellectual work encompasses writing and thinking that makes
discoveries while conforming to disciplinary and linguistic conventions, but
not in equal measure. In his interview the Roads program director, for instance,
profiled the relative weight of these conventions when he described the role of
a thesis advisor: "we help them to write a master's thesis that is recognizable as
a master's thesis in English; this includes comments on language, but we can't
be English teachers." By framing theses as evidence of intellectual work, Roads
readers seem to contextualize them within processes of inquiry and discovery
and express priorities that value the process over the product.

   Arguably, the departmental grading criteria indirectly provide a partial
blueprint for these contextualizations that, again, clearly prioritizes disciplinary
learning over the textual artifacts themselves. Six of the seven parameters focus
directly on disciplinary performance, and even when descriptors sometimes
acknowledge the close relationship between disciplinary knowledge and its
expression, the latter serves the former. The parameter for specialist terminology,
for example, receives particular attention (Uppsala, 2009). The grading criteria
rank writers' application of central terms on the basis of the intellectual work
they do. In F-level application, disciplinary terms are "not defined" or "used
arbitrarily" and without awareness that their multiple uses had "consequences
for the analysis." E-level usage defines all key terms and uses them consistently,
yet fails to problematize them. In C-level usage "the choice of definitions is
discussed and motivated," and ultimately in A-level usage, a best-practice
benchmark, "terms and concepts ... are carefully discussed, problematized and
motivated" and used "stringent[ly] and consistent[ly] ... throughout to make
analytical points" (2011a, emphases added).

   The department's disciplinary and educational priorities also emerge, albeit
indirectly, in the descriptors of textual quality, which bundle together an
assessment of argumentation, formal conventions and linguistic accuracy. The
formulation of these descriptors lacks the precision that applied linguists or
writing specialists might give them, especially those addressing accuracy. Failing
theses use "language [that] exhibits serious flaws" and "the grammar is poor"
(2011a). The language and grammar of bare passes "reveals smaller flaws," and
the grammar of solid Cs has "only a few isolated errors" (2011a). In best practice
theses, the grammar is "free of errors" (2011a). This imprecision is fitting for a
faculty that values theses not primarily as textual artifacts.

   Although the Department of History has no explicit policy on how to apply
its grading criteria, priorities do exist, and they are traceable in past practice,
examples that illustrate which aspects of historical scholarship faculty members

                                                                                                447
Lavelle and Shima

value most highly in the writing of junior historians. The first such example is
a thesis analyzing the political thought of Mehmed Sabahaddin, a member of
the ruling family of the Ottoman dynasty who lived between 1877 and 1948,
a period that saw the end of dynastic rule in Turkey. At 55 pages the thesis falls
short of the 60-page length requirement, and, according to a faculty informant,
it had serious shortcomings along several grading parameters. In his own words:

         ... This thesis was according to my view a little bit tricky.
         The problem was that it was not living up to the standard
         of an ordinary thesis. There were problems both with the
         formulation of the topic, which was actually not really made
         in a way that we historians like. It was done as a political
         scientist might do it. There were also problems with the
         historical context and not least with the timeline. However,
         I liked the thesis very much. The reason for this was that the
         author really made a very fascinating analysis. Exceptionally
         good at this level. That meant that I thought that even if
         he had made some rather fundamental mistakes, that in an
         ordinary thesis [would have been] very grave, he had in other
         areas [done] a fantastic job and therefore I gave him a top
         grade. Not an ordinary thesis but a very good one.

   The priorities emerging here elevate "a fascinating analysis," clear evidence
of intellectual work, above all other considerations. The assessor refers to
"problems" with two disciplinary grading parameters, the research-problem's
formulation and historical contextualization, and mentions his concern with
the research question's disciplinary locus, yet he confidently subordinates those
problems and concern to the findings that emerge from a strong analysis carried
out by an apprentice historian. The thesis was awarded a grade of B, and assessed
in terms that valued its intellectual strengths over its academic weaknesses.

   A second example is a comparative study of affirmative action in Malaysia
and the United States. In this case the faculty informant served as thesis advisor
and not therefore the assessor. In discussing the thesis' strengths and weaknesses,
he too was greatly impressed by the author's findings and subordinated his
other concerns. Those other concerns dealt with the thesis as a written artifact,
specifically language accuracy, and its lack of engagement with Malaysian
archival source material because the thesis writer's application for access to
the national archive was denied when the Malaysian authorities noticed the
sensitivity of this study. The advisor's latter concern is particularly salient as
the application of archival material to research questions plays a central role in

448
                                                                                           Writing Histories

academic history and because another faculty informant, the program director,
identified the single greatest challenge for Roads students as work with primary
sources: "the problem is with primary studies; they [Roads student from other
disciplinary backgrounds and some other history departments] don't know how
sources help us answer questions." Like the previous example this thesis too
received a grade of B, and like the previous faculty informant, this advisor valued
primarily the creation of new knowledge about the history of democracy. In
both cases those values seem to govern the assessment and grading of students'
disciplinary writing.

   These successful aspects of thesis assessment in Roads share two features
with well documented lingua franca communication strategies. The first is
explicitness (Kaur, 2011; Maruanen, 2006). In lingua franca communication
linguistic codes do less meaning-bearing work on their own and are instead
complemented with semantic negotiation, moves such as confirmation checks,
follow-up questions, counter proposals and interactive repair (Maruanen, 2006).
Almost paradoxically then successful lingua franca communication draws more
support from explicitness than from tacit communication and conversational
implicature (Grice, 1975), because explicit expression quite simply provides
more common ground, more material, over which lingua franca interlocutors
can negotiate. (Lancaster [this volume] describes a contrasting Anglophone
environment where variations in largely tacit, discipline-embedded linguistic
codes are identified as error and not as reason for negotiation.) In Roads this
explicitness is particularly evident in the published assessment criteria that align
learning outcomes and student performances. Published criteria of this kind
have become commonplace at Uppsala and other Swedish universities, but that
in no way detracts from the communicative function they play in the lingua
franca Roads community.

   Their reading priorities are a second feature of Roads thesis assessment
that is consistent with lingua franca communication strategies. What these
reading priorities and those communicative strategies share is that neither
is overly concerned with linguistic code per se (Canagarajah & Wurr, 2011),
but foreground and prioritize what is most expressive or valuable in a text or
communicative act. In Roads thesis assessment, this seems to include the "let
it pass" strategy that Firth (1996) established as a cornerstone of lingua franca
pragmatics. Importantly, this strategy is not a passive move, but a strategy by
which the hearer [or reader] "is actively though implicitly engaged in the task of
attempting to make sense of what is being done and said" (p. 245, emphasis in
original). For Roads readers this strategy entails the downgrading of linguistic
flaws, rhetorical shortcomings and even some breaches of disciplinary expectation
(such as the problem-formulation problem in the Ottoman-political-philosophy

                                                                                                449
Lavelle and Shima

thesis and the absence of primary sources in the affirmative-action thesis) in
favor of a scholarly understanding of a writer's intentions and discoveries.

   These two aspects of successful assessment, explicitness and let-it-pass
reading priorities remain however incomplete successes. The Roads program
could deploy these operational strengths to address its strategic weakness,
its low and slow completion rate. For instance, there are at present no overt
guidelines on how assessors should (or do) apply grading criteria. In the absence
of such guidelines student writers might quite reasonably interpret the rather
unsystematic descriptors on language and expression more literally than faculty
members do, leading to an unnecessary focus on form as they work to produce
a text that for some of them represents a first significant attempt at scholarly
writing. Similarly, writers might complete more often or more quickly knowing
that they will be read, interpreted and graded for what they have done most
successfully and not dismissed for the weakest sides of their performance.
While we recognize the difficulty involved in drafting explicit grading criteria
for master's theses that explicate let-it-pass reading strategies, we also recognize
that acknowledging a lingua franca approach to linguistic values and textual
priorities would further support the multilingual academic writers in Roads.

Qualified Success with Topic Selection: Difference as Resource

   A Roads to Democracy thesis carries 60 credits, half the two-year degree
requirement. This curriculum does not however wholly backload this
requirement into the program's second year. Instead, students take a thesis-
methods course in semester one of year one, and time for thesis work is
allocated throughout the program. This longitudinal approach to research
writing pays dividends for the writers who complete; again those who do not
complete remain a chronic challenge to the program's overall success. One
such dividend affects topic selection, where longer-term planning and longer
timelines facilitate thesis writers' framing of problems that are personally
relevant and that draw upon the linguistic and cultural knowledge they bring to
the program. More specifically, longer timelines are relevant to topic selection
because if, hypothetically, a Cameroonian student wants to frame a problem
addressing, say, the postcolonial unification of Francophone and Anglophone
regions drawing on Cameroonian archives or other primary sources, longer
timelines support the logistics of finding travel funding, planning the travel,
acquiring access to archives and recruiting an expert, either in Cameroon or
an Africanist in the Uppsala network, willing to serve as a thesis advisor or
co-advisor.

450
                                                                                           Writing Histories

   Of the Roads theses defended through 2011, fully two-thirds, 10 of 15,
frame and address a research problem of apparent personal relevance: an Italian
student examines the inception of the Italian welfare state under fascism, a
Chinese student addresses the "New Left" in China, a Swedish student contrasts
Swedish and German urban planning and housing policy in the 1930s. In some
cases the personal relevance is more than apparent. A Bosnian thesis writer
explicitly merges personal and professional engagement by opening her thesis
on nation building among Bosnian Muslims with a "personal reflection" on
national identity. In a broadly similar vein there are references to personal
relevance in a Korean writer's thesis on western perceptions of Korea between
1892 and 1936, a Portuguese writer's study of Portugal's immigration policies
after the advent of democracy there and an Albanian writer's analysis of the
media's role in Albania's "feeble" democracy. Given the low numbers and what
has been said about the program's completion rate, this dividend too remains a
qualified success. Nevertheless, at the very least this pattern shows that successful
Roads writers emulate senior scholars who, as Hyland (2009) makes clear, often
have a personal stake in their disciplinary writing.

   Far beyond emulation another dynamic comes into play when thesis topics
combine academic relevance and aspects of the writer's native culture, language
and identity in a highly internationalized, multilingual setting. That dynamic
is a perceptual shift, perhaps ultimately a cultural shift, whereby students move
in Canagarajah's terms (2002) from perceptions of "difference as deficit" to
perceptions of "difference as resource." As suggested above Roads students in
some cases struggle with the program's demands because of their first languages
and experience with English, because of their disciplinary backgrounds
or because of their earlier educational cultures. Such students, we reason,
experience their differences as deficits at times. Supporting that reasoning, in
interviews some students reported feeling hamstrung by their English skills
or hampered by their limited experience of academic history--particularly
archival experience; more report feeling intimidated by the prospect of writing
a long academic thesis. We postulate--because the writers of completed theses
were not available for interviews or declined requests--that doing archival
work on a topic of personal relevance with primary sources in the student's first
language changes these self-perceptions. By extension, completing theses based
on that archival work and those primary sources changes those perceptions
further. By further extension, having those theses read appreciatively by faculty
assessors and recognized as scholarly contributions changes those perceptions
even further, and difference as deficit has become difference as resource. Finally
when a number of thesis writers undergo this transformation, when personally

                                                                                                451
Lavelle and Shima

relevant thesis topics researched through L1 primary sources become a norm, a
difference-as-resource culture has emerged.

   This cultural point is necessarily speculative, but it has received indirect
corroboration in four of the five faculty interviews, where informants express
clear appreciation for, even professional pride in, the accomplishments of Roads
researchers. Parallel to this appreciation is a recognition that this archival work,
carried out on Albanian, Bosnian, Mandarin or Turkish sources, for instance,
might not have been done or might not have reached international research
communities were it not for the efforts of Roads graduates. These conditions
and attitudes successfully create a context where multilingualism is an asset, not
a deficit.

   A balanced understanding of the Roads program's success with difference-as-
resource culture may require drawing, however briefly, a conceptual distinction
between two variants of difference-as-deficit expectations or experience. While
richly international with regard to his multilingual writers, Canagarajah's
(2002) initial work on difference-as-deficit attitudes toward academic writing
foregrounds dominantly Anglophone settings where English functions as a
hegemonic superstrate in academic language contact situations. Subsequent
work in writing studies or in broader educational research (Cummins, 2003;
Guo & Zenobia, 2007; Mitchell, 2012) also characterizes English as hegemonic
in Anglophone settings. In contrast, multilingual Roads students in Uppsala
meet a more balanced diglossic context, where Swedish functions as the local/
national language and English as an international lingua franca. Neither
therefore attains the hegemony that English holds in higher education in
Anglophone countries.

   Research in American settings has identified some of the roles both instructors
and local students play in establishing and maintaining Anglophone hegemony.
In a blatant example, a faculty informant described by Zamel (1995) requires
that multilingual students employ English grammar accurately and deploy a
grammatical metalanguage for talking about errors as an entry condition to
substantive feedback and disciplinary engagement. In a study (Kim, 2011)
where multilingual graduate students describe their teachers' behavior and its
effects, one participant reports that "her name caused her to feel embarrassed
because Americans could not say it correctly. Whenever American professors
took roll, they mispronounced her name" (p. 289); as a solution one "professor
suggested that she use an easier name or an English name" (p. 289), making
clear just how completely these students were expected to adapt to Anglophone
norms. In the same study, local students are also seen as reinforcing, perhaps
unintentionally, the dominant role English plays through their performance in
collaborative group work and group discussions, where local students "spoke

452
                                                                                           Writing Histories

casual American English at fast speeds" and typically shaped conversations
that shifted topics often, which made it difficult for multilingual students to
follow the conversation and led to their contributions frequently being off topic
(Kim, 2011, p. 287). The reported result of these kinds of interactions is one
international student feeling, "I know they did not care about my opinion. They
don't try to understand what my opinion is" (p. 287). Kim herself concludes
that "professors and native students often did not understand the opinions of
international graduate students, nor did they see the need to include them in the
discourse" (2011, p. 287, emphasis added). (For further examples of English
hegemony at work in US classrooms, see chapters by Phillips and Nielsen [this
volume].)

   Lacking extensive classroom observations, we cannot claim definitively
that no such behavior takes place in Roads classrooms. However, there was
no mention of it by the students interviewed. Moreover the sociolinguistic
context speaks against such linguistic hegemony. Because English is an
additional language for almost all the faculty and the vast majority of Roads
students, it never attains the full status of a superstrate. Members of the Uppsala
history faculty generally acknowledge their own status as L2 English speakers
(in interviews and in faculty-development work describe below), and only
one instructor (one of two native speaker of English teaching history in the
program, but the only one interviewed) complained about accuracy levels in
student writing or intelligibility in classroom discourse. Among Roads students
themselves, neither the few Swedes nor the few native English speakers enjoy
or exercise the same privileged position Kim attributes to the local American
students in her study. The Swedish students, like their classmates, must adapt to
instruction in English, the program lingua franca, and native English speakers
must adapt to life as an international graduate student in a new educational
culture.

   Briefly then, the Roads program's success in supporting a difference-as-
resource culture takes place in an environment relatively amenable to such a
culture, a fact that again should not detract from the accomplishment itself. Nor
does it color the qualification of that success. The upside of the Roads longitudinal
and student-centered approach to thesis research and writing emerges in the
program's difference-as-resource culture. The downside rests, according to the
program director, in the supervision of these theses, or at least some of them.
The Uppsala department cannot house all the expertise necessary to handle the
geographic, cultural and linguistic breadth that opens up when Roads students
pursue research problems across four continents; few departments could. As
mentioned above, the department makes an effort to secure an advisor with
expertise relevant to each writer's project. Those efforts however are not always

                                                                                                453
Lavelle and Shima

successful, and their limitations show in the thesis contrasting the development
of American and Malaysian affirmative action legislation, which was supervised
by a Swedish Americanist. That thesis nevertheless was successfully completed.

   Even when the department can enlist international experts for Roads
students' international projects, the program director explained, those external
advisors vary greatly in their depth of commitment, experience with masters-
level supervision and adaptability to Uppsala's standards and expectations. These
shortcomings lead to predictable outcomes: the most experienced, most talented
or most determined students succeed in completing their theses anyway. Those
most in need of an advisor's support encounter delays. Concisely, what qualifies
the Roads success with the framing of writer-centered, L1-inclusive research
problems is that the department lacks the resources to advise on and supervise
such a range of theses, and while it encouragingly looks outside the department
for relevant expertise, there are no routines, no academic infrastructure, in place
to coach those external experts into positions where they can consistently advise
Roads writers to completion.

Qualified Success with Writing Support:
Preparing Writers and Readers

   Since 2003 the Department of History has planned and carried out a series
of English-writing support activities, some of which were direct, aiming at
student writers and their evolving skill sets, and others which were indirect,
aiming at departmental faculty and their preparedness for teaching and reading
in lingua franca English environments. Neither type of activity has been subject
to systematic follow up or extensive evaluation, which makes it somewhat
futile to address certain aspects of success. However both types of activity
demonstrate an orientation in the Roads program's host department that is a
prerequisite for success with multilingual writers. Essentially this orientation
combines an awareness that diverse international students bring with them a
new set of educational needs and a willingness to act upon that awareness.
However intangible an orientation may seem, successful lingua franca
communication rests, as pointed out above, in part on heightened "language
awareness" (Canagarajah, 2007, p. 925) and "positive attitudes" (Canagarajah
& Wurr, 2011, p. 2). (See Zenger et al. [this volume] for examples of how
translingual values were infused into a course providing writing support for
graduate students at American University of Beirut and into the revised general
education curriculum.)

   Direct writing support for the student authors of Roads theses grew out of
the Department of History's decision to follow national and university-wide

454
                                                                                           Writing Histories

trends towards internationalizing its educational offering, but to do so with an
acknowledgement that enrolling international student entailed a commitment
to supporting them. That decision unfolded at a time when the department
also began internationalizing its mission more generally, particularly its
research mission. This relatively broad-based approach to internationalizing the
department's missions may help account for what is most successful about the
department's L2 writing support, yet it may also be this same generality that
also explains the limitations of those interventions in directly supporting Roads
thesis writers.

   The rationale for this support encompasses the role of English in published
research as well as in graduate education. In an op-ed essay directed to Swedish
scholars in the humanities, the director of the department's PhD program and a
Roads thesis assessor (흁ren, 2005) makes a case for internationalizing Swedish
humanities research. The core of 흁ren's argument is that Swedish researchers
"take as their points of departure internationally grounded theory building
or research problems," and in doing so they "see themselves as participating
in an international discussion" (p. 2, our translation). They do not however
follow through completely in that participation because they "rarely report
their results in an international arena" (p. 2, our translation). 흁ren goes on to
acknowledge that the difficulties of writing well in English represent an obstacle
to be overcome if this internationalist turn is to be fully realized, and in a later
publication, she extends that argument from an acknowledgment of difficulty
to an action plan for addressing that difficulty (Lavelle & 흁ren, 2010). The
core of that plan consists of improving the English writing of graduate students
in history and across the humanities. "PhD students need to be able to present
their work in English, and since the PhD programs are too short to allow
students to develop [English writing] skills there, it is necessary to start earlier,
on the master's level at the latest" (Lavelle & 흁ren, 2010, p. 203). On the basis
of these rationales, the Department of History organized and in some cases
funded three phases of direct English-writing support for its graduate students
and a series of three activities for faculty aimed at helping them to teach in an
internationalized, lingua franca English pedagogical environment.

   The first intervention predated the Roads program and consisted of a
modest half-day workshop in 2003 aimed primarily at raising awareness among
graduate students, especially doctoral candidates, regarding what writing
academic history in English entails and thus making it possible for them to
consider writing dissertations in English.

   By the time Roads students began arriving in 2005, the department had
integrated regular writing-in-English seminars and workshops into the obligatory
thesis-methods courses of its fledgling master's programs (eight contact hours

                                                                                                455
Lavelle and Shima

per cohort). These workshops were the interventions focused most directly on
the needs of Roads students, and they were well received by students, who
in traditional course evaluations characterized them as helpful. On the basis
of those evaluations the department added in 2007 an elective course to its
master's-level curriculum, Academic Writing in English, and discontinued the
writing workshops in methods courses. In interviews, both students and faculty
members refer to this course as a reason for improved writing outcomes, but
there has been no discernible improvement in completion rates. Moreover,
for a number of administrative reasons including break-even enrollment
calculations, this course has been open at times to graduate students from across
the university and at other times to students from across the humanities faculty.
Therefore even though the course works with published historical scholarship
as well as a range of student writing, the course description suggests that it
focuses too little or too indirectly on the work of Roads thesis writing (Uppsala
University, 2011b), perhaps because of cross-disciplinary enrollment. After early
enthusiasm among Roads students and a peak in the fall semester of 2009 with
eleven Roads enrollments across two sections, participation by Roads writers
has declined to two Roads students in a single section in the spring semester
of 2012, one Uppsala student and one exchange student from Siegen. As a
corrective step the department will reintroduce a writing-in-English seminar to
the obligatory thesis-methods course for Roads students from the fall of 2012.

   These writing-support activities ran or run parallel to traditional in-course
writing activities, which are of course also expected to help train student
writers, perhaps reasonably expected to provide the bulk of a student's training
in disciplinary writing. For the Roads program our interviews found that all
master's-level history courses require written deliverables, some on a lesson-
by-lesson basis. Some instructors interviewed also report that they employ a
range of writing-based pedagogies, including reading logs, peer reviewing and
process-driven revision activity.

   Paradoxically, while it remains difficult to trace clear links between the
Department of History's direct interventions and its greatest success factor,
i.e. awareness of variable needs among student writers and a positive attitude
towards linguistic differences, we can see a clearer relationship between the
indirect writing support and that awareness and those attitudes. The largest of
three faculty-development programs aimed at improving the ability of Uppsala's
history faculty to work through English with multilingual, international
students. It was organized and funded by the department as a voluntary in-
service course consisting of 24 contact hours during the fall semester of 2009.
Under the title English in the Classroom, its course description identified six
ILOs, at least four of which bear directly on the development of awareness

456
                                                                                           Writing Histories

and attitudes needed to create educational practices supportive of students like
Roads thesis writers. Those six are:

   1. Assess the impact, if any, of lingua franca instruction on a learners' class-
       room performance.

   2. Lecture more fluently in English and adapt lectures for a lingua franca
       audience.

   3. Lead discussions on academic topics in English while recognizing and
       accommodating participants' diverse communication strategies in
       discussions.

   4. Produce supporting materials (slides, handouts, exercises, exams) in
       English.

   5. Provide feedback for students in English.
   6. State and defend a critical position on the question of assessing linguistic

       form vs. assessing underlying content in student work.
   The four learning outcomes directly relevant to supporting lingua franca
instruction and reading are 1, 2, 3 and 6. Beyond those a case can certainly
be made that the learning of scaffolding strategies inherent in ILO 4 makes it
highly relevant to multilingual classrooms as well. From a faculty of roughly 30,
19 teachers initially enrolled in the course and 13 completed it.
   The second and third activities, both much shorter, functioned primarily
as follow-ups to the course, but because participants included the sitting and
pending departmental chairs and all graduate and undergraduate directors
of studies, these activities seem to function too as manifestations of the
departmental commitments and attitudes. The follow-up dimension focused
upon two specific aspects of lingua franca education. One, a simple three-hour
workshop, addressed assessment through lingua franca English, and according to
the two interviewees who participated, the workshop reiterated and formalized
some issues addressed above, including disciplinary reading priorities and
let-it-pass approaches to many surface errors. This assessment workshop was
attended only by faculty members who had completed the course described
above, but the third activity was a two-day retreat for the entire department.
The topic of the retreat was the formulation of effective course descriptions
and learning outcomes in English with the aim of making these pedagogical
documents effectively available to and useful for multilingual students. The
content particularly relevant to lingua franca education, again according to
the same two interviewees, addressed the identification of embedded (local
Swedish) cultural assumptions, the reduction of overly bureaucratic language
and the elimination of unintentional ambiguities.
   In summary, the principal success of the Department of History's writing-
support activities is that there are writing-support activities. In a context where

                                                                                                457
Lavelle and Shima

no or few such activities were taking place, the simple existence of English
writing workshops speaks to a positive approach to multilingual writers. If the
direct, student-focused interventions have become too general to help Roads
writers optimally, it remains a problem open to correction. The indirect, faculty-
focused interventions in many respects reflect and support the internationalist
openness expressed in the Roads program's curriculum, reading strategies and
handling of research topics. (In this volume, see Fredericksen & Mangelsdorf
for an example of a graduate writing course enrolling students across disciplines
and Craig for examples of direct writing support for a cohort of international
students studying in the same field. Also see Lancaster and Cox for additional
examples of faculty interventions.)

CONCLUSIONS AND DIRECTIONS

   Our case for the success of the Roads program's approach to writing rests largely
on our analyses of three features of institutional context: assessment priorities
or strategies that dovetail well with a lingua franca learning environment; the
facilitation of thesis research projects that promote a difference-as-resource
culture; and the existence (and on-going development) of activities supporting
multilingual writers, either directly or indirectly. Our case for qualifying each
of these successes begins with the program's low completion rate, but extends
into each more positive feature of institutional context. Suitable and successful
reading and assessment practices could be codified and through codification
become, as we address below, more successful. Success with difference-as-
resource research questions would also benefit from codifying or creating
routines for recruiting and supporting external (co)advisors. Finally, while
efforts to prepare faculty for international, lingua franca pedagogy appear to
be succeeding and enjoying departmental support, it seems as though direct
interventions for student writers would benefit from a more narrow disciplinary
or thesis-directed focus.

   Each of these qualifications merits further discussion, discussion that in
other discourses might take the form of recommendations to the department
under discussion or suggestions for further research. In what follows here we
offer brief closing remarks that combine aspects of these two established moves.

   In assessing Roads theses, the department has evolved a set of practices
describable as lingua franca assessment strategies, yet none of the departmental
documentation describes them as such or refers to lingua franca communication
at all. Instead, when textual features of theses are mentioned, the vocabulary

458
                                                                                           Writing Histories

remains in a traditional and pedestrian domain of correct, grammar, flaws and
errors. While we believe student writers would benefit from a codifying of what
we called above let-it-pass reading strategies and assessment priorities grounded
in evidence of intellectual work, it is not obvious to us that the Uppsala
Department of History should carry out this codification. Instead, we see this,
at least in part, as the work of applied linguists and writing specialists, for whom
a great deal of work, both theoretical and descriptive, remains to be done on
academic lingua francas.

   In our analysis above of thesis topics and their role in the promotion of
difference as resource, we highlighted the function of external advisors because
this is where faculty informants pointed us. Here too, however, a much richer
network of practice could and should be explicitly described. This network
ranges from the merely logistical arrangement of two-year longitudinal
work with theses through the encouragement of internationally grounded
projects to a tolerance of primary source material that in many cases faculty
assessors cannot read. We interpret these practices as wholly consistent with
and supportive of a Roads program mission that is explicitly internationalist,
disciplinarily grounded and critically activist. Here the program or department
itself is best equipped to re-see the practices that have evolved and articulate
them as a part of a research-writing pedagogy for its master's students. However,
as this case might illustrate, external actors such as ourselves can help guide
the reflection necessary in order to articulate that pedagogy by holding up a
mirror to practices that may have developed in silence. Such mirroring of course
follows from descriptive or ethnographic research into institutional contexts of
multilingual graduate writers and the departments hosting them.

   Finally, the active interventions aimed at supporting thesis writers succeed
in some respect simply through their existence. This however is too low a
standard, and the decisions facing the Uppsala Department of History as it
goes forward are familiar ones. Initially, it faces a classic make-or-buy decision
(Balakrishnan & Cheng, 2005), where in this case it can either continue to
produce its own graduate writing course and occasional workshops or instead
buy from other parts of the university services that have come on line since
launching its own course in 2007, including a generic course offered by the
Department of English and tutorial services from a fledgling writing center
wholly new to English writing support. Given that a shortcoming identified in
existing support activities is that they have become too general to adequately
help Roads writers, then one factor in answering that question is clear.
However, even if the department continues on a "make" path, questions will
remain regarding program-specific interventions and the internal competition

                                                                                                459
Lavelle and Shima

for resources between Roads and other graduate programs. If WID research
at some point is able to illuminate the gains and losses associated with each of
these decision paths, so much the better.

   In closing and on balance, the factors qualifying the success of the Roads
program in its work with multilingual writers seem familiar: scarce resources; a
disciplinary conservatism that leads to an underselling of successful innovation
and praxis; and a shortfall in the follow up and evaluation of departmental
initiatives. In contrast the factors most relevant to the successes themselves
are refreshingly new: assessment practices aligned with both learning goals
and lingua franca communication; a research culture that values individual
differences and multilingualism; and an institutional acknowledgement that
enrolling international graduate students requires institutional change.

NOTES

1. There is no obvious way to explain why individuals from so many countries
choose to study the history of democratic development in Uppsala, but one fact
that may be relevant is that when the program was launched and this data col-
lected, Swedish universities charged no tuition. This has subsequently changed
and students from outside the EU and EES must now pay fees of 90,000 Swed-
ish Crowns (c. $11,500) per year.

REFERENCES

흁ren, M. (2005). Svensk humaniora p engelska--en svr men ndvndig kom-
   bination [Swedish humanities in English--a difficult but necessary combina-
   tion]. Tvrsnit, 2, 11-13.

Bacha, N. N., & Bahous, R. (2008). Contrasting views of business students'
   writing needs in an EFL environment. English for Specific Purposes, 27, 79-93.

Balakrishnan, J., & Cheng, C. H. (2005). The theory of constraints and the
   make-or-buy decision: An update and review. Journal of Supply Chain Man-
   agement: A Global Review of Purchasing & Supply, 41, 40-47.

Bartholomae, D. (1985). Inventing the university. In M. Rose (Ed.), When a
   writer can't write, (pp. 134-165). New York & London: The Guiford Press.

Bazerman, C., Little, J., Bethel, L., Chavkin, T., Fouquette, D., & Garufis, J.
   (2005). Reference guide to writing across the curriculum. West Lafayette, IN:
   Parlor Press and WAC Clearinghouse. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.
   edu/books/bazerman_wac/

460
                                                                                           Writing Histories

Belcher, D., & Braine, G. (Eds.). (1995). Academic writing in a second language:
   Essays on research and pedagogy. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Biggs, J., & Tang, C. (2007). Teaching for quality learning at university (3rd ed.).
   Milton Keynes, UK: Open University Press.

Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). Critical academic writing and multilingual students.
   Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Canagarajah, A. S. (2007). Lingua Franca English, multilingual communities,
   and language acquisition. The Modern Language Journal, 91, 923-939.

Canagarajah, A. S., & Wurr, A. J. (2011). Multilingual communication and
   language acquisition: New research directions, The Reading Matrix, 11, 1-15.
   Retrieved from http://www.readingmatrix.com/articles/january_2011/
   canagarajah_wurr.pdf

Casanave, C. P., & Li, X. (Eds.). (2008). Learning the literacy practices of gradu-
   ate school: Insiders' reflections on academic acculturation. Ann Arbor, MI: Uni-
   versity of Michigan Press.

Connor, U., & Mayberry, S. (1995). Learning discipline-specific academic
   writing: A case study of a Finnish graduate student in the United States. In
   E. Ventola & A. Mauranen (Eds.), Academic writing: Intercultural and textual
   issues (pp. 231-253). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Cummins, J. (2003). Challenging the construction of difference as deficit:
   Where are identity, intellect, imagination and power in the new regime of
   truth? In P. P. Trifonas (Ed.), Pedagogies of difference: Rethinking education for
   social change (pp. 41-60) New York: Routledge.

Elmgren, E., & Henriksson, A-S. (2010). Universitetspedagogik. Stockholm:
   Norstedts.

Emerson, L., MacKay, B. R., Funnell, K., & MacKay, M. B. (2002). Writing
   in a New Zealand tertiary context: WAC and action research. Learning and
   Languages across the Disciplines, 5, 110. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.
   edu/llad/v5n3/emerson_etal.pdf

European Higher Educational Area. (2010). Bologna Process. Retrieved from
   http://www.ehea.info/article-details.aspx?ArticleId=3

European Higher Educational Area. (2006). Swedish national report for 2005-
   2007 Retrieved from http://www.ehea.info/Uploads/Documents/National_
   Report_Sweden2007.pdf

Firth, A. (1996). The discursive accomplishment of normality: On lingua fran-
   ca English and conversation analysis. Journal of Pragmatics, 26, 237-259.

Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. Morgan (Eds.),
   Syntax and Semantics 3: Speech Acts, (pp. 41-48). New York: Academic Press.

Guo, S. & Zenobia, J. (2007). Nurturing diversity in higher education: A critical
   review of selected models. Canadian Journal of Higher Education, 37, 29-49.

                                                                                                461
Lavelle and Shima

Harbord, J. (2010). Writing in central and eastern Europe: Stakeholders and di-
   rections in initiating change. Across the Disciplines, 7. Retrieved from http://
   wac.colostate.edu/atd/articles/harbord2010.cfm

Hyland, K. (2003). Genre-based pedagogies: A social response to process. Jour-
   nal of Second Language Writing, 12, 17-29.

Hyland, K. (2009). Academic discourse: English in a global context. London:
   Continuum International.

Janopolous, M. (1995). Writing across the curriculum, writing proficiency ex-
   ams, and the NNE college student. Journal of Second Language Writing, 4,
   43-50.

Johns, A. (2011). The future of genre in second-language writing: Fundamen-
   tal, but contested, instructional decisions. Journal of Second Language Writ-
   ing, 20, 56-68.

Kaur, J. (2011). Raising explicitness through self-repair in English as a lingua
   franca. Journal of Pragmatics, 43, 2704-2715.

Kim, H.Y. (2011). The international graduate students' difficulties: Graduate
   classes as a community of practices. Teaching in Higher Education, 16, 281-
   292.

Lavelle, T. & 흁ren, M. (2010). Academic writing in English--pedagogical an-
   swers to strategic challenges. In B. Johansson (Ed.), Att undervisa med veten-
   skaplig frnkring --i praktiken! [Teaching with a research foundation--in
   practice], (pp. 202-218). Uppsala: Uppsala University.

Leki, I. (1995). The coping strategies of ESL students in writing tasks across the
   curriculum. TESOL Quarterly, 29, 235-260.

Magno, C. & Amarles, A. M., (2012). Teachers' feedback practices in second
   language academic writing classrooms. The International Journal of Educa-
   tional and Psychological Assessment, 6, 21-31.

Matsuda, P. K., Cox, M., Jordan, J., & Ortmeier-Hooper, C. (Eds.) (2006).
   Second-language writing in the composition classroom. Boston & New York:
   Bedford/St. Martin's.

Maruanen, A. (2006). Signaling and preventing miscommunication in lingua
   franca communication. International Journal of the Sociology of Language,
   177, 123-150.

Mitchell, K. (2012). English is not all that matters in the education of second-
   ary multilingual learners and their teachers. International Journal of Multicul-
   tural Education, 14, 1-21.

Pedersen, A.M. (2011). Writing across languages, disciplines, and sources: Sec-
   ond language writers in Jordan. Across the Disciplines, 8(1). Retrieved from
   http://wac.colostate.edu/atd/articles/pedersen2011.cfm

462
                                                                                           Writing Histories

Ramsden, P. (2003) Learning to teach in higher education (2nd ed.). London &
   New York: RoutledgeFalmer.

Seloni, L. (2012). Academic literacy socialization of first-year doctoral students
   in US: A micro-ethnographic perspective. English for Specific Purposes, 31,
   47-49.

Swales, J. & Feak, C. (2004). Academic writing for graduate students: Essential
   tasks and skills (2nd ed.). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Uppsala University. (2009). The grading criteria for student research pa-
   pers required at the advanced level. Retrieved from http://www.
   hist.uu.se/LinkClick. aspx?fileticket=cmvG6O we6W8%3d&
   tabid=2220&mid=5156&language=en-US

Uppsala University. (2011a). Academic Writing in English. Retrieved from
   http://www.uu.se/en/education/master/selma/kursplan/?kKod=5HA707

Uppsala University. (2011b). Master programme in roads to democracy. Retrieved
   from http://www.uu.se/en/education/master/selma/program/?pKod=HVD
   2M&lasar=12/13/2011

Uppsala University. (2011c). Theory and methods in thesis work: Roads to de-
   mocracy. Retrieved from http://www.uu.se/en/education/master/selma/
   kursplan/?kKod=5HA618

Zamel, V. (1995). Strangers in academia: The experiences of faculty and ESL
   students across the curriculum. College Composition and Communication, 46,
   506-521.

Zawacki, T. M., & Rogers, P. M. (Eds.). (2012). Writing across the curriculum: A
   critical sourcebook. Boston & New York: Bedford/St. Martin's.

                                                                                                463
AFTERWORD: WRITING
GLOBALLY, RIGHT HERE, RIGHT
NOW

      Chris Thaiss
      University of California, Davis

   The rain clouds have moved off east toward the Sierra, but this December's
storm is not finished, as new clouds are coming over the Vacas to the west and
now rising over my neighbor's persimmon tree, still laden with orange fruit,
though the branches are leafless. I'm enjoying the sensations of this place, this
time, and thinking how this weather moves the lettuces I just planted, the
hibiscus leaves now fluttering in the wind. But I'm also thinking about the
message I just emailed to a researcher acquaintance in Greece who sent me
a preliminary report of a longitudinal writing assessment in a social sciences
course in her university. It hadn't crossed my mind (until I decided to make
something of these perceptions) that there might be something clashingly weird
about my sitting before a wi-fied computer in a brisk breeze off the Pacific
amid the songful chatter of blue rock jays and trying to say/write something
helpful and appreciative in English to a Greek internet colleague at a university
where her home language is the language of instruction. But of course, until we
start thinking about them, there can't be something weird about these clashes
of perceptions coming from different places, because this is the world over a
billion of us live in here and now.

   All of us who have access to the web are continually sending or receiving
complex messages via words, sound, and pictures across languages, cultures,
and geographies. More and more of us billion inhabit internet locales through
websites, blogs, Facebook pages, Pinterest boards, etc., that make us public--
readable, interpretable. Such is our desire to build these virtual homes--to get
our messages out there--that we spend relatively little worry about how we
might be misinterpreted. And we think even less about the fine points of our
discourses--nuances of parallel construction, commas, "who or whom?"--
because if these delicacies of verbal etiquette really bothered us, we'd be driven
so crazy by the unpredictability of individual readers' tastes across this busy
world that we'd never have the courage to put our messages out there.

   Similarly, why do I explore the web world? Frankly, I'm looking for
information about myriad subjects, subjects studied by experts in different parts

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0551.3.2  465
Thaiss

of the world, who speak a wide range of first languages and whose versions
of my first language, English, differ greatly from mine through influences of
culture and discipline. Am I looking to see if web writers' prose matches my
sense of an appropriate English dialect? Hardly. How much does it matter to
me if I see that in order for a writer to reach me as an English speaker, he or
she has relied on the still clumsy tool of Google Translate? Not much. I'd be
much more disconcerted if the writer used his or her first language perfectly--
but unintelligibly to me--rather than trying to reach me imperfectly, but so
courteously, in my tongue.

   This short reflection on multiple communications within simultaneous
contexts in our increasingly global consciousness is pertinent, I believe, to
understanding the remarkable collection of articles Michelle Cox and Terry
Myers Zawacki have brought together in this anthology, which comes on the
heels of the outstanding special issue of Across the Disciplines (ATD) that they
edited in 2011: "WAC and Second Language Writing: Cross-field Research,
Theory, and Program Development." Theirs is the first book collection devoted
to this important focus, first pointed out by scholars such as Leki (1995),
Villanueva (2001), and Johns (2001), and perhaps most emphatically stated
by Leki in a series of pieces through 2008. As Cox expressed the problem in
her article in the ATD issue, "WAC has increased emphasis on writing across
undergraduate programs without creating mechanisms that help L2 students
succeed as writers and without creating faculty development programs
that offer training in working with L2 writers" (Cox, 2011). This collection
addresses that problem through chapters that present research on multilingual
student writers' strengths, coping strategies, and academic writing experiences;
on faculty concerns and expectations for their L2 student writers; and on
culturally sensitive WAC pedagogies and practices developed in and for US and
international writing contexts.

   Among the signal contributions of this collection is how it documents
through surveys, interviews, and analysis of teacher responses the values and
techniques that faculty bring to their reading and assessment of the writing
of L2 students. Some of the news is not encouraging, as it corroborates the
concerns of the critics of WAC requirements. It's important that these difficulties
be documented through these studies. For example, Zawacki and Habib,
in "Negotiating `Errors' in L2 Writing: Faculty Dispositions and Language
Differences," emphasize how even those faculty willing to spend a great deal of
time with L2 students on their writing often take a rigidly monolingual view
toward what they perceive to be error, using phrases such as "zero tolerance for
error" or "blast students on errors" to describe their expectations for all student
writers with no exceptions.

466
                                                                                                    Afterword

   This focus on student error, however that is perceived, is corroborated in
Wu Dan's "`Let's see where your Chinese students come from': A Qualitative
Descriptive Study of Writing in the Disciplines in China." Wu reports that
the faculty in her study, who teach across disciplines at a number of Chinese
universities, and all of whom require student writing in Chinese or English,
focus most of their attention on perceived errors in language. She attributes this
hyperawareness of students' language deficits to the teachers' lack of training
in the basics of WAC pedagogy. As she says, "none of the faculty interviewees
mentioned `writing to learn,' a key concept in WAC in the US. They only focus
on grading students' writing or the documents their students are to encounter
in future."

   The documented tendency of teachers in WAC/WID settings to emphasize
the ways that non-native speakers of a language of instruction fall short of
native-speaker fluency is represented in the collection by the phrase "difference
as deficit." Kathryn Nielsen's essay "On Class, Race, and Dynamics of Privilege:
Supporting Generation 1.5 Writers Across the Curriculum," calls this emphasis
"discrimination" and describes the ways in which this discrimination is enacted
by peers and instructors "in relation to peer review and group work, assessment
practices, and in the social dynamics of the classroom." To put the effects of
this "difference as deficit" approach bluntly, it has turned what should be an
opportunity for learners to use the power of writing as a tool of thought into
a trap for students who trustingly take us at our word. Where WAC theory
and workshop practice have classically encouraged teachers to avoid linguistic
nitpicking of student prose, too often, it seems, teachers across disciplines are
allowing their discomfort with the surface of L2 student writing to get in the
way of their helpfully responding to these students' explorations of ideas.

   But the good news in this collection is that several of the chapters present
excellent counterexamples of richer and more helpful responses to student
writing by teachers across disciplines. Even more important, individual chapters
present programmatic and pedagogical recommendations to modify WAC/
WID practices to make programs responsive to the strengths and needs of L2
writers. These plans are founded in traditional strengths and values of WAC/
WID pedagogy, but they explicitly recognize the multilinguality of students--
and the reinforcing responsibilities of both teachers across disciplines and
language support professionals.

   In contrast to the "difference as deficit" model, the collection presents
the alternative models "difference as accommodation" (Cox) and the more
emphatic "difference as resource." These alternatives are embodied in chapters
of two kinds in the collection, whether focused on US or international contexts:
(1) those that make specific recommendations for changes in response to less

                                                                                                467
Thaiss

than ideal situations for L2 writers and (2) those that describe already enacted
teaching practices.

   "Difference as resource" recommendations include teaching practices such
as those described in many of the chapters:

   1. Investigate the ethnic, linguistic, and cultural demographics at one's own
       institution and students' perceptions of diversity and campus climate
       (see Cox; Neilsen; Zenger, Mullin, & Haviland).

   2. Ask students about their linguistic and educational backgrounds and lit-
       eracy histories (see Cox; Craig; DePalma & Ringer; Lavelle & Shima;
       Nielsen; Zenger, Mullin, & Haviland).

   3. Develop course curricula, instructional approaches, and teaching-with-
       writing practices that take these backgrounds and histories into account
       (see Center & Neistepski; Craig; Dan; Du; Fernandes; Fredericksen &
       Mangelsdorf; Mallet & Zgheib; Neilsen; Phillips; Siczek & Shapiro;
       Zenger, Mullin, & Haviland).

   4. Acknowledge and find ways to value cultural and linguistic diversity in
       responses to and assessments of student writers/writing (see Cox; Ives et
       al.; Lavelle & Shima; Zawacki & Habib).

   5. Recognize that differences in L2 students' texts might be purposeful ad-
       aptations on the part of the writer to attain his/her rhetorical objectives
       (see DePalma and Ringer).

   6. Allow class time for discussions of global Englishes, valuing "accent-
       ed" writing, and being inclusive of these in peer review and collabora-
       tive projects (see Cox; Fredericksen & Mangelsdorf; Lavelle & Shima;
       Neilsen; Phillips; Siczek & Shapiro; Zenger, Mullin, & Haviland).

   In their chapter "Reconstructing Teacher Roles through a Transnational
Lens: Learning with/in the American University of Beirut," Zenger, Mullin,
and Haviland delineate "difference as resource" as both a theoretical and
pedagogical practice, recognizing that English is just one of many languages
by which students in an increasingly multilingual environment negotiate
meaning and communication across different languages--translingually. In
that context, they argue, there is a "mismatch" between a pedagogy that focuses
on students' language deficiencies and their own observations of how much the
students they were teaching "could actually do with language." In redesigning
required graduate academic writing and general education writing courses,
they began by finding out what students already knew about the languages
they speak and write, about the conventions they've been taught, and about
disciplinary rhetorics. Their aim, as they write, was to foster "instruction that
views English as an additional rather than replacement language, instruction
that positions multilingual students as informants rather than as problems,

468
                                                                                                    Afterword

instruction that changes faculty's gatekeeping function to that of collaborative
literacy brokers."

   Revising curricula and courses to value "difference as resource" requires
faculty to invest time and attention, generally in short supply at most institutions.
Considering "difference as resource" from the perspective of university financial
investment, Zawacki and Habib recommend that attention to student writing
across disciplines be funded as part of an institution's overall international
mission. Faculty can be "rewarded for engaging in inclusive pedagogies that
successfully retain and teach the international populations being targeted"
and workloads can be reduced "to accommodate particular curricular and
pedagogical work." Moreover, "the affordances such changes also bring to L1
students negotiating an international future" should be recognized.

   A chapter that demonstrates the actual embodiment of "difference as
resource" pedagogy in the practices of disciplinary faculty is Lavelle and Shima's
"Writing Histories: Lingua Franca English in a Swedish Graduate Program."
The researchers studied 32 students from more than 20 countries on four
continents, all writing history theses at Uppsala University in Sweden--as well
as their teachers' responses to their writing. What distinguishes these instructors
from most WAC/WID practitioners was their having taken a workshop series
specifically devoted to working with multilingual writers working in English.
What distinguishes the students from most enrolled in such graduate programs
was their taking required coursework on thesis writing in the lingua franca
of English as part of a longitudinal emphasis on their thesis-writing abilities.
Lavelle and Shima attribute at least part of the students' success in completing
their theses to the "difference as resource" approach used by faculty. Rather
than focus on the students' still considerable lack of native-speaker fluency in
the lingua franca, history instructors emphasized the content of the theses--
research methods, evidence, development of ideas--in their comments on and
assessment of student drafts. Students were given credit for what they knew and
how their backgrounds had contributed to their knowledge. The researchers
conclude that the students' success could be attributed to some "refreshingly
new" factors: "assessment practices aligned with both learning goals and lingua
franca communication; a research culture that values individual differences
and multilingualism; and an institutional acknowledgement that enrolling
international graduate students requires institutional change."

   Similar to the conclusions reached by Lavelle and Shima in Sweden are those
by Linda Hirsch in a US multilingual context, Hostos Community College in
New York City. In "Writing Intensively: An Examination of the Performance
of L2 Writers Across the Curriculum at an Urban Community College," she
reports the performance of multilingual writers in writing-intensive (WI)

                                                                                                469
Thaiss

courses across disciplines. Noting that L2 writers earned higher grades in the
specially-designed WI sections than in non-WI sections, she attributes this
performance contrast both to WAC/WID pedagogies practiced in WI sections
and to students "accepting the challenge" that writing-intensive classes pose.
When WI classes provide opportunities for students to write to learn and make
connections between writing and reading, when assignments are designed to
build on one another, when students are given models, instructor feedback, and
time to revise, and when faculty address students' language needs, L2 student
writers can succeed, as she shows. "The fact that ESL students are choosing
to stay in WI classes with their greater demands on writing proficiencies and
are passing these classes at a higher rate than their non-WI counterparts," she
argues, "indicates that participating in well-designed WI classes ... may be in
and of itself an academic benefit."

   Yet another overriding message of this collection is that effective WAC/
WID programs in our increasingly translingual world require the collaborative
efforts of disciplinary teachers and language professionals and research to
inform these efforts. Both the Lavelle & Shima and Hirsch examples show the
vital role played by WAC/WID leaders in training disciplinary faculty in the
"difference as resource" model and the ways in which they used their research
findings to support the need for such training. Other chapters in the collection
show diverse types of collaboration. For example, Jennifer Craig's chapter
analyzing student data from her Globally Networked Learning Environment
(GNLE), a collaboration between MIT and engineering master's students in
Singapore, emphasizes the multiple roles of the L2 specialist in co-designing
the successful program and conducting research to improve its outcomes.
In her chapter, language professional Qian Du of Ohio University conducts
a comparative study of how a specific genre, the summary, is (1) used and
responded to by teachers across disciplines and (2) assigned and responded
to by L2 writing teachers. Du's essay recommends ways that the L2 teachers
can collaborate with disciplinary faculty to help students understand that the
summary is not so much a separate genre to be learned but "an essential literacy
skill." In his chapter, Zak Lancaster demonstrates how his findings on stance-
taking in texts written by students from two different disciplines, along with
interviews with instructors about their responses to the students' authorial
stances, can be used by WAC professionals in their faculty development work.
In their chapter, DePalma and Ringer suggest that an awareness of "adaptive
transfer," that is the choices student writers might be consciously making to
achieve their own rhetorical objectives, can be useful to faculty when they
question what knowledge and skills these writers may be transferring, or not,
from other writing contexts.

470
                                                                                                    Afterword

ALL ENVIRONMENTS MULTI- AND TRANSLINGUAL

   Some teachers may read these examples of "adaptive transfer" and "difference
as resource" and wonder, "But aren't I doing my students a disservice if I neglect
their syntax errors?" To these teachers, the collection answers with examples of
ways that language professionals and subject teachers across fields can include
helpful commentary on syntax and other language conventions without ignoring
larger issues of content and idea development and without subverting the power
of the "writing to learn" approach. The Craig chapter on the US/Singapore
GNLE and the chapter "Campus Internationalization: A Center-based Model
for ESL-ready Programs" by Mallett and Zgheib offer successful collaborative
examples between disciplinary faculty and language teachers that do just that.

   But I would also ask these wondering teachers a question: can we say with
utter confidence that we know the syntax that each of our students is and should
be striving to achieve? Even in one small section of my course in Writing in
Science, for example, I have students from many national and linguistic back-
grounds, as well as from a wide array of STEM majors--biochemistry, chemi-
cal engineering, psychology, genetic counseling, biotechnology, high energy
physics, plant sciences, animal sciences, geology, statistics, to name just a few.
All are juniors or seniors; each is preparing for a hoped-for future in research,
medicine, veterinary medicine, another type of clinical practice, a career in in-
dustry or government. Where? Mostly in the US, but not only there. And even
to say "in the US" says little about the transnational and translinguistic mix of
scholars and professional colleagues with whom they hope to work, even less
about the patients, clients, customers, and communities among whom and for
whom they might find their life's work. Even in their relatively short lives thus
far, they have encountered a remarkable range of language variations, and they
will negotiate many more. If anything, we should be respecting their ability to
switch codes; we should teach through our example how they might not only
tolerate difference, but in fact develop their ability to read and write bravely
amid a sea of different languages, accents, syntaxes, and lexicons. We would not
want them to be stopped by unfamiliar sentence structures or vocabulary; so,
then, why are we?

   Such cross-cultures-and-languages environments that these multilingual
students inhabit are the very ones that we all more and more inhabit--even
in cultures where the language of instruction matches the dominant language
of the people. There are at least three main reasons for this almost ubiquitous
translinguality.

   First, digital technology has made the diversity of peoples and cultures more
familiar and reachable, as I reflected in my opening. This smaller world has

                                                                                                471
Thaiss

facilitated migration of students to universities in other countries. The most
dramatic example of this is the Bologna Process in Europe,1 illustrated in
this volume by the Lavelle and Shima chapter. In the US, most colleges and
universities are becoming more and more diverse in the cultural and language
backgrounds of students and teachers.

   Furthermore, even in academic communities that appear comparatively
"monolingual," the "language" of "writing" has been redefined by technological
affordances to be multi-modal. Writers' choices now include visuals and
audio of many kinds, besides words in an amazing array of fonts, effects, and
layouts--all of which can affect meaning. Social networks such as Facebook
are just the most obvious exemplars of a multi-modal writing that has affected
all forms of electronic communication. The "syntax" of contemporary writing
involves relationships in the graphical space unknown in previous decades. (For
example, what constitutes a "sentence" in a PowerPoint slide with photos or a
YouTube link?)

   Second, while the lingua franca of most published academic research is
English, that "English" has been variegated by its exponentially increasing
encounters with the grammars and lexicons of other languages. Yet this form
of "code meshing" (Canagarajah's term) is only one type; equally dramatic
is the mash-up and remix that has occurred as academic research fields have
multiplied and become interwoven through interdisciplinary contacts. So-called
"correct English" has been redefined within increasingly esoteric communities.
In a single class in "Writing in Science," the students and I attempt to give
feedback to drafts written in the distinctive, evolving, and highly challenging
languages of high energy physics, genetics, medical diagnoses and treatments,
seismology, environmental degradation, bacteriology, statistics science, etc.--all
of these fields having emerged from the interactions (collaborations, conflicts,
negotiations!) of researchers from different disciplinary backgrounds. We
practice the reading of sciences in new forms of publication, such as blogs in a
wide array of styles. (One of my Chinese students, a microbiologist, told me that
Twitter has become an important tool for her to keep current with colleagues.)
Therefore, when an academic specialist in any field judges "error" in student
writing, the specialist should recognize how the disciplinary or subdisciplinary
context constrains the perception of error. The specialist should not assume that
marking an error will be meaningful communication to the student, because
the specialist cannot assume that this error will be an error in other contexts in
which the writer successfully works.

   Third, the digisphere has dramatically increased the variety of readers that
any connected writer can reach. This means that what constitutes "correct
writing" is being constantly redefined even in a single series of responses to

472
                                                                                                    Afterword

email messages in a given session. The digisphere forces any writer to develop
a remarkably versatile "verbal eye" in reading messages, weighing the desires
and expectations of readers, and crafting appropriate responses. When a
writer is fluent in multiple grammars and lexicons, and communicating with
correspondents from these diverse realms, the number of reading and writing
decisions made by that writer in, say, an hour on the internet, is truly staggering.
Surely such writers--who include the English L2 writers in our universities--
deserve respect from other writers, not a label of deficiency in language. Academic
specialists across disciplines who judge the work of these students need to learn
to respect their versatility as readers and writers, and give them the benefit of
the doubt in weighing their linguistic decisions, as DePalma and Ringer argue
in the chapter on adaptive transfer. To help faculty shift from seeing linguistic
differences as deficits to a "difference-accommodated stance" and "ultimately
[to] a difference-as-resource stance," Michelle Cox's chapter provides extensive
and detailed information, materials, and suggested activities that can be used in
working with faculty on approaches to L2 writers and writing.

MAKING WAC/WID WORK FOR MULTILINGUAL
STUDENTS (IN A TRANSLINGUAL WORLD)

   Several of the chapters in their critique of US (or Chinese, as in the Wu
essay) teachers' approaches to linguistic differences call for more emphasis on
writing-to-learn techniques and on larger structural (higher order) criteria
in training of teachers to read and respond to student work. The Lancaster
chapter for example gives a program based on systemic functional linguistics
(SFL) for faculty training in genre. What's remarkable in this call is that these
training ideas have been around for many years and have been a staple of WAC
workshops, but this volume especially emphasizes the need for such strategies
with L2 students in an environment where the L1 of the teachers dominates.

   Most basically, as this collection teaches, making WAC/WID work in our
translingual world means appreciating the multilinguality of L2 students. Even
the most "struggling with English" student in a class taught in English in a
US university has achieved technical fluency in the language, even though that
person has not reached native-speaker fluency nor a polished academic voice.
Since that student is likely to be able to communicate in at least one other
spoken language, that student brings to any subject linguistic and cultural depth
that a monolingual teacher or student does not possess. Teachers of any subject
can ask themselves how that depth can be brought to bear in understanding and
illuminating the subject--as well as in communicating its important messages

                                                                                                473
Thaiss

to other linguistic communities. For example, a multilingual (Thai/English)
student from a farm background in Thailand, majoring in biochemistry and
specializing in plant breeding, brings to my science writing course a cultural/
environmental depth that not only enriches her studies and prepares her for
varied futures, but that also can illuminate the studies of others in the subject.
But she can only be a resource for others if her teachers, including me, provide
opportunities for her writing (or talk) to develop connections between
environments that she can share with others.

   Particularly in a writing class, that depth in multilingual students gives the
writer access to audiences, settings, and purposes of writing (the full rhetorical
triangle) that can't be accessed by monolingual English speakers, no matter how
fluent. That most of our writing classes in US English departments and writing
programs have ignored the translingual resources that these students bring to
the course shows our fixation on the normative task of "teaching English,"
rather than encouraging all our students, monolingual and multilingual, to
consider how writing, rhetoric, and new communication technologies cross
linguo-cultural borders.

   In co-editing with an international team the anthology Writing Programs
Worldwide: Profiles of Academic Writing in Many Places (2012), I've been
privileged to meet teachers who exemplify this linguo-cultural border crossing.
Essays from 28 countries on six continents present examples of teachers
who use multilingual resources in teaching across disciplines. For example,
Dsire Motta-Roth of the Federal University of Santa Maria (UFSM) in
Brazil, drawing on her research on the writing demands on undergraduate and
graduate students in diverse fields, stresses the need for a genre- and rhetorically-
based curriculum that can broaden the typically narrow assumption that
skilled language use means only perfection of form (Motta-Roth, 2012). Her
emphasis on this broader approach is essential, she writes, because students
and teachers at UFSM write in both Portuguese and English, with scholarship
in Portuguese seen by many as important both toward reaching a Portuguese-
speaking readership and as "resistance to [the] `academic hegemony'" (p.
108) of English publication. Her teaching and research foreground student
consciousness of the everyday ways that genre and rhetoric are intrinsic to their
working in both languages.

   An equally striking but different example comes from Otto Kruse of the
Zurich University of Applied Sciences, who profiles the School of Translation
at his university (Kruse, 2012). Since Switzerland is a country with four official
languages (German, French, Italian, and Romansh) and a fifth, English, as an
increasingly important lingua franca, Kruse describes how translation studies

474
                                                                                                    Afterword

have changed from a paradigm of proficiency in separate languages ("`pure'
language skills") to "a model of multilingual literacy," where the norm has
become the "co-existence" of different languages and practices for individuals
(p. 404). As a result, translators can no longer demonstrate proficiency by
successfully translating documents from language to language, but must
develop "meta-linguistic abilities" that cross languages as well as genres (p.
406).

   While these two chapters from my collection as well as exemplar chapters by
Zenger, Mullin, and Haviland and Lavelle and Shima in this volume describe
programs at institutions outside of the US, they offer model approaches,
practices, and perspectives that we in the US can strive to achieve. Which,
ultimately, is the goal of this anthology.

THE LAST WORD

   WAC/WID has always been about flexibility amid diversity. From
its earliest days as a formal "movement" in the 1970s, it has been about
respecting the differences among disciplines: appreciating the diverse learning
methods of physicists and painters, the distinctive vocabularies and syntaxes
of mathematicians and anthropologists, the esoteric genres of chemists and
musicologists. More recently, it has been about widening an already wide circle
to accept the capabilities of new technologies for learning and communication.
The basic motive of "writing across the curriculum" has been to learn from all
disciplines the most productive ways by which writing can be a tool, a vehicle, a
force for increased and more expansive learning and communication, and then
to share those methods across all fields.

   Though WAC/WID has focused on disciplinary differences, its inherent
flexibility of approach makes it an ideal construct to appreciate the diversity of
language backgrounds of both students and teachers. Because the best-known
WAC/WID practices, as espoused in these chapters, give priority to diverse
ways and tools of learning, they can be used productively in translinguistic
contexts--the new norm in education. What is truly exciting about collections
such as this is that by illuminating the confluence of disciplinary diversity and
multilinguality, we will never again think of WAC as "only" about the content
and methods of academic disciplines. Indeed, we need to reconceive the idea of
"the discipline," just as we have reconceived the idea of "writing," as evolving
within an ever-richer global mix of languages, technologies, ways of thinking,
and desires for expression.

                                                                                                475
Thaiss

NOTES

1. See the official website of the Bologna Process 2010-2012 (http://www.
chea.info/)

REFERENCES

Canagarajah, A. S. (2006). The place of world Englishes in composition: Plural-
   ization continued. College Composition and Communication, 57(4), 586-619.

Cox, M. (2011). WAC: Closing doors or opening doors for second language
   writers? Across the Disciplines, 8(4.). Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/
   atd/ell/cox.cfm

Johns, A. (2001). ESL students and WAC programs: Varied populations and
   diverse needs." In S. H. McLeod, E. Miraglia, M. Soven, & C. Thaiss (Eds.),
   WAC for the new millennium (pp. 141-164). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Kruse, O. (2012). The place of writing in translation: From linguistic crafts-
   manship to multilingual text production. In C. Thaiss, G. Bruer, P. Car-
   lino, L.Ganobcsik-Williams, & A. Sinha (Eds.), Writing programs worldwide:
   Profiles of academic writing in many places (pp. 401-415). Fort Collins, CO:
   WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.
   edu/books/wpww/

Lea, M. (1999). Academic literacies and learning in higher education. In C.
   Jones, J.Turner, & B. Street (Eds.), Students writing in the university: Cultural
   and epistemological issues (pp. 103-124). (Studies in written language and
   literacy 8.) Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

Leki, I. (1995). Coping strategies of ESL students in writing tasks across the
   curriculum. TESOL Quarterly 29(2), 235-260.

Motta-Roth, D. (2012). Academic literacies in the South: Writing practices
   in a Brazilian university. In C. Thaiss, G. Bruer, P. Carlino, L. Ganobcsik-
   Williams& A. Sinha (Eds.), Writing programs worldwide: Profiles of academic
   writing in many places (pp. 105-116). Fort Collins, CO: WAC Clearinghouse
   and Parlor Press. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/books/wpww/

Villanueva, V., Jr. (2001). The politics of literacy across the curriculum. In S.
   H. McLeod, E. Miraglia, M. Soven, & C. Thaiss (Eds.), WAC for the new
   millennium (pp. 165-178) Urbana, IL: NCTE.

476
NOTES ON EDITORS AND

CONTRIBUTORS

EDITORS

   Terry Myers Zawacki is associate professor emerita of English and director
emerita of George Mason University's nationally ranked Writing Across
the Curriculum (WAC) program. Her publications include the co-authored
Engaged Writers and Dynamic Disciplines: Research on the Academic Writing Life,
the co-edited Writing Across the Curriculum: A Critical Sourcebook, the co-edited
Across the Disciplines special issue on "WAC and Second Language Writing,"
and articles on writing centers and writing fellows, writing in the disciplines,
feminism and composition, writing assessment, and WAC and second
language writing. The latter was the focus of her keynote addresses at the 2010
International WAC conference and the 2012 Middle East North Africa Writing
Center Association conference in Doha, Qatar. She serves on the editorial
boards of Across the Disciplines and The WAC Journal, on the review board for
the Digital Books series on the WAC Clearinghouse, and is lead editor of the
International Perspectives on Writing series, also on the Clearinghouse. She is
a member of the Consultants Board of the International WAC Network, the
College Composition and Communication Committee on the Globalization of
Postsecondary Writing Instruction and Research, and the Scientific Committee
of the International Society for the Advancement of Writing Research.

   Michelle Cox is Multilingual Specialist in the Institute for Writing and
Rhetoric at Dartmouth College, and is the former director of Bridgewater
State University's Writing Across the Curriculum (WAC) program, which she
launched in 2007. She co-edited Second Language Writing in the Composition
Classroom: A Critical Sourcebook (Bedford/St. Martin's, 2006), Reinventing
Identities in Second Language Writing (NCTE, 2010), and a special issue of Across
the Disciplines, "WAC and Second Language Writing: Cross-Field Research,
Theory, and Program Development" (December, 2011), and has published
articles on WAC program administration, composition pedagogy, second
language writing pedagogy, identity theory, and faculty development. She is
a member of the International WAC Network Consultants Board, the WAC
Clearinghouse editorial board (where she edits the WAC Clearinghouse pages
on WAC and second language writing), the Across the Disciplines editorial board,

                                                                                                 477
Editors and Contributors

and the College Composition and Communication Committee on Diversity,
and is past chair of the Northeast Writing Centers Association (NEWCA) and
the Northeast Writing Across the Curriculum Consortium (NEWACC).

   CONTRIBUTORS
   Carole Center is an associate professor of English and the Writing Program
Director at Lasell College. She has published in Teaching English in the Two-Year
College, MELUS (Multi-Ethnic Literature of the United States), Journal of Basic
Writing, Open Words, and Reader.
   Jennifer Lynn Craig is a lecturer in the Program in Writing and Humanistic
Studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology where she teaches writing,
oral presentation and team skills to engineering students. She is the author of
Integrating Writing Strategies in EFL/ESL University Contexts: A Writing-across-
the-Curriculum Approach. She is a co-author of Learning to Communicate in
Science and Engineering: Case Studies from MIT, the 2012 winner of the CCCC's
Advancement of Knowledge award.
   Wu Dan received her PhD in Rhetorics, Communication, and Information
Design from Clemson University in 2010. She now teaches undergraduate
English writing and graduate writing research courses in Xi'an International
Studies University (XISU), Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China. She also works as
the Dean of Humboldt College, a joint program by XISU and Humboldt State
University, California, US.
   Michael-John DePalma is an Assistant Professor of English in the
Professional Writing Program at Baylor University. His work has appeared in
College Composition and Communication, Rhetoric Society Quarterly, Rhetoric
Review, Reflections: A Journal of Writing, Service Learning, and Community
Literacy, and the Journal of Second Language Writing. His co-authored article
(with Jeffrey M. Ringer), "Toward a Theory of Adaptive Transfer: Expanding
Disciplinary Discussions of `Transfer' in Second-Language Writing and
Composition Studies," received honorable mention for the Journal of Second
Language Writing's Best Article of 2011.
   Qian Du received her Ph.D. in Foreign, Second and Multilingual Language
Education at Ohio State University in 2013. She now works as a Lecturer
and Undergraduate Composition Coordinator in the English Language
Improvement Program at Ohio University. Her research interests include
academic literacy development, reading-writing connections, and intercultural
rhetoric.
   Marino Fernandes was, at the time of this writing, in the Langauge and
Linguistics Master's program at the University of New Hampshire. He is
currently a PhD candidate in the UNH Composition Studies program. A version

478
                                                                                  Editors and Contributors

of the essay that appears in this collection was presented at the 2012 Conference
on College Composition and Communication in St. Louis Missouri, where he
was also named a 2012 Scholar for the Dream.

   Elaine Fredericksen has forty years of teaching experience at all levels. She
earned a PhD in Rhetoric and Composition from the University of Alabama in
1996 and is Professor Emerita of English at the University of Texas at El Paso.
She has authored many scholarly articles and a book, A New World of Writers:
Teaching Writing in a Diverse Society, published in January 2003 by Peter Lang.
She serves on the editorial board for the Journal of Hispanic Higher Education.
Her 1999 FIPSE grant was instrumental in the establishment of the country's
first Bilingual Professional Writing Certificate program.

   Anna S. Habib is term assistant professor in the English Department at
George Mason University where she teaches the undergraduate and graduate
stretched writing courses for Mason's Center for International Student Access.
Her collaborative research with Terry Zawacki has been published by NCTE in
the edited collection titled Reinventing Identities in Second Language Writing and
in Valuing Written Accents, a George Mason University publication.

   Jonathan Hall is an assistant professor of English at York College, City
University of New York, where he also serves as Writing Across the Curriculum
Coordinator. His work has appeared in The WAC Journal, Across the Disciplines,
and elsewhere. He's currently working on an investigation of translingual
reading and faculty language identity.

   Carol Peterson Haviland, emerita professor of English at California State
University, San Bernardino, directed CSUSB's writing center and WAC programs
for twenty years. She presently teaches in CSUSB's rhetoric and composition
program and spent the spring terms of 2010 and 2011 teaching and consulting
with the writing faculty at the American University of Beirut. Her co-authored
book, Who Owns This Text? Plagiarism, Authorship and Disciplinary Cultures,
her work at the American University of Beirut, and her current study with first-
year-writers challenging the language of remediation represent her interests in
the ways writing collaborations within and across borders can challenge often-
unexamined "norms."

   Linda Hirsch is a professor at Hostos Community College/CUNY where
she implemented and co-coordinates the WAC program. Her essays have
appeared in journals including Language and Learning across the Disciplines, and
the Journal of Basic Writing, and books including Making Teaching and Learning
Matter: Transformative Spaces in Higher Education.

   Lindsey Ives is a PhD candidate in Rhetoric and Writing at the University
of New Mexico, where she serves as assistant director of Core Writing. She
is currently completing her dissertation, "Case not Closed: Whiteness and

                                                                                                479
Editors and Contributors

the Rhetorical Genres of Freedom Summer." Her research interests include
whiteness studies, L2 writing, WAC, writing program administration, and the
intersections between them.

   Zak Lancaster is an assistant professor of English at Wake Forest University,
where he is working to build a Writing Across the Curriculum program. He is a
recent PhD in English and Education from the University of Michigan; to date,
his publications and conference presentations have focused on the language
of stance and evaluation in academic discourses, for the benefit of informing
university-level writing instruction.

   Thomas Lavelle directs the Center for Modern Languages at the Stockholm
School of Economics, where he also teaches ESP courses and serves as a senior
lecturer. He consults widely with Swedish universities on the functions of lingua
franca English in higher education. His published articles address such topics
as teaching methods for L2 disciplinary writing, communication training in
international legal education, Anglophone teaching in international business
schools and, in an American context, the 1996-97 Ebonics controversy.

   Elizabeth Leahy is currently pursuing a PhD in Rhetoric, Composition,
and the Teaching of English at the University of Arizona, where she is co-PI
on a study examining an outdated curricular WID requirement. Her research
interests include sustainable WAC programs and border rhetorics.

   Anni Leming is a reading instructor at Central New Mexico Community
College and is pursuing a PhD in Educational Linguistics at the University
of New Mexico. She presented at the Conference on College Composition
and Communication in 2012. Her current research interests focus on issues
in multilingualism, globalisation and e-learning, discourse analysis, and adult
education.

   Karyn E. Mallet is assistant director of the English Language Institute and
assistant director of Language Development for the Center for International
Student Access (CISA) at George Mason University, where she constructs,
implements, and assesses language-supported programs for undergraduate
and graduate international students. Recent publications include a chapter in
TESOL's Effective Second Language Writing with Jennifer Haan and Diversity at
Mason: The Pursuit of Transformative Education, a George Mason publication
co-edited with Anna Habib.

   Kate Mangelsdorf is Professor of Rhetoric and Writing Studies at the
University of Texas at El Paso, where she has served as Director of University
Writing Programs. She has published a number of articles and book chapters
on second-language writing and has co-authored several textbooks for
developmental and first-year composition that focus on students with a range
of language backgrounds.

480
                                                                                  Editors and Contributors

   Joan Mullin, professor at Illinois State University, has published on,
initiated and directed WAC programs/writing centers at the universities of
Toledo and Texas at Austin. Her recent co-authored book, Who Owns This Text?
Plagiarism, Authorship and Disciplinary Cultures, complements her collaborative
examinations of international approaches to the teaching of writing. Her current
project is The Research Exchange with Fishman and Palmquist, a database for the
collection, aggregation, and sharing of models of writing research at all levels
across borders. She is one of four editors of International Studies of Writing
series on the WAC Clearinghouse.

   Kathryn Nielsen is an associate director in the Communication Arts and
Sciences Department at Merrimack College where she works as the second
language writing specialist in the Writing Center and Writing Intensive (WI)
program. Her essays have appeared in the Journal of the Academy of Business
Education, Writing in the Center, Teaching in a Writing Center Setting, and Adult
Education Research Conference Proceedings. Her research interests include second
language writing, transformative learning theory, and critical and liberatory
education.

   Michelle Niestepski is an assistant professor of English at Lasell College.
She has co-directed workshops on archival research at the Conference on
College Composition and Communication and has presented at CCCCs and
the National Council of Teachers of English conference.

   Tom Pierce is Director of Adult Education at Central New Mexico
Community College and a PhD candidate at the University of New Mexico.
His dissertation focuses on standards of correctness for L2 writers and basic
writers in college composition. He has been a frequent presenter at the National
Association of Developmental Education, and more recently at the Conference
on College Composition and Communication.

   Talinn Phillips is an Assistant Professor of English at Ohio University in
Athens, Ohio. She co-directs the Ohio University Appalachian Writing Project
site and is helping to develop a new Graduate Writing and Research Center.

   Jeffrey M. Ringer is an assistant professor of English at the University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, where he teaches in the division of Rhetoric, Writing, and
Linguistics. His work has appeared in journals such as College English, Rhetoric
Review, JAC, and the Journal of Second Language Writing, among others. He's
currently working on a book project that examines how student religious
identity shapes and is shaped by academic writing.

   Michael Schwartz is an assistant professor at St. Cloud State University,
where he is the director of the Intensive English Center and teaches in the
MA-TESL program. He has published in Arizona Working Papers in SLA
and Teaching and has presented at the Conference on College Composition

                                                                                                481
and Communication 2011 and 2012, the High Desert Linguistics Society
Conference, and the Ethnography in Education Forum. He is interested in
SLA and identity, L2 writing, discourse analysis, and issues in world Englishes.

   Shawna Shapiro is a Visiting Assistant Professor at Middlebury College,
where she teaches courses in writing and linguistics. Her work has appeared
in several volumes of TESOL's Classroom Practice Series, as well as in TESL
Canada Journal, Teaching and Teacher Education, and the Journal of English for
Academic Purposes.

   Alan Shima is an associate professor at the Stockholm School of Economics
where he teaches Business English courses. He also taught academic writing
in a master's program at Uppsala University. He has written a book length
study on contemporary feminist poetics and published articles on postcolonial
fiction. His current research explores the narrative strategies of memoir and the
pedagogy of academic writing.

   Megan Siczek has been an instructor in English for Academic Purposes
(EAP) at the George Washington University since 2004. In addition to teaching
academic writing courses to international undergraduates, she works with the
writing center and university writing program to meet the needs of second
language writers at the university. She is currently pursuing a doctoral degree
in Educational Policy Studies, with research interests in transnational migration
and internationalization.

   Chris Thaiss is Clark Kerr Presidential Chair and Professor in the University
Writing Program at UC Davis. Author, co-author, or editor of twelve books
and numerous articles and chapters, he coordinates the International Network
of Writing-across-the-Curriculum Programs. His most recent book, co-edited
with an international team, is Writing Programs Worldwide: Profiles of Academic
Writing in Many Places (WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press, 2012). He
teaches undergraduate courses in science writing and graduate courses in
writing theory, pedagogy, research, and program administration.

   Amy Zenger is an associate professor of English at the American University
of Beirut, where she directs the Writing Center and guides a Writing in the
Disciplines initiative. With Bronwyn Williams, she has co-authored Popular
Culture and Representations of Literacy and co-edited New Media Literacies and
Participatory Popular Culture Across Borders.

   Ghania Zgheib is a doctoral student and an instructor at the English
Language Institute at George Mason University as well as the language support
course coordinator in the ACCESS program. Recent publications include a
chapter in Diversity at Mason: The Pursuit of Transformative Education, a George
Mason publication, co-authored with Karyn E. Mallett.
WAC AND SECOND-L ANGUAGE WRITERS

In WAC and Second-Language Writers, the editors and contributors pur-
sue the ambitious goal of including within WAC theory, research, and
practice the differing perspectives, educational experiences, and voices of
second-language writers. The chapters within this collection not only re-
port new research but also share a wealth of pedagogical, curricular, and
programmatic practices relevant to second-language writers. Representing
a range of institutional perspectives--including those of students and fac-
ulty at public universities, community colleges, liberal arts colleges, and
English-language schools--and a diverse set of geographical and cultural
contexts, the editors and contributors report on work taking place in the
United States, Asia, Europe, and the Middle East.

Terry Myers Zawacki is associate professor emerita of English at
George Mason University. She has published on writing in the dis-
ciplines, writing assessment, WAC and L2 writing, writing centers,
and writing fellows. She serves on the editorial boards of Across the
Disciplines, The WAC Journal, and the WAC Clearinghouse. She also is
lead editor of the WAC Clearinghouse International Exchanges on the
Study of Writing series.

Michelle Cox is a Multilingual Specialist at Dartmouth College and
former director of Bridgewater State University's WAC program, which
she launched in 2007. She has published on WAC and second-language
writing as well as on composition pedagogy, identity theory, and fac-
ulty development. She serves on the editorial boards of Across the Disci-
plines and the WAC Clearinghouse, where she edits the pages on WAC
and second-language writing.

Perspectives on Writing         W
Series Editor, Susan H. McLeod

The WAC Clearinghouse

Fort Collins, CO 80523
wac.colostate.edu

Parlor Press

Anderson, SC 29621
w w w.parlorpress.com

ISBN 978-1-64215-055-1
