Writing Spaces at Oklahoma State
                 University
WRITING SPACES AT OKLAHOMA STATE
UNIVERSITY

DR. JOSHUA DANIEL; DR. KATHY ESSMILLER; MARK DIFRUSIO;
NATASHA TINSLEY; DR. JOSIAH MEINTS; DR. COURTNEY LUND
O'NEIL; DANE HOWARD; AND ROSEANNA RECCHIA

Oklahoma State University Libraries
Stillwater, OK
Writing Spaces at Oklahoma State University Copyright  2023 by Dr. Joshua Daniel; Dr. Kathy Essmiller; Mark DiFrusio; Natasha
Tinsley; Dr. Josiah Meints; Dr. Courtney Lund O'Neil; Dane Howard; and Roseanna Recchia is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Original content is licensed CC BY, all other content retains its original license unless otherwise noted.
CONTENTS

Writing Spaces and Building a Sustainable OER                                       1

Dr. Joshua Daniel

Our Approach and Editorial Team                                                     5

Dr. Joshua Daniel; Dr. Kathy Essmiller; Mark DiFrusio; Natasha Tinsley; Dr. Josiah

Meints; Dr. Courtney Lund O'Neil; Dane Howard; and Roseanna Recchia

Meet the Writing Spaces Team                                                        x

Dr. Trace Daniels-Lerberg; Dr. Dana Driscoll; Dr. Mary K. Stewart; and Dr. Matthew

Vetter

OpenOKState Student Privacy Guidelines                                              xiii

Part I. Listening to And Representing an Argument

1. Lennie Irvin's "What is Academic Writing?"                                       21

Writing Spaces Volume 1

2. Corinne E. Hinton's "So You've Got a Writing Assignment: Now What?"              24

Writing Spaces Volume 1

3. Catherine Savini's "Looking for Trouble: Finding Your Way Into a Writing         28

Assignment"

Writing Spaces Volume 2

4. Ben Rafoth's "Why Visit Your Campus Writing Center?"                             32

Writing Spaces Volume 1

Part II. Analyzing and Evaluating an Argument

5. Laura Bolin Carroll's Backpacks or Briefcases: Steps toward Rhetorical Analysis  39

Writing Spaces Volume 1
6. Jenae Cohn's Understanding Visual Rhetoric                                              43

Writing Spaces Volume 3

7. Kerry Dirk's Navigating Genres                                                          47

Writing Spaces Volume 1

8. William T. FitzGerald's Writing with Force and Flair                                    51

Writing Spaces Volume 3

9. Rebecca Jones's Finding the Good Argument or Why Bother with Logic?                     55

Writing Spaces Volume 1

Part III. Describing and Explaining a Scholarly Conversation

10. Gitanjali DasBender's "Critical Thinking in College Writing: From the Personal to the  61

Academic"

Writing Spaces Volume 2

11. Karen Rosenberg's "Reading Games: Strategies for Reading Scholarly Sources"            64

Writing Spaces Volume 2

12. Dan Melzer's "Understanding Discourse Communities"                                     68

Writing Spaces Volume 3

13. James P. Purdy's "Wikipedia Is Good for You!?"                                         72

Writing Spaces Volume 1

Part IV. Entering and Participating in a Scholarly Conversation

14. Randall McClure's "Googlepedia: Turning Information Behaviors into Research            79

Skills"

Writing Spaces Volume 2

15. Marjoria Stewart's "Weaving Personal Experience into Academic Writings"                83

Writing Spaces Volume 3
16. Quentin Vieregge's "Exigency: What Makes My Message Indispensable to My         87

Reader"

Writing Spaces Volume 3

17. Janice R. Walker's "Everything Changes, or Why MLA Isn't (Always) Right"        91

Writing Spaces Volume 2

Part V. Selected Essays on Writing Processes

18. Melanie Gagich's "An Introduction to and Strategies for Multimodal Composing"   97

Writing Spaces Volume 3

19. Alex Reid's "Why Blog? Searching for Writing on the Web"                        101

Writing Spaces Volume 2

20. Anthony T. Atkins's ."Collaborating Online: Digital Strategies for Group Work"  105

Writing Spaces Volume 1

21. Christopher Leary's "Composing the Anthology: An Exercise in Patchwriting"      109

Writing Spaces Volume 1

Appendix                                                                            113
                                                                                    WRITING SPACES AND BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE OER | 1

WRITING SPACES AND BUILDING A
SUSTAINABLE OER

   Dr. Joshua Daniel

Welcome to Writing Spaces at Oklahoma State University, our second OER project for FYC at Oklahoma
State University, which serves as the primary textbook for English 1213. While English 1113 and its
corresponding textbook, Who Teaches Writing, introduced you to a range of genres and styles of writing
with an overall focus on writing a lot and writing for different audiences, English 1213 focuses on the various
processes involved in researching answers to various inquiry questions and building effective arguments within
and outside academic contexts. Our curriculum takes you through the processes of listening/summarizing,
asking questions, characterizing scholarly debates, and entering those debates once you have something
productive to add to an ongoing conversation.

   Who Teaches Writing was produced "in-house," so to speak. We received a $10,000.00 grant from Dr.
Matt Upson and worked with OER guru/knower-and-doer-of-all things Dr. Kathy Essmiller to produce
essays about important concepts for beginning writers by paying authors from Oklahoma State and other
institutions to write for us. Writing Spaces at Oklahoma State University was produced using a different
process. You're no doubt asking yourself, "Well, gosh! Who Teaching Writing was uh-mazing! Why would they
switch it up?" Despite your well-reasoned "if it ain't broke don't fix it" logic, we wanted to use another model
for this textbook (and spoiler alert, more is coming) to show in every way we could there are many different
ways to produce commercial free textbooks for students. So how did we do this one?

   Writing Spaces is, as I like to say, the "OG" of all things commercial-free-textbooks for first-year writing. If
you don't believe me, check out the opening lines on their website:

       Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing is a book series containing peer-reviewed collections of
       essays--all composed by teachers for students--with each volume freely available for
       download under a Creative Commons license. Writing Spaces aims to build a library of quality
       open access textbooks for the writing classroom as an alternative to costly textbooks.

If terms like "book series" and "peer-reviewed essays" or "by teachers for students" or "free" sound reminiscent
of Who Teaches Writing, it is because Writing Spaces was and is the inspiration for Who Teaches Writing. Who
Teaches Writing was no brain child of ours, but just the end result of us keeping up with good practice from
2 | WRITING SPACES AND BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE OER

smart people who have been doing this work for many years. I had the good fortune to serve as web editor for
Writing Spaces for a time, and I know their work well. While we borrowed their process to create our textbook,
this textbook uses existing Writing Spaces articles and organizes them around the English 1213 curriculum,
along with abstracts and introductions from our editorial team (you'll be meeting them in each section) to
deliver you another commercial free textbook. Not only is it entirely possible to create free textbooks for FYC
students, it has been for a while. This is because, well, Writing Spaces has been at it for a minute; as FYC
Director, I do not believe in unnecessary textbook costs, and almost all commercial textbook costs are almost
all unnecessary.

   The long and short of it is this: I have no real beef with students paying some cost for textbooks. My
issue is that I don't want students paying textbook costs that aren't absolutely necessary, and I think as
program directors we should explore every possible alternative before making a choice to ask students to pay for
materials above and beyond all the other costs associated with college. When we do ask them to pay, it should
be as small as we can make it, and we should be thoughtful and purposeful about why they are being asked
to pay with a clear sense of who benefits. In other words, if students are paying for textbooks, it should help
everyone (them, the program, instructors, etc). If you're producing an OER, maybe you need to ask students
to pay 5 or 10 bucks to compensate your authors. Do it. That's a necessary and good cost, and not prohibitive
for students. Maybe you need to create a small printing fee to give a kickback to your bookstore, who is losing
money from a contract with the old textbook supplier. Again, no beef. What is the cost? Is it necessary? Is it
prohibitive? Who does it help? If you don't have good answers to those questions, you may have a problem.
The last time we used a commercial textbook, we were always told it was only 40 bucks. It usually ended up
being closer to 80 in the end, and we saw no benefit from that. No thanks. Do not pass go.

   Reflections on My Father: Why Are We Doing This?
   I began my job here at Oklahoma State University in the Fall of 2014. My father-unexpectedly, at the age
of 56-died that November during Thanksgiving Break. My parents split up when I was 3 and they never saw
eye-to-eye on much of anything, but there are two important qualities they share: 1) they were/are (yes, Mom,
I know you're still alive) tremendously intelligent people; and 2) neither of them had the chance to graduate
high school. My mom is one of the great storytellers of our generation, so I won't speak for her here, but I have
come to realize in recent years some things about my dad's story are important to the work I do today, and I
want to share them with you here.
   In my dad's case, he didn't even get the chance to finish middle school and had to drop out during the 7th
grade to work full time. From the age of 13 until his death at the age of 56, he worked as an electrician (a
good one at that from everything I ever knew or learned about the man). Think about that for a second. My
father died young after putting in 43 years of hard labor. My academic career, especially in recent years, has
been in many ways shaped by these facts about my father. As part of my work directing the FYC program at
OSU, I have worked closely with the Gardner Institute and their Gateways to Completion program. Recently,
the Gardner Institute has been launching a new series about transforming the first 60 hours of college courses
                                                                                    WRITING SPACES AND BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE OER | 3

toward accessibility, and they have stated as their goal to make "race, ethnicity, and family income no longer
reliable predictors of who gets to graduate college." For me, this is a major focus of our OER Project. No matter
who you are, or where you come from, or what your family has or does not have, we can provide these FYC
textbooks for free. This is a small gesture to remove barriers to education, and we are so happy to be able to do
it for all of you.

   You find yourself now in a college classroom, reading this, maybe thinking about your own parents and the
work/opportunities you have in front of you. If you think college is hard for you or if you ever worry that
maybe you aren't good enough to succeed, know that I thought those things about myself and, if you want
to know the truth about it, I still think those things a lot. Know this: you are a student in a first-year writing
program that believes in you and believes in your capacity to succeed in college. If the only thing between you
and a college degree is your ability and willingness to do the work, we think you have a really great shot at
success.

   Go get it.

   To Dad: Thanks For Everything
   See you on the other side.
4 | WRITING SPACES AND BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE OER

About the author

                                  Dr. Joshua Daniel

                                              OKLAHOMA STATE UNIVERSITY
                                              https://cas.okstate.edu/department_of_english/faculty_profiles/
                                              joshua_daniel.html
                                              https://twitter.com/drjldaniel
                                              https://www.linkedin.com/in/dr-joshua-luke-daniel-727a12230/

Dr. Joshua Daniel (formerly published under Joshua Daniel-Wariya) is an Associate Professor of Rhetoric and
Writing Studies at Oklahoma State University and he directs the First-Year Composition Program. His research
is on the persuasive capacities of games and software, and his work has appeared in journals such as Games
and Culture, Computers and Composition, and Rhetoric Society Quarterly, and he created the textbook Who
Teaches Writing. He is also a tremendous Twitter follow, and you can contact him there through @drjldaniel
                                                                                                          OUR APPROACH AND EDITORIAL TEAM | 5

OUR APPROACH AND EDITORIAL TEAM

   Dr. Joshua Daniel; Dr. Kathy Essmiller; Mark DiFrusio; Natasha Tinsley; Dr.
   Josiah Meints; Dr. Courtney Lund O'Neil; Dane Howard; and Roseanna Recchia

       This textbook consists of five primary sections. Like Who Teaches Writing, the first four
       sections correspond to the first four learning outcomes in the English 1213 curriculum and are
       loosely organized around the current curriculum at Oklahoma State University. Additionally, a
       fifth section includes selected chapters on general reading, writing, and researching processes. If
       your are a student in an English 1213 course, your instructor will likely assign some readings
       from this textbook and supplement those with some selected outside readings from their own
       interests, research areas, and expertise. Below, you can meet our editorial team for this
       textbook. Each editor has provided a short introduction to the unit, along with abstracts for the
       readings that provide an overview of how the chapter is useful within the English 1213
       curriculum at Oklahoma State University. Each chapter contains a link to the article from Writing
       Spaces, along with samples citations in MLA, APA, and Chicago Style, along with information on
       the volume of Writing Spaces where the selection appears.

About the authors

                   Dr. Joshua Daniel

                   OKLAHOMA STATE UNIVERSITY
                   https://cas.okstate.edu/department_of_english/faculty_profiles/
                   joshua_daniel.html
                   https://twitter.com/drjldaniel
                   https://www.linkedin.com/in/dr-joshua-luke-daniel-727a12230/
6 | OUR APPROACH AND EDITORIAL TEAM

Dr. Joshua Daniel (formerly published under Joshua Daniel-Wariya) is an Associate Professor of Rhetoric and
Writing Studies at Oklahoma State University and he directs the First-Year Composition Program. His research
is on the persuasive capacities of games and software, and his work has appeared in journals such as Games
and Culture, Computers and Composition, and Rhetoric Society Quarterly, and he created the textbook Who
Teaches Writing. He is also a tremendous Twitter follow, and you can contact him there through @drjldaniel

                                  Kathy Essmiller

                                              OKLAHOMA STATE UNIVERSITY

Kathy's background is in music education, where she enjoyed over fifteen fantastic years making music with
MS/HS band students (including her own two kids). She is an Assistant Professor/Coordinator of OER at
Oklahoma State University, and was a 2019-2020 OER Research Fellow. She holds Masters degrees in trumpet
performance and educational technology, and a PhD in Learning, Design and Technology from OSU.

                                  Mark DiFrusio

Mark DiFruscio, Editor of Section I: "Listening to and Representing an Argument," is a PhD
candidate in English at Oklahoma State University. His previously published work has appeared in Fiction
International, The Laurel Review, and Puerto del Sol. His story "The Alien Dialogues" was selected as one of
the winners of the 2020 AWP Intro Journals Contest. He has been teaching creative writing, literature, and
composition and rhetoric since 201, at San Diego State University and Oklahoma State University.
                                                                                                          OUR APPROACH AND EDITORIAL TEAM | 7

                                  Natasha Tinsley

                                              SOUTHERWESTERN OKLAHOMA STATE UNIVERSITY

Natasha Tinsley, Editor of Section II: "Analyzing and Evaluating an Argument," M.Ed., MFA, is
Assistant Professor and Coordinator of the Writing Center in the the Language and Literature Department at
Southwestern Oklahoma State University.

                                  Josiah Meints

                                              OKLAHOMA STATE UNIVERSITY

Dr. Josiah Meints, Editor of Section III: Describing and Explaining a Scholarly Conversation," is
a Visiting Assistant Professor of Rhetoric and Writing Studies and the Assistant Director of the Cowboy
Concurrent Composition program at Oklahoma State University. His research primarily focuses on the
multimodal composition and the rhetoric of video games and college athletics. His scholarship on video games
has appeared in Gamevironments and G/A/M/E: The Italian Journal of Game Studies.
8 | OUR APPROACH AND EDITORIAL TEAM

                                  Dr. Courtney Lund

                                              UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SAN DIEGO

Dr. Courtney Lund O'Neil, Editor of Section IV: "Entering and Participating in a Scholarly
Conversation," is a lecturer in the Analytical Writing Program at the University of California, San Diego.
She served as an Assistant Director for Oklahoma State University's First-Year Composition Program and the
university Writing Center. Her writing has appeared in The New York Times, The Washington Post, The
Guardian, Columbia Journal, The Normal School, and elsewhere. Her academic and research interests include
mindfulness, anti-racist pedagogy, vulnerability in the writing classroom, and writing for social change. She is
currently working on her first book. You can find her on Twitter, @courtneylundo.

                                  Dane Howard

                                              OKLAHOMA STATE UNIVERSITY

Dane Howard, Editor of Section V: "Selected Essays on Writing Processes," is a Graduate Teaching
Assistant at Oklahoma State University, where he has also served Supervisor of the Multimodal Writing Studio.
                                                                                                          OUR APPROACH AND EDITORIAL TEAM | 9

                                  Roseanna Reccia

                                              OKLAHOMA STATE UNIVERSITY

Roseanna is editor in charge of cover design. Her bio will go here.
10 | MEET THE WRITING SPACES TEAM

MEET THE WRITING SPACES TEAM

   Dr. Trace Daniels-Lerberg; Dr. Dana Driscoll; Dr. Mary K. Stewart; and Dr.
   Matthew Vetter

This page is to introduce you to the current Writing Spaces managing editors. For Writing Spaces at Oklahoma
State University, we intentionally only utilized Writing Spaces articles from the first three volumes of the
project. The purpose of this was to make clear that not only are commercial free textbooks entirely possible for
First-Year Composition, they have been for many years now through the Writing Spaces project. The current
team has already released Volume 4, and Volumes 5 and 6 are coming soon. The current editorial team is hard at
work updating the new volumes with even more current work than is featured in this textbook, some of which
you can read about in their Commitment to Anti-Racism Statement. Future editions of this textbook will
feature articles from new volumes of Writing Spaces, and of course instructors are strongly encouraged to get
to know the project and utilize any OER materials for their courses that are appropriate for their classrooms.

   We are Oklahoma State University want to thank all current and former editors and participants in
the Writing Spaces project, not only for their work on those volumes, but also for their help and support with
this project. Go to their websites! Check out their work! Shoot them an email! They are the very best of people.

About the authors

                                  Dr. Trace Daniels-Lerberg

                                              THE UNIVERSITY OF UTAH

Dr. Trace Daniels-Lerberg is an Assistant Professor (lecturer) for the Department of Rhetoric & Writing
Studies at the University of Utah. She earned her PhD in English from the University of Texas--Arlington,
with a with a Women's and Gender Studies graduate certificate. She was the UT--Arlington FYW Assistant
Director and the Writing Center Director, where she collaborated with the VP of Research to develop
                                                                                                               MEET THE WRITING SPACES TEAM | 11

Graduate Student and Faculty Writing Support Programs before joining the U as an Assistant Professor
(lecturer) and the Associate Writing Program Director, where she works undergraduate and graduate students.
Her research and teaching interests include feminist, indigenous, and postman rhetorics, and focusing on
environmental and women writers. Her publications include "Watershed Ethics and Dam Politics: Mapping
Biopolitics, Race and Resistance in Sleep Dealer and Watershed," in Make Waves: Water in Contemporary
Literature and Film U of Nevada P (2019); "To `See with Eyes Unclouded by Hate': Princess Mononoke and
the Quest for Environmental Balance," in Princess Mononoke: Understanding Studio Ghibli's Monster Princess,
Bloomsbury Publishing (2018), and is currently working on an edited collection of short diary fiction. She is
the editor of CCCC's Forum: Issues About Part-Time and Contingent Faculty and is a member of the NCTE
EB.

                                  Dr. Dana Driscoll

                                              INDIANA UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
                                              https://danadriscoll.com/

Dr. Dana Driscoll is a Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania, where she teaches in the
Composition and Applied Linguistics graduate program. While at Purdue, she served as the Purdue OWL's
Coordinator and Technical Coordinator. Her scholarly interests include composition pedagogy, writing
centers, writing transfer and writerly development, research methodologies, writing across the curriculum, and
assessment. Her work has appeared in journals such as Writing Program Administration, Assessing Writing,
Computers and Composition, Composition Forum, Writing Center Journal, and Teaching and Learning
Inquiry. Her co-authored work with Sherry Wynn Perdue won the International Writing Center Association's
2012 Outstanding Article of the Year Award. She has served on the CCCC Executive Board, CCCC Research
Impact Award Committee, and on numerous editorial boards.
12 | MEET THE WRITING SPACES TEAM

                                   Dr. Mary K. Stewart

                                   CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY SAN MARCOS

                                   https://www.mary-k-stewart.com/

Dr. Mary K. Stewart is an Associate Professor and the General Education Writing Coordinator for the
Literature & Writing Studies Department at California State University, San Marcos. She earned her PhD
in Education from University of California-Davis, with a designated emphasis in Writing, Rhetoric, and
Composition Studies. She also holds an MA in Literature and a BA in English. Her qualitative and quantitative
research focuses on collaborative learning, online writing instruction, composition pedagogy, and teaching
with technology. Her work has appeared in journals such as Computers and Composition, Composition Forum,
The Internet and Higher Education, and Journal of Response to Writing. For more information, visit
her website.

                                  Dr. Matthew Vetter

                                              INDIANA UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
                                              https://www.iup.edu/english/faculty/permanent-faculty/vetter-
                                              matthew.html

Dr. Matthew Vetter is an Associate Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania and affiliate
faculty in the Composition and Applied Linguistics PhD Program. A scholar in writing, rhetoric, and digital
humanities, his research explores how technologies shape writing and writing pedagogy. Vetter's work has
appeared in College English, Composition Studies, Composition Forum, Computers and Composition,
Pedagogy, Rhetoric Review, and Studies in Higher Education, among other journals. His co-authored
book, Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality, is available as an open access ebook from Routledge. For
more information on his work, check out Matt's digital portfolio.
                                                                                             OPENOKSTATE STUDENT PRIVACY GUIDELINES | 13

OPENOKSTATE STUDENT PRIVACY
GUIDELINES

OpenOKState and the OSU Libraries Library Teaching and Learning (T&L) Team* strive to enable engaging
learning experiences for students using a variety of digital resources**. When you--the student--use these
resources, you're likely to produce some data, such as data about how you used the resources (e.g., what you
clicked on) or the content you produced while using the resources (e.g., answering a question).

   In line with our values and our beliefs about student data privacy, our T&L team has created and closely
follows a set of guidelines, made up of 5 core principles, for any type of student data we might come in contact
with.

   We aim to be exceedingly transparent with you about your data. On this page, you can learn about our
team's values and beliefs regarding student data privacy as well as explore the 5 core principles of our Student
Data Privacy Guidelines.

   If you have any questions about these guidelines or about your data privacy, please don't hesitate to contact
the Director of Library Teaching and Learning, Holly Reiter, at holly.reiter@okstate.edu.

   *The data and Guidelines referenced on this page are unique to Library Teaching & Learning, and do not
indicate guidelines for the Library or the University as a whole.

   **For our purposes, digital learning objects include interactive tutorials, OStateTV or YouTube videos, the
mobile Library Scavenger Hunt, visits to web pages that host these items, Pressbooks, and graduate student
workshop registration.

Values and Beliefs

Values

Our Library Teaching and Learning team values:

   Prioritizing student needs and welfare
   Restoring and protecting equity and assisting students in doing the same
   Incorporating student voice and experiences and using it to shape our practice
   Providing "digital sanctuaries," or digital environments that prioritize and promote student safety
14 | OPENOKSTATE STUDENT PRIVACY GUIDELINES

Student Data Privacy Beliefs

As a Teaching and Learning team, we have foundational, ethical, scholarship-shaped beliefs about student data
that have shaped our student data practice and guidelines.

   We believe in prioritizing student data privacy to...

   Protect students
   Respect student autonomy
   Return power to students and establish equity
   Protect students' intellectual freedom
   Build trust between students and Library Teaching and Learning
   Enable student data privacy literacy

Core Principles of Student Data Privacy

Responsibility

The Teaching and Learning team believes it's our ethical responsibility to protect your data privacy.
Specifically, we uphold the responsibility to:

   Ensure any collected data is handled carefully, used effectively, and used only for the stated purpose.
   Prevent unauthorized disclosure, use, or collection of your data
   Follow specific steps in data collection, use, storage, and destruction.
   Carry a shared understanding of our role in your data privacy.

Transparency

T&L believes you shouldn't have to wonder what's happening with your data, so we strive to be as open and
transparent with you as possible. For each digital learning object we use, we'll share the following:

   What we are and are not collecting
   Why we're collecting it
   How it's being collected
   How it's being used
   Who has access to the data
                                                                                             OPENOKSTATE STUDENT PRIVACY GUIDELINES | 15

To keep you safe, we strive to store and process all data according to best practices. We'll only collect the
minimum amount of data necessary to achieve our stated objectives.

Privacy and Consent

T&L believes that privacy is your right. We strive to honor your privacy by never releasing any personally
identifiable information unless it is to your instructor of record who is using the digital learning object within
their class.

   Occasionally, we may share aggregates of de-identified or anonymized data internally (e.g., with Library
administrators) or externally (e.g., at Library or industry conferences). We do this to continuously improve
effectiveness, evaluate the effectiveness of our teaching and learning program, or to help evolve and shape the
practices of our profession. Aggregating the data means that the data is in summary form and no individual
student can be identified.

   Finally, we will never sell or otherwise commodify your data, and will always prioritize the use of vendors
and resources that do the same.

Confidentiality and Security

T&L takes great strides to ensure that any and all data we collect is kept confidential and secure.
   We use several vendors to help us create and host digital learning objects and collect analytics. Sometimes,

these vendors have access to your personally identifiable information for operational purposes, so we
intentionally investigate and select vendors that also prioritize confidentiality and security.

Access

Sometimes we do collect and store personally identifiable information so we can do things like retain records
for your instructor of record or keep track of event registrations. In these cases, T&L believes you have the right
to know what that data is, request corrections if you think it's incorrect, and request that it be deleted. Please
note, we'll always make every effort to honor deletion requests, but sometimes we're required to retain records
for various reasons. If that's the case, we'll be open about why we can't delete it now, and if and when it can be
deleted.
16 | OPENOKSTATE STUDENT PRIVACY GUIDELINES

Acknowledgements

Library Teaching and Learning would like to acknowledge several projects that helped inform our Guidelines.
We extend our sincerest gratitude for the effort and dedication that individuals invested in these works.

   The Open University's Student Policies and Regulations: Ethical Use of Student Data for Learning
      Analytics

   The JISC Code of Practice for Learning Analytics
   National Information Standards Organization's (NISO) Consensus Principles on User's Digital Privacy

      in Library, Publisher, and Software-Provider Systems
   Stanford CAROL & Ithaka S+R Project of Responsible Use of Student Data in Higher Education
   UC Berkeley Research, Teaching, and Learning's Learning Data Principles
   University of Hawai`i at Mnoa's Resolution Supporting Learning Data Privacy Principles and Practices

Last updated 8/10/2021 by Kathy Essmiller.
                                                                                       LISTENING TO AND REPRESENTING AN ARGUMENT | 17

PART I

LISTENING TO AND
REPRESENTING AN ARGUMENT

Step 1: Are you listening?
   Truly listening? Even now, as you read these words.
   Are you listening actively, thoughtfully?
   It can be trickier than it seems.
   As Sherlock Holmes once admonished Dr. Watson, "You see, but you do not observe." Explaining the

distinction, Holmes notes that Watson has climbed the staircase of their lodgings at 221B Baker Street
hundreds of times and yet cannot say how many steps it takes to reach the top. Observation, Holmes tells
Watson, goes beyond merely seeing. To observe one must endeavor to take the measure of what has been seen.

   Listening, like observation, requires that we not only hear, but take the measure of what has been heard, or
read.

   In English 1213, the Unit 1 assignment: "Listening to and Representing an Argument" asks
students to critically consume an argument made for a particular audience. In other words, the first essay
asks you to listen.

   More specifically, it asks you to listen to an argument. Then, to demonstrate how well you have taken the
measure of that argument--i.e., how well you have listened--it asks you to accurately, and fairly, explain that
argument to a reader.

   Throughout Writing Spaces at OSU, each section of this text identifies concepts and tools that will help you
successfully complete the major essays in the 1213 assignment sequence. Subsequent assignments ask you to
analyze and evaluate an argument (Unit 2), research a scholarly conversation (Unit 3), and participate
in a scholarly conversation by formulating a unique argument (Unit 4).

   But first comes the listening.

   Step 2: Are you still listening?
   The Unit 1 section of Writing Spaces at OSU is comprised of four short chapters:

   What Is "Academic" Writing? (L. Lennie Irvin)
   So You've Got a Writing Assignment. Now What? (Corrine E. Hinton)
   Looking for Trouble: Finding Your Way into a Writing Assignment (Catherine Savini)
   Why Visit Your Campus Writing Center? (Ben Rafoth)
18 | LISTENING TO AND REPRESENTING AN ARGUMENT

Each of these essays addresses a question or concern that students often encounter with this first assignment.
For many students, the most pressing of these issues can be simply how to begin.

   Student writers often feel some degree of anxiety, dread, or even just nervous energy when introduced to a
new assignment, in large part due misconceptions about what academic writing entails. Likewise, concerns
over page length, due date, and assessment frequently overshadow considerations of genre, topic, and
learning outcomes. Each reading in this section offers guidance on how to negotiate these issues, as well as
how to generate topic ideas, develop an argument, and make good use of the campus writing center.

   But again... first comes the listening.

   Step 3: So, what am I supposed to be listening for exactly?
   As you read through the essays in this section, note how each emphasizes the importance of first
deciphering the assignment. In other words, before committing a single word to the page, your first step
in the writing process should be forming a clear understanding of the type of writing you are being
asked to perform, and the expectations generated by the rhetorical context in which that writing act is
situated. In other words, you need to begin by listening carefully to what the instructions ask you to do--what
specific writing tasks are you required to perform? What learning outcomes is your writing expected to
demonstrate?
   You might think that simply reading over the assignment sheet should be enough to answer these questions.
But deciphering assignments, like listening, can be trickier than it seems.
   Ask any group of college freshmen to identify the purpose of an assignment and many are likely to
answer, "to get an A." Ask them to identify the audience and some will answer, "the instructor." Ask what
qualities a successful essay should demonstrate, and likely responses might include practicing good grammar,
punctuation, organization, style and flow. While these responses may all be true, after a fashion, they also
tend to be equally applicable to just about any piece of writing, and therefore a bit useless at improving your
understanding of the current assignment. See my point? Still listening...?
   One worthwhile approach to improving this understanding, it would seem, might be identifying the specific
writing tasks and expectations that make each assignment unique rather than those things that tend to be
universally applicable. For example, the first major writing assignment in English 1213 specifically asks that you
listen to and represent an argument.
   Perhaps a good place to begin then, might be simply asking yourself "What exactly does that mean--listen
to and represent an argument?" Herein, you might think that simply reading over an argument and then
summarizing what you have read would be enough to perform the above tasks. But learning to listen to an
argument, like learning to listen to music, requires you to do more than merely hear and then repeat back
what you have heard. Rather, the assignment asks that you take the measure of the composition, count its
steps, identify the composition's component parts, and describe for the reader how those parts--purpose,
claims, evidence--work together to comprise the whole.
   This is what it means to listen to and represent an argument.
                                                                                      LISTENING TO AND REPRESENTING AN ARGUMENT | 19

   First, by deciphering the assignment itself.
   Then, by deciphering the argument.
   And lastly, by composing an essay that demonstrates how well you have taken the measure of each. Your
completion of the writing tasks, along with your description of the argument, reflect your understanding
of what you have been asked to do, and your understanding of how to do it.
   Keep in mind, it takes it a bit of time and practice to learn how to do these things.
   For this reason, Unit 1 (and the accompanying readings) are geared toward helping you practice this skill
set. Incidentally, this is a skill set that tends to come in handy. Not just for this course, or for your academic
career, but more broadly as a life skill. Later essays in the 1213 curriculum will ask you to practice and perform
additional writing tasks.
   But first comes the listening. Always the listening.

   Step 4: And now for a word about argument...
   Hopefully the emphasis on argument in in English 1213 has not escaped your attention. When we use
the word argument in this context, like the word critical, it should be read with a neutral connotation.
To present an argument does not mean a heated exchange or verbal disagreement. Instead, it conveys the act
of presenting reasons or evidence as means of supporting a position for the purpose of evaluating that
position's validity.
   Likewise, our use of the word critical does not necessarily mean to criticize or find fault, but simply to
critique--to offer a detailed analysis or interpretation of a text. Think of a film critic, for instance, who
routinely highlights positive as well as negative aspects of a movie.
   Much of the work you do in this course will be predicated on your recognition of argument and critical as
neutral terms. Consider the stage of your writing process when you receive feedback on a draft or your
finished essay. This critique of your writing may be neutral, but in some instances, it can feel very personal.
Keep in mind, learning to listen to critical feedback, truly listen, also requires practice. And patience. Just
like writing.

   Step 5: Thank you for listening.
   Please keep reading. And listening. Always the listening.
20 | LISTENING TO AND REPRESENTING AN ARGUMENT
                                                                                             LENNIE IRVIN'S "WHAT IS ACADEMIC WRITING?" | 21

1.

LENNIE IRVIN'S "WHAT IS ACADEMIC
WRITING?"

   Writing Spaces Volume 1

                                       Read the chapter "What is Academic Writing?"

In this first chapter, Irvin defines academic writing for students new to the genre and identifies some
common misconceptions (like never using the "I" pronoun). The chapter further explores the importance
of understanding the academic writing situation for each assignment, and the literary tasks students are
frequently asked to perform on the college level. Irvin also provides a detailed guide for deciphering the three
major types of assignments (closed, semi-open, open) along with explaining how each carries different
expectations. This reading would be especially useful when introducing each of the major essays, as we can
employ Irvin's methods to decode the assignment's specific writing situation and requisite writing tasks.

                                                         "Analysis works best when you put
                                                            all the cards on the table, so to
                                                            speak. Identify and isolate the

                                                          parts of your analysis, and record
                                                                 important features and

                                                              characteristics of each one."

     MLA Citation Examples

     Works Cited
22 | LENNIE IRVIN'S "WHAT IS ACADEMIC WRITING?"

        Irvin, L. Lennie. "What Is `Academic' Writing?" Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing Volume 1,
        edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemlianksky, Parlor Press, 2010, pp. 3-17.
     In-text citation
     "Analysis works best when you put all the cards on the table, so to speak. Identify and isolate the
     parts of your analysis, and record important features and characteristics of each one" (Irvin 11).

     APA Citation Examples

     References
        Irvin, L. L. (2010). What is `academic' writing? In Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.),
        Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing, vol. 1 (pp. 3-17). New York: Parlor Press.

     In-text citation
     "Analysis works best when you put all the cards on the table, so to speak. Identify and isolate the
     parts of your analysis, and record important features and characteristics of each one" (p. 11).

     Chicago Citation Examples

     Bibliography
        Irvin, Lennie. "What is Academic Writing?." in Writing Spaces: Reading on Writing Volume 1, ed.
        Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (New York: Parlor Press, 2010), 3-17.

     In-text citation
     "Analysis works best when you put all the cards on the table, so to speak. Identify and isolate the
                                                                                      LENNIE IRVIN'S "WHAT IS ACADEMIC WRITING?" | 23

parts of your analysis, and record important features and characteristics of each one" (Irvin, 2010,
11).

About the author

                  Writing Spaces Volume 1

                  PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                  https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-1/
                  https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 1 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Topics in Volume 1 of the series include academic writing, how to interpret writing assignments, motives
for writing, rhetorical analysis, revision, invention, writing centers, argumentation, narrative, reflective writing,
Wikipedia, patchwriting, collaboration, and genres.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
   Publication Information: Lowe, Charles, & Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.). (2010). Writing Spaces: Readings on
Writing, Volume 1. WrtingSpaces.org; Parlor Press; The WAC Clearinghouse. https://wac.colostate.edu/
books/writingspaces/writingspaces1/
   Publication Date: June 14, 2010
24 | CORINNE E. HINTON'S "SO YOU'VE GOT A WRITING ASSIGNMENT: NOW WHAT?"

2.

CORINNE E. HINTON'S "SO YOU'VE GOT A
WRITING ASSIGNMENT: NOW WHAT?"

   Writing Spaces Volume 1

                         Read the chapter "So You've Got a Writing Assignment: Now What?"

The next chapter offers guidelines for interpreting specific assignment sheets. Using a wide range of
assignment sheets from a variety of essay types, Hinton explains how identifying the use of directive verbs can
help students to better understand the assignment's purpose. Hinton also demonstrates how to decipher an
assignment's expectations by creating a table for what you know - what you think you know - and what
you don't know. This reading provides a useful gateway activity prior to distributing the first assignment
sheet, wherein we practice how to read and interpret a variety of assignments.
                       CORINNE E. HINTON'S "SO YOU'VE GOT A WRITING ASSIGNMENT: NOW WHAT?" | 25

MLA Citation Examples          "If you're having trouble
                       understanding your assignment, go

                          to the writing center for help. If
                        you're working on a draft and you

                         want to review it with someone,
                        they can take a look. Your writing

                          center tutor will not write your
                        paper for you, nor will [they] serve
                         as an editor to correct grammar

                           mistakes. When you visit your
                       university's writing center, you'll be
                       able to discuss your project with an

                         experienced tutor who can offer
                        practical advice in a comfortable

                               learning environment."

Works Cited

  Hinton, Corrine E. "So You've Got a Writing Assignment: Now What?." Writing Spaces: Readings
  on Writing Volume 1, edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky, Parlor Press, 2010, pp. 18-33.

In-text citation

"If you're having trouble understanding your assignment, go to the writing center for help. If you're
working on a draft and you want to review it with someone, they can take a look. Your writing
center tutor will not write your paper for you, nor will he serve as an editor to correct grammar
mistakes. When you visit your university's writing center, you'll be able to discuss your project with
an experienced tutor who can offer practical advice in a comfortable learning environment" (31).

References

   Hinton, C. E. (2010). So you've got a writing assignment: Now what?." In Charles Lowe and Pavel
  Zemliansky (Eds.), Writing spaces: Readings on writing, vol. 1 (pp. 18-33). New York: Parlor Press.
26 | CORINNE E. HINTON'S "SO YOU'VE GOT A WRITING ASSIGNMENT: NOW WHAT?"

     In-text citation
     "If you're having trouble understanding your assignment, go to the writing center for help. If you're
     working on a draft and you want to review it with someone, they can take a look. Your writing
     center tutor will not write your paper for you, nor will he serve as an editor to correct grammar
     mistakes. When you visit your university's writing center, you'll be able to discuss your project with
     an experienced tutor who can offer practical advice in a comfortable learning environment" (p. 31).

     Chicago Citation Examples

     Bibliography
        Hinton, Corrine E. "So You've Got a Writing Assignment: Now What?" in Writing Spaces: Reading
        on Writing Volume 1, ed. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (New York: Parlor Press, 2010),
        18-33.

     In-text citation
     "If you're having trouble understanding your assignment, go to the writing center for help. If you're
     working on a draft and you want to review it with someone, they can take a look. Your writing
     center tutor will not write your paper for you, nor will he serve as an editor to correct grammar
     mistakes. When you visit your university's writing center, you'll be able to discuss your project with
     an experienced tutor who can offer practical advice in a comfortable learning environment"
     (225-226).
                  CORINNE E. HINTON'S "SO YOU'VE GOT A WRITING ASSIGNMENT: NOW WHAT?" | 27

About the author

                  Writing Spaces Volume 1

                  PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                  https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-1/
                  https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 1 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Topics in Volume 1 of the series include academic writing, how to interpret writing assignments, motives
for writing, rhetorical analysis, revision, invention, writing centers, argumentation, narrative, reflective writing,
Wikipedia, patchwriting, collaboration, and genres.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
   Publication Information: Lowe, Charles, & Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.). (2010). Writing Spaces: Readings on
Writing, Volume 1. WrtingSpaces.org; Parlor Press; The WAC Clearinghouse. https://wac.colostate.edu/
books/writingspaces/writingspaces1/
   Publication Date: June 14, 2010
28 | CATHERINE SAVINI'S "LOOKING FOR TROUBLE: FINDING YOUR WAY INTO A WRITING ASSIGNMENT"

3.

CATHERINE SAVINI'S "LOOKING FOR
TROUBLE: FINDING YOUR WAY INTO A
WRITING ASSIGNMENT"

   Writing Spaces Volume 2

              Read the chapter "Looking for Trouble: Finding Your Way In to a Writing Assignment"

In this chapter, Savini examines how identifying a useful problem can be used to develop a strong
argumentative thesis. The chapter outlines a process whereby students locate a unique problem that they
find especially meaningful, then articulate the details of that problem, pose fruitful questions related to the
problem, and identify the stakes of the problem. Savini analyzes this process at work by examining an essay by
critic bell hooks wherein a specific problem is used as the genesis for an argumentative essay. This chapter is
especially helpful for learning how to generate research topics and formulate original arguments.
CATHERINE SAVINI'S "LOOKING FOR TROUBLE: FINDING YOUR WAY INTO A WRITING ASSIGNMENT" | 29

MLA Citation Examples          "Though it may seem
                       counterintuitive at the outset, one
                       way to diminish the considerable

                        difficulty of getting started on a
                          new assignment is to look for

                       something that troubles you, seek
                         out difficulty, find problems. All
                          academic disciplines seek to

                       impart in their students the ability
                             to identify, mull over, and

                          sometimes solve challenging
                         problems. Not surprisingly, the
                          benefits of a willingness and
                        mental acuity to greet complex
                       problems extend well beyond the

                                      classroom."

Works Cited

  Savini, Catherine. "Looking for Trouble: Finding Your Way Into a Writing Assignment." Writing
  Spaces: Readings on Writing Volume 2, edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky, 2011, pp.
   52-70.

In-text citation

"Though it may seem counterintuitive at the outset, one way to diminish the considerable difficulty
of getting started on a new assignment is to look for something that troubles you, seek out
difficulty, find problems. All academic disciplines seek to impart in their students the ability to
identify, mull over, and sometimes solve challenging problems. Not surprisingly, the benefits of a
willingness and mental acuity to greet complex problems extend well beyond the classroom."
(52-53).

References
30 | CATHERINE SAVINI'S "LOOKING FOR TROUBLE: FINDING YOUR WAY INTO A WRITING ASSIGNMENT"

        Savini, C. (2011). Looking for trouble: Finding your way into a writing assignment. In Charles Lowe
        and Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.), Writing spaces: readings on writing, vol. 2 (pp. 52-70). New York:
        Parlor Press.
     In-text citation
     "Though it may seem counterintuitive at the outset, one way to diminish the considerable difficulty
     of getting started on a new assignment is to look for something that troubles you, seek out
     difficulty, find problems. All academic disciplines seek to impart in their students the ability to
     identify, mull over, and sometimes solve challenging problems. Not surprisingly, the benefits of a
     willingness and mental acuity to greet complex problems extend well beyond the classroom."
     (Savini, 2011, p. 52-53).

     Chicago Citation Examples

     Bibliography
        Savini, Catherine. "Looking for Trouble: Finding Your Way Into a Writing Assignment," in Writing
        Spaces: Reading on Writing Volume 2, ed. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemlianksy (New York: Parlor
        Press, 2011), 52-70

     In-text citation
     "Though it may seem counterintuitive at the outset, one way to diminish the considerable difficulty
     of getting started on a new assignment is to look for something that troubles you, seek out
     difficulty, find problems. All academic disciplines seek to impart in their students the ability to
     identify, mull over, and sometimes solve challenging problems. Not surprisingly, the benefits of a
     willingness and mental acuity to greet complex problems extend well beyond the classroom."
     (Savini, 2011, 52-53).
                   CATHERINE SAVINI'S "LOOKING FOR TROUBLE: FINDING YOUR WAY INTO A WRITING ASSIGNMENT" | 31

About the author

                                  Volume 2 Writing Spaces

                                              PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                                              https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-2/
                                              https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 2 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Volume 2 continues the tradition of the previous volume with topics, such as the rhetorical situation,
collaboration, documentation styles, weblogs, invention, writing assignment interpretation, reading critically,
information literacy, ethnography, interviewing, argument, document design, and source integration.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
32 | BEN RAFOTH'S "WHY VISIT YOUR CAMPUS WRITING CENTER?"

4.

BEN RAFOTH'S "WHY VISIT YOUR CAMPUS
WRITING CENTER?"

   Writing Spaces Volume 1

Read the chapter "Why Visit Your Campus Writing Center?"

This final chapter provides a series of reflections from writing center tutors describing how students benefit
from their writing center consultations. Rafoth describes how students use the process of verbalizing their
thoughts to a tutor as a means for clarifying their understanding of the assignment. The section also cites
extensive research indicating how writing center visits help students to overcome their fear of sharing writing,
and to improve their sense of audience. Most importantly, this chapter offers clear expectations for what a visit
to the campus writing center entails, emphasizing its potential to be conversational and generative.

MLA Citation Examples   "Tutors seem to understand that
                         writing a good paper is a team

                             effort. The part that tutors
                         contribute as readers is crucial
                       because they draw writers outside
                       of themselves to see the paper as
                       others are likely to see it. This is a
                       hard thing to do on one's own. We
                       tend to step in and out of our own
                       thoughts. But a tutor stands apart,
                        reading the draft with fresh eyes
                        and pointing out gaps the writer
                          needs to fill so that ideas flow

                                       smoothly."
                                                                BEN RAFOTH'S "WHY VISIT YOUR CAMPUS WRITING CENTER?" | 33

Works Cited
  Rafoth, Ben. "Why Visit Your Campus Writing Center." Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing
  Volume 1, edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky, 2010, pp. 146-153.

In-text citation
"Tutors seem to understand that writing a good paper is a team effort. The part that tutors
contribute as readers is crucial because they draw writers outside of themselves to see the paper as
others are likely to see it. This is a hard thing to do on one's own. We tend to steep in our own
thoughts. But a tutor stands apart, reading the draft with fresh eyes and pointing out the gaps the
writer needs to fill so that ideas flow smoothly" (153).

References
   Rafoth, B. (2010). Why visit your campus writing center? In Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky
  (Eds.), Writing spaces: readings on writing, vol. 1 (pp. 146-153). New York: Parlor Press.

In-text citation
"Tutors seem to understand that writing a good paper is a team effort. The part that tutors
contribute as readers is crucial because they draw writers outside of themselves to see the paper as
others are likely to see it. This is a hard thing to do on one's own. We tend to steep in our own
thoughts. But a tutor stands apart, reading the draft with fresh eyes and pointing out the gaps the
writer needs to fill so that ideas flow smoothly" (Rafoth, 2010, p. 153).

Chicago Citation Examples

Bibliography
  Rafoth, Ben. "Why Visit Your Campus Writing Center?" in Writing Spaces: Reading on Writing
  Volume 1, ed. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemlianksy (New York: Parlor Press, 2011), 146-153.
34 | BEN RAFOTH'S "WHY VISIT YOUR CAMPUS WRITING CENTER?"

     In-text citation
     "Tutors seem to understand that writing a good paper is a team effort. The part that tutors
     contribute as readers is crucial because they draw writers outside of themselves to see the paper as
     others are likely to see it. This is a hard thing to do on one's own. We tend to steep in our own
     thoughts. But a tutor stands apart, reading the draft with fresh eyes and pointing out the gaps the
     writer needs to fill so that ideas flow smoothly" (Rafoth, 2010, 153).

About the author

                  Writing Spaces Volume 1

                  PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                  https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-1/
                  https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 1 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Topics in Volume 1 of the series include academic writing, how to interpret writing assignments, motives
for writing, rhetorical analysis, revision, invention, writing centers, argumentation, narrative, reflective writing,
Wikipedia, patchwriting, collaboration, and genres.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
   Publication Information: Lowe, Charles, & Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.). (2010). Writing Spaces: Readings on
Writing, Volume 1. WrtingSpaces.org; Parlor Press; The WAC Clearinghouse. https://wac.colostate.edu/
books/writingspaces/writingspaces1/
   Publication Date: June 14, 2010
                                                                                              ANALYZING AND EVALUATING AN ARGUMENT | 35

PART II

ANALYZING AND EVALUATING AN
ARGUMENT

The Real-World Necessity of Analysis and Evaluation
   Anyone who has been exposed to the field of writing has heard the words "analyze" and "evaluate" at some

point. For anyone working in academia, these words function as a subtle but prominent mantra that shadows
the subconscious every time they read or write, forcing them to dig below, behind, and in-between the words
on the page to uncover some intended meaning or purpose.

   However, with the rise in technological advancements and uses, everyone can encounter the potential to
analyze and evaluate content every time they pick up their phone, turn on the TV, or log on to their computer.
From social media feeds to ads you can't skip on YouTube or Hulu, anyone could potentially be bombarded
with countless modes of information. And it is this information that many people, especially the young, use to
help them navigate through society.

   From the interactions we have, to the clothes we wear, to the food we eat, we are constantly and
unconsciously determining not only where we fit in but where we should fit in and where we want to fit
in. In other to do that, you have to be able to judge the merit and validity of whatever is presented to you,
whether it's breaking news, a new political debate, or a new acne cream. As educators, it should be our goal
and responsibility to help students understand that analysis and evaluation are normal skills that are not only
obtainable but essential to their growth as adults and consumers. And that is where this section comes in.

   While created by different authors, each piece functions like a spot on a map directing students through the
process of truly understanding not just how to analyze and evaluate information but helping them grasp the
necessity and the impact this knowledge has on their lives and their writing. In other words, the articles can
be put in a type of order, one either building off the other or adding a new layer to knowledge already learned.
While these articles can be placed in any order based on literary interpretation, the most logical order I have
found is Jones, Cohn, Carroll, Davis, and FitzGerald.

   "Finding Good Arguments or Why Bother with Logic" by Rebecca Jones comes first because it provides
the students with the sledgehammer needed to break away some of the old and outdated interpretations
associated with argument. Composition is not supposed to be a bloody battlefield where writers leave their
words scattered on the page like dismembers limp. But rather an intelligent debate. Jones helps readers see
that a well-constructed argument is not intended to be "right," but understood. An argument is meant to be
strong and durable but also malleable, seen and acknowledged by many but the skeptical eye can find the cracks
and holes that can be used to denounce the claims found. Denounce not destroy for, if explained correctly,
every idea will have an audience. This understanding will help students build their confidence because they will
36 | ANALYZING AND EVALUATING AN ARGUMENT

realize that they don't have to be right, just understood, emphasizing that the foundations arguments build are
not intended to support everyone, just the ones they convince to stand on them.

   Once the old ideas about argument are removed, student are ready for Jenae Cohn's "Understanding
Visual Rhetoric." This article helps with rebuilding the idea of rhetoric through simple yet relevant and
understandable concepts. Looking at the basic design elements such as lines, color, shape, size, space, value
("the lightness or darkness of a particular element"), and texture, students can start to process how argument
is formed through the visual. Since, in many ways, we live in a visual society, these ideas will be easier to grasp
due to the constant exposure. Since the old beliefs about argument have been chiseled away, student can begin
to process not why the information is "right" but why the information is working, which is one of the primary
goals of any argument and ultimately one of the goals that instructors hope student strive for in their own
work.

   Now that students are moving into interpreting an arguments functionality, they can move on to Laura
Bolin Carroll "Backpacks or Briefcases: Steps toward Rhetorical Analysis." Carroll reinforces Jones by
reminding the reader that arguments are not built based on right or wrong but intend and purpose.
Furthermore, this piece, like Cohn, focuses on breaking down the elements used to determine what the author
wants to get across to the audience. However, Carroll adds on to Jones's and Cohn's pieces by providing the
different ways to determine and identify the elements being used, as well as how to evaluate those different
components to determine the argument's merit and validity. Basically, Carroll explains that even though a piece
isn't intended to be right or wrong, it should be logical, organized, and properly supported. This piece teaches
students to look for the strengths and weaknesses in others so they can learn from them, thus further building
on that understanding that it's not about right or wrong, but support.

   Upon first read, Kerry Davis's piece "Navigating Genres" sounds similar to the first three articles. This
author also suggests that students must learn from others before they can truly understand what to do. So, like
Jones, Cohn, and Carroll, the article suggests breaking down the works of others to determine how the piece
is structure so you can better understand how the author formed their ideas and thoughts. The contribution
this author makes is explaining the significance of learning the genre one is writing in. This piece is a necessary
steppingstone for students as they begin the drafting process. Genres are ready-made frameworks to help guide
students in the right direction when constructing their own pieces, working as a way for students to double
check they are conveying the intended purpose associated with the genre they are working within. While it is
often said there are no hard rules to writing, for students, it's always beneficial to know that there are guidelines
they can follow until they are more comfortable with breaking the mold.

   Davis's article also works as a transition, moving away from how others have done things to how the student
will do them. Once this transition is made, FitzGerald's piece takes them to the next step by getting them to
think about ways of making the work truly their own. "Writing with Force and Flair" is also a good shift from
"Navigating Genres" because, as Davis's piece goes well with the first draft, FitzGerald's piece goes well with
the revision process. First the students have to figure out what to say and how to say it. It is here where students
mimic (sometimes plagiarize) the work of others to ensure they are getting their point across and achieving the
                                                                                              ANALYZING AND EVALUATING AN ARGUMENT | 37

intended purpose. Now as any writer knows, whether they like it or not, the first draft should never be the final
draft. Even though FitzGerald focuses on the incorporation of figurative language, the understanding is still
that the goal is to make the writing better and more of the student's thoughts and interpretations. In order for
students to determine what types of figurative language to incorporate, they have to stop and process what they
know and understand about their work. This processing will make the writing better, stronger, and infused
with their person voice.

   In the end, every piece in this section helps lead students to a better grasp of what it means to analyze and
evaluate the work of others as well as their own work. They are also provided with a real world rational for
why performing these skills are important and crucial as each author uses known or practical examples from
information found in the public. These inclusions help student see that they are expected to piece a part and
put together the world around them all the time.

   As educators, analysis and evaluation should not just be a box checked off on an instructional map. These
concepts should be taught to give students the tools necessary to think for themselves and navigate this world,
hopefully understanding that they don't have to agree with others and others don't have to agree with them.
It's not even about acceptance. It's about understanding that difference has always existed, will always exist,
and should always exist. And that really is okay. Arguments are not intended to tear anyone down and destroy
individuality. Arguments are an opportunity for different people to have their different and unique voice
heard. Student just need to learn to process the information they encounter in a logical and intelligent way so
that they are not looking for what's "right," but for what makes sense to them.
38 | ANALYZING AND EVALUATING AN ARGUMENT
                       LAURA BOLIN CARROLL'S BACKPACKS OR BRIEFCASES: STEPS TOWARD RHETORICAL ANALYSIS | 39

5.

LAURA BOLIN CARROLL'S BACKPACKS OR
BRIEFCASES: STEPS TOWARD RHETORICAL
ANALYSIS

   Writing Spaces Volume 1

Read the chapter "Backpacks or Briefcases: Steps Toward Rhetorical Analysis"

The article provides a definition of rhetorical analysis and a rational for its necessity, tying the concept to real
world experiences such as personal interactions and media exposure. The author focuses heavily on media
content, explaining that rhetorical analysis is needed to prevent individuals from becoming blind followers of
someone else's logic and interpretations. Instructors can use the real-world examples and discussion questions
included to help guide students to a better understanding of rhetorical analysis and its use in everyday life.
Students are taught that, while they may not know the term, they perform or are expected to perform such
analysis in their everyday lives. This realization will help build students' confidence and make the concept easier
to grasp and eventually perform in a more academic setting.

                       "Because media rhetoric surrounds
                         us, it is important to understand
                       how rhetoric works. If we refuse to

                       stop and think about how and why
                         it persuades us, we can become
                       mindless consumers who buy into
                        arguments about what makes us
                        value ourselves and what makes
                                        us happy."

MLA Citation Examples
40 | LAURA BOLIN CARROLL'S BACKPACKS OR BRIEFCASES: STEPS TOWARD RHETORICAL ANALYSIS

     Works Cited
        Carroll, Laura Bolin. "Backpacks or Briefcases: Steps Toward Rhetorical Analysis." Writing Spaces:
        Readings on Writing Volume 1, edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemlianksky, Parlor Press, 2010,
        pp. 45-58.

     In-text citation
     "Because media rhetoric surrounds us, it is important to understand how rhetoric works. If we
     refuse to stop and think about how and why it persuades us, we can become mindless consumers
     who buy into arguments about what makes us value ourselves and what makes us happy " (47).

     APA Citation Examples

     References
        Carroll, L.B. (2010). Backpacks or briefcases: Steps toward rhetorical analysis. In Charles Lowe and
        Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.), Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing, vol. 1 (pp. 45-58). New York: Parlor
        Press.

     In-text citation
     "Because media rhetoric surrounds us, it is important to understand how rhetoric works. If we
     refuse to stop and think about how and why it persuades us, we can become mindless consumers
     who buy into arguments about what makes us value ourselves and what makes us happy " (p. 47).

     Chicago Citation Examples

     Bibliography
                 LAURA BOLIN CARROLL'S BACKPACKS OR BRIEFCASES: STEPS TOWARD RHETORICAL ANALYSIS | 41

  Carroll, Laura Bolin. "Backpacks or Briefcases: Steps Toward Rhetorical Analysis," in Writing
  Spaces: Reading on Writing Volume 1, ed. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (New York: Parlor
   Press, 2010), 45-58
In-text citation
"Because media rhetoric surrounds us, it is important to understand how rhetoric works. If we
refuse to stop and think about how and why it persuades us, we can become mindless consumers
who buy into arguments about what makes us value ourselves and what makes us happy " (Carroll,
2010, 47).

About the author

                  Writing Spaces Volume 1

                  PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                  https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-1/
                  https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 1 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Topics in Volume 1 of the series include academic writing, how to interpret writing assignments, motives
for writing, rhetorical analysis, revision, invention, writing centers, argumentation, narrative, reflective writing,
Wikipedia, patchwriting, collaboration, and genres.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
   Publication Information: Lowe, Charles, & Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.). (2010). Writing Spaces: Readings on
42 | LAURA BOLIN CARROLL'S BACKPACKS OR BRIEFCASES: STEPS TOWARD RHETORICAL ANALYSIS

Writing, Volume 1. WrtingSpaces.org; Parlor Press; The WAC Clearinghouse. https://wac.colostate.edu/
books/writingspaces/writingspaces1/

   Publication Date: June 14, 2010
                                                                                     JENAE COHN'S UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC | 43

6.

JENAE COHN'S UNDERSTANDING VISUAL
RHETORIC

   Writing Spaces Volume 3

                       Read the chapter "Understanding Visual Rhetoric"

The article explains how visual rhetoric is used by writers to help audiences obtain a better grasp of the
intentions and purposes found within them. The author introduces real-world examples such as food images
and menus to outline the unconscious, yet effective way visual rhetoric impacts individuals through
components such as lines, colors, shapes, sizes, spacing, values ("the lightness or darkness of a particular
element"), and textures. Instructors can use the discussion questions and suggestions provided by the author
to create an introduction to rhetoric in general. This will be beneficial for instructors who teach more complex
visual forms, such as music videos, professional advertisements, and recorded speeches. Students will benefit
from a simplified explanation that can translate into more academically appropriate content as it relates to both
the visual and written form.

                             "A picture is often worth a
                       thousand words because it implies

                         so much and can give us a lot of
                         information quickly. Seeing may
                       not always be believing, but visual
                        rhetoric can be a pretty powerful
                       way to help people understand an
                       idea differently than they may have

                                       otherwise. "

MLA Citation Examples
44 | JENAE COHN'S UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC

     Works Cited
        Cohn, Jenae. "Understanding Visual Rhetoric." Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing Volume 3,
        edited by Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew Vetter, Parlor Press, 2020, pp. 45-58.

     In-text citation
     "A picture is often worth a thousand words because it implies so much and can give us a lot of
     information quickly. Seeing may not always be believing, but visual rhetoric can be a pretty
     powerful way to help people understand an idea differently than they may have otherwise" (35).

     APA Citation Examples

     References
        Cohn, J. (2020). Understanding visual rhetoric. In Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew
        Vetter (Eds.), Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing, vol. 3 (pp. 18-39). New York: Parlor Press.

     In-text citation
     "A picture is often worth a thousand words because it implies so much and can give us a lot of
     information quickly. Seeing may not always be believing, but visual rhetoric can be a pretty
     powerful way to help people understand an idea differently than they may have otherwise " (p. 35).

     Chicago Citation Examples

     Bibliography
        Cohn, Jenae. "Understanding Visual Rhetoric," in Writing Spaces: Reading on Writing Volume 3,
        ed. Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew Vetter, (New York: Parlor Press, 2020), 18-39.
                                                                               JENAE COHN'S UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC | 45

In-text citation
"A picture is often worth a thousand words because it implies so much and can give us a lot of
information quickly. Seeing may not always be believing, but visual rhetoric can be a pretty
powerful way to help people understand an idea differently than they may have otherwise "
(Carroll, 2010, 47).

About the author

                  Writing Spaces Volume 3

                  PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                  https://writingspaces.org/
                  https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2020, the third issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew
Vetter. In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 3 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as
well as Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Volume 3 continues the tradition of previous volumes with topics such as voice and style in writing,
rhetorical appeals, discourse communities, multimodal composing, visual rhetoric, credibility, exigency,
working with personal experience in academic writing, globalized writing and rhetoric, constructing scholarly
ethos, imitation and style, and rhetorical punctuation.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Dana Driscoll is Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania, where she teaches in the
Composition and Applied Linguistics graduate program and directs the Jones White Writing Center. Her
scholarly interests include composition pedagogy, writing centers, writing transfer and writerly development,
research methodologies, writing across the curriculum, and assessment.
   Mary Stewart is Assistant Professor and the Assessment Coordinator for the English Department at Indiana
University of Pennsylvania. Her research, which is primarily qualitative, focuses on collaborative and
46 | JENAE COHN'S UNDERSTANDING VISUAL RHETORIC

interactive learning, blended and online writing instruction, composition pedagogy, and teaching with
technology.

   Matthew Vetter is Assistant Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania and affiliate faculty
in the Composition and Applied Linguistics Doctoral Program. A scholar in writing, rhetoric, and digital
humanities, his research explores how technologies shape writing and writing pedagogy.
                                                                                                             KERRY DIRK'S NAVIGATING GENRES | 47

7.

KERRY DIRK'S NAVIGATING GENRES

   Writing Spaces Volume 1

                       Read the chapter "Navigating Genres"

The article explains the importance of knowing the genre one is writing in. This knowledge helps students
better structure their writing because knowing the genre means understanding the intended context and
purpose their piece is supposed to convey. The article plays on this idea of not needing to "re-invent the wheel,"
using the already existing examples as guides and tools to learn from. While the students are still imputing
original ideas and concepts into their work, they are structuring that information into a well-established and
understood form. Instructors can use this article and the discussion questions to help students understand
the necessity for learning and writing within the genre that instructors introduce to them in class. Students
are given an easy-to-follow explanation for why they should understand the genres they are asked to write in,
hopefully coaxing them into seeking out examples of assigned genre, so they can start learning effective and
college-appropriate techniques to implement into their own writing.

                       "Knowing what a genre is used for
                          can help people to accomplish

                       goals, whether that goal be getting
                         a job by knowing how to write a

                       stellar resume, winning a person's
                         heart by writing a romantic love
                         letter, or getting into college by

                           writing an effective personal
                                       statement."

MLA Citation Examples
48 | KERRY DIRK'S NAVIGATING GENRES

     Works Cited
        Dirk, Kerry. "Navigating Genres." Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing Volume 1, edited by
        Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemlianksky, Parlor Press, 2010, pp. 249-262.

     In-text citation
     "Knowing what a genre is used for can help people to accomplish goals, whether that goal be
     getting a job by knowing how to write a stellar resume, winning a person's heart by writing a
     romantic love letter, or getting into college by writing an effective personal statement " (253).

     APA Citation Examples

     References
        Dirk, K. (2010). Backpacks or briefcases: Steps toward rhetorical analysis. In Charles Lowe and
        Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.), Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing, vol. 1 (pp. 249-262). New York:
        Parlor Press.

     In-text citation
     "Knowing what a genre is used for can help people to accomplish goals, whether that goal be
     getting a job by knowing how to write a stellar resume, winning a person's heart by writing a
     romantic love letter, or getting into college by writing an effective personal statement " (p. 253).

     Chicago Citation Examples

     Bibliography
                                                                                                       KERRY DIRK'S NAVIGATING GENRES | 49

  Dirk, Kerry. "Navigating Genres," in Writing Spaces: Reading on Writing Volume 1, ed. Charles
   Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (New York: Parlor Press, 2010), 249.262.
In-text citation
"Knowing what a genre is used for can help people to accomplish goals, whether that goal be
getting a job by knowing how to write a stellar resume, winning a person's heart by writing a
romantic love letter, or getting into college by writing an effective personal statement" (Dirk, 2010,
47).

About the author

                  Writing Spaces Volume 1

                  PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                  https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-1/
                  https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 1 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Topics in Volume 1 of the series include academic writing, how to interpret writing assignments, motives
for writing, rhetorical analysis, revision, invention, writing centers, argumentation, narrative, reflective writing,
Wikipedia, patchwriting, collaboration, and genres.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
   Publication Information: Lowe, Charles, & Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.). (2010). Writing Spaces: Readings on
Writing, Volume 1. WrtingSpaces.org; Parlor Press; The WAC Clearinghouse. https://wac.colostate.edu/
books/writingspaces/writingspaces1/
50 | KERRY DIRK'S NAVIGATING GENRES

   Publication Date: June 14, 2010
                                                                          WILLIAM T. FITZGERALD'S WRITING WITH FORCE AND FLAIR | 51

8.

WILLIAM T. FITZGERALD'S WRITING WITH
FORCE AND FLAIR

   Writing Spaces Volume 3

                                      Read the chapter "Writing With Force and Flair"

The article explains how figurative language is necessary to create quality writing in academia, suggesting that
a writer who can effectively incorporate such ideas demonstrates their expertise, much like a painter or chef.
It provides definitions and examples of rhetorical figures such as expression and patterns, using historical
writings to demonstrate their effectiveness. Instructors can use the article, the discussion questions, and the
activities provided by the author to help students understand that there is no set definition for academic
writing. The author offers suggestions for ways students can generate this kind of writing, using techniques
such as Fieldwork, Analysis, Imitation, and Copia (Plenty). The information indirectly introduces students
to this idea of voice and that their work, while still must convey a purpose, should be written in a way that
demonstrates their own unique writing style and ability.
52 | WILLIAM T. FITZGERALD'S WRITING WITH FORCE AND FLAIR

MLA Citation Examples  "If we are not careful, writing with
                         force and flair comes across as
                        mere show-in the useful figure of

                       cliche, all hat and no cattle. Or as
                          any cook can tell you, a little
                           nutmeg goes a long way. To
                          extend this culinary analogy,

                       rhetorical figures may be likened
                         to a spice rack, without which
                         writing cannot be anything but

                       bland. What is needed is the right
                       combination of spices as a matter

                           of both taste and tradition."

Works Cited

  Fitzgerald, William T. "Writing With Force and Flair." Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing
  Volume 3, edited by Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew Vetter, Parlor Press, 2020, pp.
   52-64.

In-text citation

"If we are not careful, writing with force and flare comes across as mere show--in the useful figure
of clich, all hat and no cattle. Or as any cook can tell you, a little nutmeg goes a long way. To
extend this culinary analogy, rhetorical figures may be likened to a spice rack, without which
writing cannot be anything but bland. What is needed is the right combination of spices as a
matter of both taste and tradition" (57).

APA Citation Examples
                                                                   WILLIAM T. FITZGERALD'S WRITING WITH FORCE AND FLAIR | 53

References
   Fitzgerald, W.T. (2020). Writing with force and flair. In Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew
  Vetter (Eds.), Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing, vol. 3 (pp. 52-64). New York: Parlor Press.

In-text citation
"If we are not careful, writing with force and flare comes across as mere show--in the useful figure
of clich, all hat and no cattle. Or as any cook can tell you, a little nutmeg goes a long way. To
extend this culinary analogy, rhetorical figures may be likened to a spice rack, without which
writing cannot be anything but bland. What is needed is the right combination of spices as a
matter of both taste and tradition" (p. 57).

Chicago Citation Examples

Bibliography
  Fitzgerald, William T. "Writing With Force and Flair," in Writing Spaces: Reading on Writing
  Volume 3, ed. Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew Vetter, (New York: Parlor Press, 2020),
   52-64.

In-text citation
"If we are not careful, writing with force and flare comes across as mere show--in the useful figure
of clich, all hat and no cattle. Or as any cook can tell you, a little nutmeg goes a long way. To
extend this culinary analogy, rhetorical figures may be likened to a spice rack, without which
writing cannot be anything but bland. What is needed is the right combination of spices as a
matter of both taste and tradition" (Fitzgerald, 2020, 57).
54 | WILLIAM T. FITZGERALD'S WRITING WITH FORCE AND FLAIR

About the author

                                  Writing Spaces Volume 3

                                              PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                                              https://writingspaces.org/
                                              https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2020, the third issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew
Vetter. In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 3 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as
well as Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Volume 3 continues the tradition of previous volumes with topics such as voice and style in writing,
rhetorical appeals, discourse communities, multimodal composing, visual rhetoric, credibility, exigency,
working with personal experience in academic writing, globalized writing and rhetoric, constructing scholarly
ethos, imitation and style, and rhetorical punctuation.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Dana Driscoll is Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania, where she teaches in the
Composition and Applied Linguistics graduate program and directs the Jones White Writing Center. Her
scholarly interests include composition pedagogy, writing centers, writing transfer and writerly development,
research methodologies, writing across the curriculum, and assessment.
   Mary Stewart is Assistant Professor and the Assessment Coordinator for the English Department at Indiana
University of Pennsylvania. Her research, which is primarily qualitative, focuses on collaborative and
interactive learning, blended and online writing instruction, composition pedagogy, and teaching with
technology.
   Matthew Vetter is Assistant Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania and affiliate faculty
in the Composition and Applied Linguistics Doctoral Program. A scholar in writing, rhetoric, and digital
humanities, his research explores how technologies shape writing and writing pedagogy.
                                        REBECCA JONES'S FINDING THE GOOD ARGUMENT OR WHY BOTHER WITH LOGIC? | 55

9.

REBECCA JONES'S FINDING THE GOOD
ARGUMENT OR WHY BOTHER WITH
LOGIC?

   Writing Spaces Volume 1

                    Read the chapter "Finding the Good Argument OR Why Bother With Logic?"

The article explains the negative connotations associated with written arguments and how those connotations
have impacted the concept's interpretation. Essentially, the article explains how argument has been compared
to the Western connation of war and the belief that there is a "right" side and "wrong" side, a "good" side
and a "bad" side. The article explains the unrealistic nature of this interpretation, asserting that arguments
are intended to be logical explanations supported by facts and reasoning that are intended to be understood,
not absolute. Instructors can use the different ways for breakdown and understanding an argument's structure
that are included in the article to help students properly analyze and evaluate arguments for their strength
and validity. Students will understand that an argument is not based on right or wrong, but logic, reason, and
support. This will help them judge an argument based on its components, not on their feelings and personal
beliefs. In turn, they will learn how to better structure their own arguments, relying on evidence, explanation,
and logic to convey their beliefs and assumptions.
56 | REBECCA JONES'S FINDING THE GOOD ARGUMENT OR WHY BOTHER WITH LOGIC?

                             "Rather than an either/or
                        proposition, argument is multiple
                       and complex. An argument can be
                       logical, rational, emotional, fruitful,

                          useful, or even enjoyable. As a
                            matter of fact, the idea that
                            argument is necessary *and

                       therefore not always about war or
                             even about winning) is an

                        important notion in a culture that
                          values democracy and equity."

MLA Citation Examples

Works Cited

  Jones, Rebecca. "Finding the Good Argument OR Why Bother With Logic?." Writing Spaces:
  Readings on Writing Volume 1, edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemlianksky, Parlor Press, 2010,
   pp. 156-179.

In-text citation

"Rather than an either/or proposition, argument is multiple and complex. An argument can be
logical, rational, emotional, fruitful, useful, and even enjoyable. As a matter of fact, the idea that
argument is necessary (and therefore not always about war or even about winning is an important
notion in a culturenthat values democracy and equity" (160).

APA Citation Examples

References
   Jones, R. (2010). Finding the good argument or why bother with logic? In Charles Lowe and Pavel
                                  REBECCA JONES'S FINDING THE GOOD ARGUMENT OR WHY BOTHER WITH LOGIC? | 57

  Zemliansky (Eds.), Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing, vol. 1 (pp. 156-179). New York: Parlor
   Press.
In-text citation
"Rather than an either/or proposition, argument is multiple and complex. An argument can be
logical, rational, emotional, fruitful, useful, and even enjoyable. As a matter of fact, the idea that
argument is necessary (and therefore not always about war or even about winning is an important
notion in a culturenthat values democracy and equity" (p. 160).

Chicago Citation Examples

Bibliography
  Jones, Rebecca. "Finding the Good Argument OR Why Bother With Logic?" in Writing Spaces:
  Reading on Writing Volume 1, ed. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (New York: Parlor Press,
   2010), 156-179.

In-text citation
"Rather than an either/or proposition, argument is multiple and complex. An argument can be
logical, rational, emotional, fruitful, useful, and even enjoyable. As a matter of fact, the idea that
argument is necessary (and therefore not always about war or even about winning is an important
notion in a culturenthat values democracy and equity" (Jones, 2010, 160).
58 | REBECCA JONES'S FINDING THE GOOD ARGUMENT OR WHY BOTHER WITH LOGIC?

About the author

                                  Writing Spaces Volume 1

                                              PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                                              https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-1/
                                              https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 1 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Topics in Volume 1 of the series include academic writing, how to interpret writing assignments, motives
for writing, rhetorical analysis, revision, invention, writing centers, argumentation, narrative, reflective writing,
Wikipedia, patchwriting, collaboration, and genres.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
   Publication Information: Lowe, Charles, & Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.). (2010). Writing Spaces: Readings on
Writing, Volume 1. WrtingSpaces.org; Parlor Press; The WAC Clearinghouse. https://wac.colostate.edu/
books/writingspaces/writingspaces1/
   Publication Date: June 14, 2010
                                                                       DESCRIBING AND EXPLAINING A SCHOLARLY CONVERSATION | 59

PART III

DESCRIBING AND EXPLAINING A
SCHOLARLY CONVERSATION

Introduction
   Entering into a conversation of any kind can be tricky if you are new to a group of people, topic, or even

the tone of the conversation. If you don't pause and listen to what people are saying for a moment before
speaking, you can repeat something someone else has said, come across as speaking in bad faith, or strike up the
wrong tone entirely. The same is true for engaging with a conversation within an academic discipline or topic
of scholarship. To become a member of their scholarly community and enter the conversation, you may need
to spend some time catching up on what people have said before you. While deciding when you have listened
or read enough is going vary from topic to topic and assignment to assignment, the research process utilizes
many concrete techniques and practices that can help you reach those goals. In this section of readings, you
will read about some of those techniques and how they can serve you as a researcher and writer.

   Questions and Arguments
   Research is often described as a linear process, but it is often anything but. While there are recognizable
phases and strategies, in extended research projects you can often find yourself doing certain tasks repeatedly,
adjusting the scope of your research, changing your terms, or even discovering a related but functionally new
topic that interests you more. In many ways, this makes sense because what we know can teach us what to ask.
If you learn a lot about particle physics, for example, you begin to see what we don't know and what would
merit further study. "Listening" to the conversation doesn't just teach you more about what to say, but also
about how to listen even better.
   Often our understanding of a topic starts broad and digs down into a particular group of ideas or
applications, which is how some broad disciplines like engineering have vastly different subfields that deal with
aerodynamics, construction, efficiency, computer software and hardware, chemicals, and many other areas.
Our understanding of how manipulate and craft the world around us may have begun with general concerns,
but the more we learned about the world, the more specific our questions have become. A computer engineer
may spend the majority of their time examining how sound signals are processed and transmitted and may
never even examine the particular chemical makeup of a pesticide that targets certain species but is virtually
harmless to others, and yet both of those concerns fall under the umbrella of engineering. Similarly a historian
who studies ancient Persia may never spend meaningful time considering the cultural impact of TikTok and
other social media apps, but both topic could be considered to be part of the humanities or even the social
sciences. In a similar way, your understanding of a concept may start off very broad, and so your initial
questions about that topic may start equally broad, but as you learn more and gain a deeper understanding of
60 | DESCRIBING AND EXPLAINING A SCHOLARLY CONVERSATION

a topic, your questions will change and become far more specific. Your questions will evolve from learning the
definitions of terms and concepts to applying those terms to situations to test them out. So while early on in
your research, you may have broad questions, if you allow these questions to evolve and change as you learn
more and more about a topic, you will find your ability to research the topic improve as you go.

   Similarly, when you are looking for a stance or argument to make on a topic for an assignment, you may find
this stance evolve as you learn more about a topic. A topic that had initially seemed extremely simple to you at
first may grow more and more complex as you delve into the research, which will likely make your argument
more specific and granular. Or, alternatively, a topic which seemed hopelessly complicated may become much
simpler to you as the true point of controversy becomes clear in the midst of a large and messy conversation.
Or your argument may change in a dozen other ways. Regardless, allowing your stance to change along with
your questions will not only help you better understand your topic, it will also help you better explain your
perspective.

   While research can be a tedious process, the goal is not simply to prove you deserve to speak about a topic,
but to understand your topic as clearly as you can. By cultivating a deep understanding of a topic, you are
better equipped to describe and demonstrate your stance on that topic. If someone is explaining why a business
regulation should be stronger but they can't clearly explain the details of the regulation, it is more difficult to
follow the point they are making even if it is a good one. They may be completely right, but having as deep a
knowledge about the regulations surrounding this business will help them select the best information to share
and focus on the most important points of the conversation. While research can build your credibility as a
writer, its greatest power is in how it builds your ability to write in the first place.

   Engaging with research can do a lot of things for us as writers, learners, and people. Not only does it allow
us to better understand the world around us, it also helps us to better position ourselves within that world and
decide what we want to do about it. Not every research project may change your mind in a deep way, but every
research project is an opportunity to better understand the world and yourself as a part of that world, and the
readings that follow should help provide you with tools to do just that.
GITANJALI DASBENDER'S "CRITICAL THINKING IN COLLEGE WRITING: FROM THE PERSONAL TO THE ACADEMIC" | 61

10.

GITANJALI DASBENDER'S "CRITICAL
THINKING IN COLLEGE WRITING: FROM
THE PERSONAL TO THE ACADEMIC"

   Writing Spaces Volume 2

Read the chapter "Critical Thinking in College Writing: From the Personal to the Academic"

The concept of "critical thinking" can be intimidating and nebulous even to people experienced with academic
writing and research. However, the process of critical thinking can be one with concrete steps and stages that
lead a reader to a thorough understanding of a text (or piece of media), and eventually help that reader create a
piece of writing about that text. By approaching critical thinking as a process we all perform and can improve
upon, Gita DasBender helps us to see how we are all critical thinkers and writers.

                          "While critical thinking may be
                         subject-specific, that is to say, it
                       can vary in method and technique
                        depending on the discipline, most
                         of its general principles such as

                             rational thinking, making
                          independent judgments, and a
                       healthy skepticism of what is being

                            read, are common to all the
                                       disciplines."

MLA Citation Examples
62 | GITANJALI DASBENDER'S "CRITICAL THINKING IN COLLEGE WRITING: FROM THE PERSONAL TO THE ACADEMIC"

     Works Cited
        Dasbender, Gitanjali. Critical Thinking in College Writing: From the Personal to the Academic."
        Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing Volume 2, edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky,
        Parlor Press, 2011, pp. 37-51.

     In-text citation
     "While critical thinking may be subject-specific, that is to say, it can vary in method and technique
     depending on the discipline, most of its general principles such as rational thinking, making
     independent evaluations and judgments, and a healthy skepticism of what is being read, are
     common to all disciplines" (Dasbender 38).

     References
        Dasbender, G. (2011). Critical thinking in college writing: From the personal to the academic. In
        Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.), Writing spaces: readings on writing, vol. 2 (pp. 37-51).
        New York: Parlor Press.

     In-text citation
     "While critical thinking may be subject-specific, that is to say, it can vary in method and technique
     depending on the discipline, most of its general principles such as rational thinking, making
     independent evaluations and judgments, and a healthy skepticism of what is being read, are
     common to all disciplines" (Dasbender, 2011, p. 38).

     Chicago Citation Examples

     Bibliography
        Gitanjali, Dasbender. "Critical Thinking in College Writing: From the Personal to the Academic," in
GITANJALI DASBENDER'S "CRITICAL THINKING IN COLLEGE WRITING: FROM THE PERSONAL TO THE ACADEMIC" | 63

       Writing Spaces: Reading on Writing Volume 2, ed. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (New
        York: Parlor Press, 2011), 37-51.
     In-text citation
     "While critical thinking may be subject-specific, that is to say, it can vary in method and technique
     depending on the discipline, most of its general principles such as rational thinking, making
     independent evaluations and judgments, and a healthy skepticism of what is being read, are
     common to all disciplines" (Dasbender, 2011, 38).

About the author

                  Volume 2 Writing Spaces

                  PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                  https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-2/
                  https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 2 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Volume 2 continues the tradition of the previous volume with topics, such as the rhetorical situation,
collaboration, documentation styles, weblogs, invention, writing assignment interpretation, reading critically,
information literacy, ethnography, interviewing, argument, document design, and source integration.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
64 | KAREN ROSENBERG'S "READING GAMES: STRATEGIES FOR READING SCHOLARLY SOURCES"

11.

KAREN ROSENBERG'S "READING GAMES:
STRATEGIES FOR READING SCHOLARLY
SOURCES"

   Writing Spaces Volume 2

                    Read the chapter "Reading Games: Strategies for Reading Scholarly Sources"

Engaging with academic texts can be challenging especially when the intended audience is other academics
and not readers who are new to a topic or conversation. While being an outsider to an academic topic can
be difficult, Karen Rosenberg describes their own experience with reading difficult texts and how we can
approach the process practically. Even if we don't fully understand everything we read in an unfamiliar topic,
by employing a clear reading strategy we can come away from every difficult text with a greater understanding
of the topic and questions that can guide us as we synthesize the material.

   \

                                                             "If your reading assignments
                                                         confound you, if they send you into
                                                         slumber, or you avoid them, or they

                                                            seem to take you way too long,
                                                           then pay attention. Based on my
                                                         experience as a frustrated student
                                                           and now as a teacher of reading
                                                          strategies, I have some insights to
                                                          share with you designed to make

                                                                the reading process more
                                                           productive, more interesting, and

                                                                      more enjoyable."

     MLA Citation Examples
                      KAREN ROSENBERG'S "READING GAMES: STRATEGIES FOR READING SCHOLARLY SOURCES" | 65

Works Cited
  Rosenberg, Karen. Reading Games: Strategies for Reading Scholarly Sources." Writing Spaces:
  Readings on Writing Volume 2, edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky, Parlor Press, 2011,
   pp. 210-220.

In-text citation
"If your reading assignments confound you, if they send you into slumber, or you avoid them, or
they seem to take you way too long, then pay attention. Based on my experience as a frustrated
student and now as a teacher of reading strategies, I have some insights to share with you
designed to make the reading process more productive, more interesting, and more enjoyable"
(Rosenberg 211).

References
   Rosenberg, K. (2011). Reading games: Strategies for reading scholarly sources. In Charles Lowe
  and Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.), Writing spaces: readings on writing, vol. 2 (pp. 210-220). New York:
   Parlor Press.

In-text citation
"If your reading assignments confound you, if they send you into slumber, or you avoid them, or
they seem to take you way too long, then pay attention. Based on my experience as a frustrated
student and now as a teacher of reading strategies, I have some insights to share with you
designed to make the reading process more productive, more interesting, and more enjoyable"
(Rosenberg, 2011, p. 211).

Chicago Citation Examples

Bibliography
66 | KAREN ROSENBERG'S "READING GAMES: STRATEGIES FOR READING SCHOLARLY SOURCES"

        Rosenberg, Karen. "Reading Games: Strategies for Reading Scholarly Sources," in Writing Spaces:
        Reading on Writing Volume 2, ed. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (New York: Parlor Press,
        2011), 210-220.
     In-text citation
     "If your reading assignments confound you, if they send you into slumber, or you avoid them, or
     they seem to take you way too long, then pay attention. Based on my experience as a frustrated
     student and now as a teacher of reading strategies, I have some insights to share with you
     designed to make the reading process more productive, more interesting, and more enjoyable"
     (Rosenberg, 2011, 211).

About the author

                  Volume 2 Writing Spaces

                  PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                  https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-2/
                  https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 2 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Volume 2 continues the tradition of the previous volume with topics, such as the rhetorical situation,
collaboration, documentation styles, weblogs, invention, writing assignment interpretation, reading critically,
information literacy, ethnography, interviewing, argument, document design, and source integration.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
                             KAREN ROSENBERG'S "READING GAMES: STRATEGIES FOR READING SCHOLARLY SOURCES" | 67

composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
68 | DAN MELZER'S "UNDERSTANDING DISCOURSE COMMUNITIES"

12.

DAN MELZER'S "UNDERSTANDING
DISCOURSE COMMUNITIES"

   Writing Spaces Volume 3

Read the chapter "Understanding Discourse Communities"

When you complete a writing assignment, deciphering the goals and expectations of that assignment is one the
most important and difficult steps in that writing process. One way to better understand what an assignment,
a class, or even a job is asking from is to examine the assignment in the context of its "discourse community." In
this chapter, Dan Melzer not only describes what a discourse community is but also how understanding that
concept can aid us as writers and beyond.

                       "You can write in a journal alone in
                        your room, just like you can play
                         guitar for yourself along in your
                           room. But most writers, like
                        musicians, learn their craft from
                        studying experts and becoming
                         part of a community. And most

                       writers, like most musicians, want
                         to be a part of community and
                        communicate with other people
                            who share their goals and
                                       interests."

MLA Citation Examples
                                                                DAN MELZER'S "UNDERSTANDING DISCOURSE COMMUNITIES" | 69

Works Cited
  Melzer, Dan. "Understanding Discourse Communities." Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing
  Volume 3, edited by Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew Vetter, Parlor Press, 2020, pp.
   100-115.

In-text citation
"You can write in a journal alone in your room, just like you can play guitar just for yourself alone in
your room. But most writers, like most musicians, learn their craft from studying experts and
becoming part of a community. And most writers, like most musicians, want to be a part of
community and communicate with other people who share their goals and interests" (102).

APA Citation Examples

References
   Melzer, D. (2020). Understanding discourse communities. In Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and
  Matthew Vetter (Eds.), Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing, vol. 3 (pp. 100-115). New York: Parlor
   Press.

In-text citation
"You can write in a journal alone in your room, just like you can play guitar just for yourself alone in
your room. But most writers, like most musicians, learn their craft from studying experts and
becoming part of a community. And most writers, like most musicians, want to be a part of
community and communicate with other people who share their goals and interests" (p. 102).

Chicago Citation Examples
70 | DAN MELZER'S "UNDERSTANDING DISCOURSE COMMUNITIES"

     Bibliography
        Melzer, Dan. "Understanding Discourse Communities," in Writing Spaces: Reading on Writing
        Volume 3, ed. Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew Vetter, (New York: Parlor Press, 2020),
        100-115.

     In-text citation
     "You can write in a journal alone in your room, just like you can play guitar just for yourself alone in
     your room. But most writers, like most musicians, learn their craft from studying experts and
     becoming part of a community. And most writers, like most musicians, want to be a part of
     community and communicate with other people who share their goals and interests" (Melzer, 2020,
     102).

About the author

                  Writing Spaces Volume 3

                  PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                  https://writingspaces.org/
                  https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2020, the third issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew
Vetter. In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 3 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as
well as Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Volume 3 continues the tradition of previous volumes with topics such as voice and style in writing,
rhetorical appeals, discourse communities, multimodal composing, visual rhetoric, credibility, exigency,
working with personal experience in academic writing, globalized writing and rhetoric, constructing scholarly
ethos, imitation and style, and rhetorical punctuation.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Dana Driscoll is Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania, where she teaches in the
                                                                       DAN MELZER'S "UNDERSTANDING DISCOURSE COMMUNITIES" | 71

Composition and Applied Linguistics graduate program and directs the Jones White Writing Center. Her
scholarly interests include composition pedagogy, writing centers, writing transfer and writerly development,
research methodologies, writing across the curriculum, and assessment.

   Mary Stewart is Assistant Professor and the Assessment Coordinator for the English Department at Indiana
University of Pennsylvania. Her research, which is primarily qualitative, focuses on collaborative and
interactive learning, blended and online writing instruction, composition pedagogy, and teaching with
technology.

   Matthew Vetter is Assistant Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania and affiliate faculty
in the Composition and Applied Linguistics Doctoral Program. A scholar in writing, rhetoric, and digital
humanities, his research explores how technologies shape writing and writing pedagogy.
72 | JAMES P. PURDY'S "WIKIPEDIA IS GOOD FOR YOU!?"

13.

JAMES P. PURDY'S "WIKIPEDIA IS GOOD
FOR YOU!?"

   Writing Spaces Volume 1

                       Read the chapter "Wikipedia is Good for You!?"

Doing research and creating writing from that research can be a complex, daunting process, especially when
some of the most readily available resources like Wikipedia are often banned from academic writing
assignments. However, in this chapter James P. Purdy outlines what we can learn as researchers and writers
from Wikipedia. Wikipedia is not only a useful tool at the beginning of a research project, it can also model
some of the key concepts and stages in the research writing process.

MLA Citation Examples          "Because of their open
                          participation, unreliability, and

                             (potentially) shallow topic
                       coverage, you generally should not

                          cite Wikipedia as authoritative
                         sources in college-level writing.
                        This does not mean Wikipedia is
                       not useful, or that you cannot read
                        it, or that you should not cite it if
                         you do use it. It does mean that
                        Wikipedia is better used in other

                                          ways."
                                                                                 JAMES P. PURDY'S "WIKIPEDIA IS GOOD FOR YOU!?" | 73

Works Cited
  Purdy, James P. "Wikipedia is Good for You!?" Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing Volume 1,
   edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemlianksky, Parlor Press, 2010, pp. 205-224.

In-text citation
"Because of their open participation, unreliability, and (potentially) shallow topic coverage, you
generally should not cite Wikipedia articles as authoritative sources in college-level writing. This
does not mean that Wikipedia is not useful, or that you cannot read it, or that you should not cite it
if you do use it. It does mean that Wikipedia is better used in other ways" (Purdy 209).

APA Citation Examples

References
  Purdy, J.P. (2010). Wikipedia is good for you!? In Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.),
  Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing, vol. 1 (pp. 205-224). New York: Parlor Press.

In-text citation
"Because of their open participation, unreliability, and (potentially) shallow topic coverage, you
generally should not cite Wikipedia articles as authoritative sources in college-level writing. This
does not mean that Wikipedia is not useful, or that you cannot read it, or that you should not cite it
if you do use it. It does mean that Wikipedia is better used in other ways" (p. 209).

Chicago Citation Examples

Bibliography
74 | JAMES P. PURDY'S "WIKIPEDIA IS GOOD FOR YOU!?"

        Purdy, James. "Wikipedia is Good for You!?." in Writing Spaces: Reading on Writing Volume 1, ed.
        Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (New York: Parlor Press, 2010), 205-224.
     In-text citation
     "Because of their open participation, unreliability, and (potentially) shallow topic coverage, you
     generally should not cite Wikipedia articles as authoritative sources in college-level writing. This
     does not mean that Wikipedia is not useful, or that you cannot read it, or that you should not cite it
     if you do use it. It does mean that Wikipedia is better used in other ways" (Purdy, 2010, 209).

About the author

                  Writing Spaces Volume 1

                  PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                  https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-1/
                  https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 1 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Topics in Volume 1 of the series include academic writing, how to interpret writing assignments, motives
for writing, rhetorical analysis, revision, invention, writing centers, argumentation, narrative, reflective writing,
Wikipedia, patchwriting, collaboration, and genres.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
   Publication Information: Lowe, Charles, & Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.). (2010). Writing Spaces: Readings on
Writing, Volume 1. WrtingSpaces.org; Parlor Press; The WAC Clearinghouse. https://wac.colostate.edu/
books/writingspaces/writingspaces1/
                                 JAMES P. PURDY'S "WIKIPEDIA IS GOOD FOR YOU!?" | 75

Publication Date: June 14, 2010
76 | JAMES P. PURDY'S "WIKIPEDIA IS GOOD FOR YOU!?"
                                                                  ENTERING AND PARTICIPATING IN A SCHOLARLY CONVERSATION | 77

PART IV

ENTERING AND PARTICIPATING IN
A SCHOLARLY CONVERSATION

I've always found the final unit in the composition sequence to be exhilarating. This final unit has student
writers participate fully in a scholarly conversation. When I have taught this unit, I have had students discover
new majors, career paths, and mostly, I have come to watch students beautifully find their voices. Hopefully,
the research topic chosen is one student writers are excited about and invested in. If you are a student writer
here, you have made it through Composition 1 and are now ready to finish Composition 2. And you are ready
to finish on a strong note.

   My hope is by the time student writers have arrived at this unit, where one will most likely produce an
original research paper, they have found their passions and voices. Voice is something that bends, adapts, and
builds on one's identity, life experience, ethics, and beliefs. Voice is something inherent to you, as well as
something you mold and create on the page. Voice is something not to be left out of research or academic
writing. My hope is that you remember this as you end this final unit in Composition 2 and complete the rest
of your undergraduate degree. My hope is that these chapters in the text help guide you as you produce writing
and conduct research in this unit, and beyond.

   In "Googlepedia: Turning Information Behaviors into Research Skills," by Randall McClure, you'll learn
that it is okay to Google, but you'll also learn the importance of knowing how to conduct serious research
through your university library. You'll come to understand most of us use both. Marjorie Stewars, in "Weaving
Personal Experience into Academic Writings," will show you how blending who you are and your personal
narrative with research can only strengthen your writing. You'll learn about exigency and how a reader can
spot your passion for a topic in "Exigency: What Makes My Message Indispensable to My Reader" by Quentin
Vieregge. Finally, in "Everything Changes, or Why MLA Isn't (Always) Right" by Janice R. Walker, you will
understand the ethical importance of giving credit to other voices when credit is due.

   My goal is that these four chapters help guide you to produce a final product you are both happy with and
proud of. These chapters will push you to consider various methods of research. It will also challenge you to
reflect on who you are, what your beliefs contain, and how you plan to influence readers through your writing.
Words hold power. Research and storytelling hold infinite power. In these chapters. you will unearth what
shapes your own identity, as well as others' identities around you. Never turn your back on anyone. Your voice,
your words, and research all hold the future. And I anticipate your writing will add a unique perspective and
diverse voice to our ever-changing world.
78 | ENTERING AND PARTICIPATING IN A SCHOLARLY CONVERSATION
     RANDALL MCCLURE'S "GOOGLEPEDIA: TURNING INFORMATION BEHAVIORS INTO RESEARCH SKILLS" | 79

14.

RANDALL MCCLURE'S "GOOGLEPEDIA:
TURNING INFORMATION BEHAVIORS INTO
RESEARCH SKILLS"

   Writing Spaces Volume 2

               Read the chapter "Googlepedia: Turning Information Behaviors into Research Skills"

In this chapter, McClure addresses the common habit of student writers to turn to both Google and Wikipedia
to begin their research. Over the years, instructors of writing have dismissed this method of research as being
appropriate for the writing classroom. However, McClure discusses ways to make space for composition
students to begin at these sites of interrogation and move to more academic spaces to conduct deeper research,
such as the university library. McClure asserts that students need support and direction to understand the
benefits of researching at the university library. This chapter offers a blend of case study, narrative, reflection,
and questions for both instructors and student writers to consider when developing their own research habits.
A takeaway from this chapter will be how students in first-year writing classrooms might take a blended
approach to research--from both Googlepedia and the university library.
80 | RANDALL MCCLURE'S "GOOGLEPEDIA: TURNING INFORMATION BEHAVIORS INTO RESEARCH SKILLS"

\                          "I admit that finding information
                         quickly and effortlessly is certainly
  MLA Citation Examples
                             alluring. But what about the
                          reliability of information you find?

                               Do you ever question if the
                             information you find is really
                         accurate or true? If you have, then
                         please know that you are not alone
                          in your questions. You might even
                         find some comfort in my belief that
                             conducting sound academic
                          research is more challenging now
                             than at any other time in the
                          history of the modern university."

Works Cited

  McClure, Randall. "Googlepedia: Turning Information Behaviors into Research Skill." Writing
  Spaces: Readings on Writing Volume 2, edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky, Parlor
   Press, 2011, pp. 221-241.

In-text citation

"I admit that finding information quickly and effortlessly is certainly alluring. But what about the
reliability of the information you find? Do you ever question if the information you find is really
accurate or true? If you have, then please know that you are not alone in your questions. You might
even find some comfort in my belief that conducting sound academic research is more challenging
now than at any other time in the history of the modern university" (McClure 222).

References
   McClure, R. (2011). Googlepedia: Turning informatoin behaviors into research skills. In Charles
          RANDALL MCCLURE'S "GOOGLEPEDIA: TURNING INFORMATION BEHAVIORS INTO RESEARCH SKILLS" | 81

  Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.), Writing spaces: readings on writing, vol. 2 (pp. 221-241). New
   York: Parlor Press.
In-text citation
"I admit that finding information quickly and effortlessly is certainly alluring. But what about the
reliability of the information you find? Do you ever question if the information you find is really
accurate or true? If you have, then please know that you are not alone in your questions. You might
even find some comfort in my belief that conducting sound academic research is more challenging
now than at any other time in the history of the modern university" (McClure, 2011, p. 222).

Chicago Citation Examples

Bibliography
  McClure, Randall. "Googlepedia: Turning Information Behaviors into Research Skills," in Writing
  Spaces: Reading on Writing Volume 2, ed. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (New York: Parlor
   Press, 2011), 221-241.

In-text citation
"I admit that finding information quickly and effortlessly is certainly alluring. But what about the
reliability of the information you find? Do you ever question if the information you find is really
accurate or true? If you have, then please know that you are not alone in your questions. You might
even find some comfort in my belief that conducting sound academic research is more challenging
now than at any other time in the history of the modern university" (McClure, 2011, 222).
82 | RANDALL MCCLURE'S "GOOGLEPEDIA: TURNING INFORMATION BEHAVIORS INTO RESEARCH SKILLS"

About the author

                                  Volume 2 Writing Spaces

                                              PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                                              https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-2/
                                              https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 2 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Volume 2 continues the tradition of the previous volume with topics, such as the rhetorical situation,
collaboration, documentation styles, weblogs, invention, writing assignment interpretation, reading critically,
information literacy, ethnography, interviewing, argument, document design, and source integration.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
     MARJORIA STEWART'S "WEAVING PERSONAL EXPERIENCE INTO ACADEMIC WRITINGS" | 83

15.

MARJORIA STEWART'S "WEAVING
PERSONAL EXPERIENCE INTO ACADEMIC
WRITINGS"

   Writing Spaces Volume 3

     Read the chapter "Weaving Personal Experience into Academic Writing"

Personal experience may be something first-year writing instructors or students don't see as an asset or a part of
academic writing. However, one's personal experience can richly aid in developing one's academic writing and
research on a topic. In this chapter, Stewart does not debate whether narrative is "appropriate" for academic
writing. Rather, she addresses how personal narrative is powerful, and offers tools on how to best integrate it.
Stewart's goal in this chapter is to model to students various ways that she, as well as student writers, can best
weave personal narrative into research and academic writing. When personal experience and research overlap,
a space for self discovery emerges. Personal narrative can successfully become a framing device, an example, or
point of context for academic writing.

                       "Many of you have been taught not
                       to use the word `I' in your academic

                         writing; not to include anything
                       that does not directly relate to that

                         mysterious thing called a `thesis
                          statement;' and not to include

                        anything personal in your writing.
                          The opening of this essay has
                          broken all of those so-called
                                           rules."

MLA Citation Examples
84 | MARJORIA STEWART'S "WEAVING PERSONAL EXPERIENCE INTO ACADEMIC WRITINGS"

     Works Cited
        Stewart, Marjorie. "Weaving Personal Experience into Academic Writing." Writing Spaces:
        Readings on Writing Volume 3, edited by Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew Vetter,
        Parlor Press, 2020, pp. 162-174.

     In-text citation
     "Many of you have been taught not to use the word "I" in your academic writing; not to include
     anything that does not directly relate to that mysterious thing called a "thesis statement;" and not
     to include anything personal in your writing. The opening of this essay has broken all of those so-
     called rules" (163).

     APA Citation Examples

     References
        Stewart, M. (2020). Weaving personal experience into academic writing. In Dana Driscoll, Mary
        Stewart, and Matthew Vetter (Eds.), Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing, vol. 3 (pp. 162-174).
        New York: Parlor Press.

     In-text citation
     "Many of you have been taught not to use the word "I" in your academic writing; not to include
     anything that does not directly relate to that mysterious thing called a "thesis statement;" and not
     to include anything personal in your writing. The opening of this essay has broken all of those so-
     called rules" (p. 163).

     Chicago Citation Examples
                             MARJORIA STEWART'S "WEAVING PERSONAL EXPERIENCE INTO ACADEMIC WRITINGS" | 85

Bibliography
  Stewart, Marjorie. "Weaving Personal Experience into Academic Writing," in Writing Spaces:
  Reading on Writing Volume 3, ed. Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew Vetter, (New York:
   Parlor Press, 2020), 162-174.

In-text citation
"Many of you have been taught not to use the word "I" in your academic writing; not to include
anything that does not directly relate to that mysterious thing called a "thesis statement;" and not
to include anything personal in your writing. The opening of this essay has broken all of those so-
called rules" (Stewart, 2020, 163).

About the author

                  Writing Spaces Volume 3

                  PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                  https://writingspaces.org/
                  https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2020, the third issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew
Vetter. In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 3 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as
well as Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Volume 3 continues the tradition of previous volumes with topics such as voice and style in writing,
rhetorical appeals, discourse communities, multimodal composing, visual rhetoric, credibility, exigency,
working with personal experience in academic writing, globalized writing and rhetoric, constructing scholarly
ethos, imitation and style, and rhetorical punctuation.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Dana Driscoll is Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania, where she teaches in the
Composition and Applied Linguistics graduate program and directs the Jones White Writing Center. Her
86 | MARJORIA STEWART'S "WEAVING PERSONAL EXPERIENCE INTO ACADEMIC WRITINGS"

scholarly interests include composition pedagogy, writing centers, writing transfer and writerly development,
research methodologies, writing across the curriculum, and assessment.

   Mary Stewart is Assistant Professor and the Assessment Coordinator for the English Department at Indiana
University of Pennsylvania. Her research, which is primarily qualitative, focuses on collaborative and
interactive learning, blended and online writing instruction, composition pedagogy, and teaching with
technology.

   Matthew Vetter is Assistant Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania and affiliate faculty
in the Composition and Applied Linguistics Doctoral Program. A scholar in writing, rhetoric, and digital
humanities, his research explores how technologies shape writing and writing pedagogy.
     QUENTIN VIEREGGE'S "EXIGENCY: WHAT MAKES MY MESSAGE INDISPENSABLE TO MY READER" | 87

16.

QUENTIN VIEREGGE'S "EXIGENCY: WHAT
MAKES MY MESSAGE INDISPENSABLE TO
MY READER"

   Writing Spaces Volume 3

               Read the chapter "Exigency: What Makes My Message Indispensable to My Reader"

In first-year writing classrooms, an instructor may seem like a captive audience for a student writer, but this
should not be where a student writer stops when developing exigency within their paper. According to Viregge,
exigency "concerns itself with subject matter, and its successful invocation makes readers care." Arguably, when
a student writer cares deeply about a topic or issue, this investment has the potential to leave a stronger impact
on a reader. In this chapter, Vieregge offers various techniques for student writers to use exigency in their own
writing. These methods include exigency through an audience's concerns or needs, exigency through a gap in
research, exigency of reframing, and exigency through a radical reinterpretation of knowledge or experience.
This chapter will leave student writers with new ideas on how to find passion, urgency, and purpose within
their research and writing.

                                                            "It's the writer's job to clarify a
                                                             text's relevance. Rhetoricians
                                                          sometimes refer to this concept as
                                                            a text's exigency, which may be
                                                          defined as the circumstances and

                                                                 reasons why something
                                                            matters-not only generally, but
                                                          specifically at this moment, in this
                                                            place, for this group of people
                                                            (presumably one's readership)."
88 | QUENTIN VIEREGGE'S "EXIGENCY: WHAT MAKES MY MESSAGE INDISPENSABLE TO MY READER"

     MLA Citation Examples

     Works Cited
        Vieregge, Quentin. "Exigency: What Makes My Message Indispensable to My Reader." Writing
        Spaces: Readings on Writing Volume 3, edited by Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew
        Vetter, Parlor Press, 2020, pp. 175-188.

     In-text citation
     "It's the writer's job to clarify a text's relevance. Rhetoricians sometimes refer to this concept as a
     text's exigency, which may be defined as the circumstances and reasons why something
     matters-not only generally, but specifically at this moment, in this place, for this group of people
     (presumably one's readership" (Vierrege 176).

     References
        Vieregge, Quentin. (2020). Exigency: What makes my message indispensable to my reader. In
        Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart and Matthew Vetter (Eds.), Writing spaces: readings on writing, vol.
        3 (pp. 175-188). New York: Parlor Press.

     In-text citation
     "It's the writer's job to clarify a text's relevance. Rhetoricians sometimes refer to this concept as a
     text's exigency, which may be defined as the circumstances and reasons why something
     matters-not only generally, but specifically at this moment, in this place, for this group of people
     (presumably one's readership." (Vierrege, 2020, p. 66).

     Chicago Citation Examples
                QUENTIN VIEREGGE'S "EXIGENCY: WHAT MAKES MY MESSAGE INDISPENSABLE TO MY READER" | 89

Bibliography
  Vieregge, Quentin. "Exigency: What Makes My Message Indispensable to My Reader," in Writing
  Spaces: Reading on Writing Volume 3, ed. Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew Vetter
   (New York: Parlor Press, 2020), 65-85.

In-text citation
"It's the writer's job to clarify a text's relevance. Rhetoricians sometimes refer to this concept as a
text's exigency, which may be defined as the circumstances and reasons why something
matters-not only generally, but specifically at this moment, in this place, for this group of people
(presumably one's readership" (Vierrege, 2020, 176).

About the author

                  Writing Spaces Volume 3

                  PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                  https://writingspaces.org/
                  https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2020, the third issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew
Vetter. In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 3 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as
well as Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Volume 3 continues the tradition of previous volumes with topics such as voice and style in writing,
rhetorical appeals, discourse communities, multimodal composing, visual rhetoric, credibility, exigency,
working with personal experience in academic writing, globalized writing and rhetoric, constructing scholarly
ethos, imitation and style, and rhetorical punctuation.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Dana Driscoll is Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania, where she teaches in the
Composition and Applied Linguistics graduate program and directs the Jones White Writing Center. Her
90 | QUENTIN VIEREGGE'S "EXIGENCY: WHAT MAKES MY MESSAGE INDISPENSABLE TO MY READER"

scholarly interests include composition pedagogy, writing centers, writing transfer and writerly development,
research methodologies, writing across the curriculum, and assessment.

   Mary Stewart is Assistant Professor and the Assessment Coordinator for the English Department at Indiana
University of Pennsylvania. Her research, which is primarily qualitative, focuses on collaborative and
interactive learning, blended and online writing instruction, composition pedagogy, and teaching with
technology.

   Matthew Vetter is Assistant Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania and affiliate faculty
in the Composition and Applied Linguistics Doctoral Program. A scholar in writing, rhetoric, and digital
humanities, his research explores how technologies shape writing and writing pedagogy.
     JANICE R. WALKER'S "EVERYTHING CHANGES, OR WHY MLA ISN'T (ALWAYS) RIGHT" | 91

17.

JANICE R. WALKER'S "EVERYTHING
CHANGES, OR WHY MLA ISN'T (ALWAYS)
RIGHT"

   Writing Spaces Volume 2

     Read the chapter "Everything Changes, or Why MLA isn't Always Right"

In this chapter, Walker conducts a deep dive into the rhetoric of MLA citation. This chapter is useful for
student writers to read through when developing a broader and deeper understanding of the historical context
of citations, current challenges and dilemmas regarding when to use citations, the necessity for citations, and
how to implement them well. Furthermore, Walker offers the four main elements one will need to cite their
work, such as: author information, title information, edition and version information, and access information.
She ends the chapter with a call for student writers to check a MLA Works Cited page to guide them in
understanding who is speaking and when they are speaking.

\                         "Academic writers . . . are held to
                         the highest standards of reliability
  MLA Citation Examples
                             for sources. Thus, academic
                                citation formats include

                         information that will not only help
                         a reader to locate a given source
                          and give credit to others for their

                            work, but that will also help a
                           reader to determine a source's

                                         credibility."
92 | JANICE R. WALKER'S "EVERYTHING CHANGES, OR WHY MLA ISN'T (ALWAYS) RIGHT"

     Works Cited
        Walker, Janice R. "Everything Changes, or Why MLA Isn't Always Right." Writing Spaces:
        Readings on Writing Volume 2, edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky, Parlor Press, 2011,
        pp. 257-269

     In-text citation
     "Academic writers . . . are held to the highest standards of reliability for sources. Thus, academic
     citation formats include information that will not only help a reader to locate a given source and
     give credit to others for their work, but that will also help a reader to determine a source's
     credibility" (Walker 261).

     References
        Walker, J.R. (2011). Everything changes, or why mla isn't always right. In Charles Lowe and Pavel
        Zemliansky (Eds.), Writing spaces: readings on writing, vol. 2 (pp. 257-269). New York: Parlor
        Press.

     In-text citation
     "Academic writers . . . are held to the highest standards of reliability for sources. Thus, academic
     citation formats include information that will not only help a reader to locate a given source and
     give credit to others for their work, but that will also help a reader to determine a source's
     credibility
     " (Walker, 2011, p. 261).

     Chicago Citation Examples

     Bibliography
        Walker, Janice R. "Everything Changes, or Why MLA Isn't Always Right," in Writing Spaces:
                                  JANICE R. WALKER'S "EVERYTHING CHANGES, OR WHY MLA ISN'T (ALWAYS) RIGHT" | 93

  Reading on Writing Volume 2, ed. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (New York: Parlor Press,
   2011), 257-269.
In-text citation
"Academic writers . . . are held to the highest standards of reliability for sources. Thus, academic
citation formats include information that will not only help a reader to locate a given source and
give credit to others for their work, but that will also help a reader to determine a source's
credibility" (Walker, 2011, 261).

About the author

                  Volume 2 Writing Spaces

                  PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                  https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-2/
                  https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 2 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Volume 2 continues the tradition of the previous volume with topics, such as the rhetorical situation,
collaboration, documentation styles, weblogs, invention, writing assignment interpretation, reading critically,
information literacy, ethnography, interviewing, argument, document design, and source integration.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
94 | JANICE R. WALKER'S "EVERYTHING CHANGES, OR WHY MLA ISN'T (ALWAYS) RIGHT"
                                                                                                SELECTED ESSAYS ON WRITING PROCESSES | 95

PART V

SELECTED ESSAYS ON WRITING
PROCESSES

There is a famous quote by Neil Gaiman that talks about "the tyranny of the blank page." Gaiman refers to
the difficulty of getting started with writing, and that one of the hardest parts of writing is just getting started.
His advice is to just start getting words down on the page, regardless of shape in order to break the blankness
and get the process started. This is good advice, and advice all writers should take to heart. However, I believe
there are other aspects of the page that can be equally frustrating to writers, and one is the shape of the page
itself. Take for example the essay. Most students have come up against and battled the traditional essay many
times: the same five paragraphs, the hook, the dreaded thesis statement. First year writing students pick up their
assignment sheets and immediately flashback to all the frustrations associated with getting past essays into the
same mold. It can feel a lot like trying to get a square peg in a round hole (if you'll excuse the clich). The
solution? Change the shape and change the form. The readings in this section will explore not just different
ways of writing, but different ways of thinking about writing. Through these changes in perspective, it is my
hope that students learn to confront, if I may borrow from Gaiman, the "tyranny of the page."

   The obstacle we face in the First Year Composition classroom is engagement. There is nothing inherently
wrong with the form of the essay. It is a tried and true means of putting down thoughts and ideas together in
order to convey specific purposes, and it has been working for years. The problem is that students have been
writing them for years. Writing takes work, and when it becomes monotonous, any type of work becomes a
chore. That is when the anxiety sets in, along with the fear and the boredom. The assignment becomes just
another obligation put on a student, with all the familiar pains of plunking away at the keyboard to reach
that end goal of creating something that will be considered passable by a teacher. The result is not a labor of
love, but instead a labor of procrastination, cut corners, and repeated scans of the assignment sheet or attached
rubric in order to just meet the bare minimum of requirements. This is not engagement, and it is certainly not
fun. This does not access that creative part of the brain where our best ideas and improvisations lie. It doesn't
connect us to our writing, or bring about the joy that writing can elicit under the right circumstances. How can
we learn to fully grasp the importance of creating when something feels like everything else? How can we stop
from seeing writing assignments as just another grain of sand on the beach of an academic career? One way
is reimagining and reconstructing what we think of when we think of writing. We can engage by completely
changing tack and rethinking the framework. With enough heat, we can turn that sand into glass.

   One word that comes up in many writing classes is revision. This usually comes at the end of a writing
project, where the drafting process has already begun and writers are polishing up their drafts to make them as
strong as possible. However, revision can be mean so much more. If we break down the word and consider its
96 | SELECTED ESSAYS ON WRITING PROCESSES

etymology in Latin, it literally means "to see again" or "to look at again". This means more than just reading
something over again, but instead means to truly try and look at something in a new way. A piece of revision
advice some writers swear by is to print out documents usually seen on a computer screen, or to change fonts
and font sizes on the document. The idea is to disrupt the familiar so that our brains can break out of the
grooves and habits formed by reading the same thing in the same way. This allows us to see our writing anew.
That is precisely what I'm proposing we do with our writing in general. We need to revise the way we approach
writing assignments so that we can see writing as a whole anew. That is why it is important to break those
deeply formed grooves and habits in order to see writing as something more than what we're used to.

   The readings in this section explore different possibilities in how one might revise their way of looking at
writing by providing techniques for writers to change their perspective on writing and composition. In "An
Introduction to and Strategies for Multimodal Composing" by Melanie Gagich, you'll learn the ins and outs
of creating a multimodal project. The reading will explore how composition is not necessarily limited to the
genre of the essay or even purely textual, but instead can be engaged through many different modes and genres.
This can include the aural, the visual, and other ways of conveying information. In "Why Blog? Searching for
Writing on the Web," Alex Reid discusses their own journey through blog writing and demonstrates the many
benefits students may find in blogging. You'll learn how focus, audience, and attitude towards subject matter
can make all the difference in engagement. In "Collaborating Online: Digital Strategies for Group Work" by
Anthony Atkins, you'll learn how to reexamine your preconceived notions of working on a group project in the
writing classroom. Atkins also provides several tips and techniques on how to get the most out of group work
while also utilizing digital spaces in order to get the most out of your group members as well. In "Composing
the Anthology: An Exercise in Patchwriting," Christopher Leary discusses a different way of thinking about
how we engage with the texts we read. You'll learn to shift your perspective towards texts by thinking about
readings as parts of a larger thread rather than individual texts with no connections. Leary also provides insights
on how this approach can help students think differently about how their writing interacts with the writing of
others.

   The readings in this section should provide you with a new way of thinking about writing, and ultimately
help put you on a path to reenergizing and rejuvenating the creative parts of your brain to help inspire that
engagement. By taking your writing into new directions, by pushing back against that "tyranny of the page,"
your views on writing will change, and the dread of work will develop into focusing less on the task at hand,
but rather having fun trying to figure out the best way to say what it is you want to say.
     MELANIE GAGICH'S "AN INTRODUCTION TO AND STRATEGIES FOR MULTIMODAL COMPOSING" | 97

18.

MELANIE GAGICH'S "AN INTRODUCTION TO
AND STRATEGIES FOR MULTIMODAL
COMPOSING"

   Writing Spaces Volume 3

                  Read the chapter "An Introduction to and Strategies for Multimodal Composing"

Students are often shocked or confused when confronted with the task of creating a multimodal composition
in a First-Year writing class. The reason for this hesitancy often stems from how the multimodal composition
deviates from the typical expectations of the page so often associated with the word composition. Gagich
pushes back on the traditional concept of text and defines it as "a piece of communication that can take many
forms." With this in mind, Gagich lays out in detail what considerations make up multimodal compositions,
from the Five Modes of Communication to the benefits to students' literacy both in and out of the classroom.
Gagich also breaks down for students how to begin a multimodal project and lays out several considerations for
students to remember as they begin creating texts. This chapter aims to demystify the multimodal composition
and provide students with a framework for rethinking composition as just merely words on a page.
98 | MELANIE GAGICH'S "AN INTRODUCTION TO AND STRATEGIES FOR MULTIMODAL COMPOSING"

MLA Citation Examples   "While some students are thrilled
                       to compose something other than

                            an academic essay, others
                        struggle to understand why they

                              are required to create a
                       multimodal text in a writing class. I
                       assure my students that although
                        they may not be familiar with the
                       concept of multimodality, it has a

                         long history in composition (e.g.
                                   writing studies)."

Works Cited

  Gagich, Melanie. "An Introduction to and Strategies for Multimodal Composing." Writing Spaces:
  Readings on Writing Volume 3, edited by Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew Vetter,
   Parlor Press, 2020, pp. 65-85.

In-text citation

"While some students are thrilled to compose something other than an academic essay, others
struggle to understand why they are required to create a multimodal text in a writing class. I assure
my students that although they may not be familiar with the concept of multimodality, it has a long
history in composition (e.g. writing studies)" (66).

References
   Gagich, M. (2020). An introduction to strategies for multimodal composing. In Dana Driscoll, Mary
  Stewart and Matthew Vetter (Eds.), Writing spaces: readings on writing, vol. 3 (pp. 65-85). New
   York: Parlor Press.

In-text citation
"While some students are thrilled to compose something other than an academic essay, others
                   MELANIE GAGICH'S "AN INTRODUCTION TO AND STRATEGIES FOR MULTIMODAL COMPOSING" | 99

struggle to understand why they are required to create a multimodal text in a writing class. I assure
my students that although they may not be familiar with the concept of multimodality, it has a long
history in composition (e.g. writing studies)." (Gagich, 2020, p. 66).

Chicago Citation Examples

Bibliography

  Gagich, Melanie. "An Introduction to and Strategies for Multimodal Composing," in Writing
  Spaces: Reading on Writing Volume 3, ed. Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew Vetter
   (New York: Parlor Press, 2020), 65-85.

In-text citation

"While some students are thrilled to compose something other than an academic essay, others
struggle to understand why they are required to create a multimodal text in a writing class. I assure
my students that although they may not be familiar with the concept of multimodality, it has a long
history in composition (e.g. writing studies)." (Gagich, 2020, 66).

About the author

                           Writing Spaces Volume 3

                           PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                           https://writingspaces.org/
                           https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2020, the third issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Dana Driscoll, Mary Stewart, and Matthew
100 | MELANIE GAGICH'S "AN INTRODUCTION TO AND STRATEGIES FOR MULTIMODAL COMPOSING"

Vetter. In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 3 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as
well as Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Volume 3 continues the tradition of previous volumes with topics such as voice and style in writing,
rhetorical appeals, discourse communities, multimodal composing, visual rhetoric, credibility, exigency,
working with personal experience in academic writing, globalized writing and rhetoric, constructing scholarly
ethos, imitation and style, and rhetorical punctuation.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Dana Driscoll is Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania, where she teaches in the
Composition and Applied Linguistics graduate program and directs the Jones White Writing Center. Her
scholarly interests include composition pedagogy, writing centers, writing transfer and writerly development,
research methodologies, writing across the curriculum, and assessment.
   Mary Stewart is Assistant Professor and the Assessment Coordinator for the English Department at Indiana
University of Pennsylvania. Her research, which is primarily qualitative, focuses on collaborative and
interactive learning, blended and online writing instruction, composition pedagogy, and teaching with
technology.
   Matthew Vetter is Assistant Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania and affiliate faculty
in the Composition and Applied Linguistics Doctoral Program. A scholar in writing, rhetoric, and digital
humanities, his research explores how technologies shape writing and writing pedagogy.
     ALEX REID'S "WHY BLOG? SEARCHING FOR WRITING ON THE WEB" | 101

19.

ALEX REID'S "WHY BLOG? SEARCHING FOR
WRITING ON THE WEB"

   Writing Spaces Volume 2

                            Read the chapter "Why Blog: Searching for Writing on the Web"

A major roadblock many students encounter in writing courses is their writing assignments. The motivation
for writing for most assignments focuses on either how to follow instructions to complete the task, or what
the student needs to do in order to get an A. Reid suggests that the rigidity of the writing-intensive classroom
assignments are often what hold students back from achieving real practice as writers. An alternative to these
narrow topics is to allow students to begin writing blogs. According to Reid, "a blog is an excellent opportunity
for exploring and developing intrinsic motivations for writing" because the student controls "the subject
matter, the length, the format, the timing of your posts, and all the other characteristics of your writing."
This chapter continues to explore to define what blogging is, as well as show the benefits of blog writing to
students. This advice is supplemented with Reid's own experiences creating and establishing his own blog.
Reid also provides practical advice on how students might come up with and create their own blogs that they
can personally engage with and will encourage them to keep writing. This chapter aims to help students gain
essential writing practice by tapping in to individual motivations and drives.
102 | ALEX REID'S "WHY BLOG? SEARCHING FOR WRITING ON THE WEB"

MLA Citation Examples  "As a student in a first year writing
                           course, you may not envision
                               yourself as a writer. It is

                        understandable that you may not
                         want to dedicate yourself to the

                            10,000-hour journey toward
                       expertise. However, you might want

                          to dedicate yourself to a more
                       modest goal. You might want to be

                          among the best writers in your
                       major or among the applicants for

                         the graduate school or job that
                            you'll be pursuing when you
                                        graduate."

Works Cited

  Reid, Alex. "Why Blog? Searching for Writing on the Web." Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing
  Volume 2, edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky, Parlor Press, 2011, pp. 302-319.

In-text citation

"As a student in a first year writing course, you may not envision yourself as a writer. It is
understandable that you may not want to dedicate yourself to the 10,000-hour journey toward
expertise. However, you might want to dedicate yourself to a more modest goal. You might want
to be among the best writers in your major or among the applicants for the graduate school or job
that you'll be pursuing when you graduate" (304).

References

   Reid, A. (2011). Why blog? searching for writing on the web. In Charles Lowe and Pavel
  Zemliansky (Eds.), Writing spaces: readings on writing, vol. 2 (pp. 302-319). New York: Parlor
   Press.

In-text citation
                                                        ALEX REID'S "WHY BLOG? SEARCHING FOR WRITING ON THE WEB" | 103

"As a student in a first year writing course, you may not envision yourself as a writer. It is
understandable that you may not want to dedicate yourself to the 10,000-hour journey toward
expertise. However, you might want to dedicate yourself to a more modest goal. You might want
to be among the best writers in your major or among the applicants for the graduate school or job
that you'll be pursuing when you graduate." (Reid, 2011, p. 304).

Chicago Citation Examples

Bibliography

  Reid, Alex. "Why Blog? Searching for Writing on the Web," in Writing Spaces: Reading on Writing
  Volume 2, ed. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (New York: Parlor Press, 2011), 302-319.

In-text citation

"As a student in a first year writing course, you may not envision yourself as a writer. It is
understandable that you may not want to dedicate yourself to the 10,000-hour journey toward
expertise. However, you might want to dedicate yourself to a more modest goal. You might want
to be among the best writers in your major or among the applicants for the graduate school or job
that you'll be pursuing when you graduate)." (Reid, 2011, 304).

About the author

                           Volume 2 Writing Spaces

                           PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                           https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-2/
                           https://twitter.com/writing_spaces
104 | ALEX REID'S "WHY BLOG? SEARCHING FOR WRITING ON THE WEB"

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 2 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Volume 2 continues the tradition of the previous volume with topics, such as the rhetorical situation,
collaboration, documentation styles, weblogs, invention, writing assignment interpretation, reading critically,
information literacy, ethnography, interviewing, argument, document design, and source integration.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
     ANTHONY T. ATKINS'S ."COLLABORATING ONLINE: DIGITAL STRATEGIES FOR GROUP WORK" | 105

20.

ANTHONY T. ATKINS'S ."COLLABORATING
ONLINE: DIGITAL STRATEGIES FOR GROUP
WORK"

   Writing Spaces Volume 1

                     Read the chapter "Collaborating Online: Digital Strategies for Group Work"

Group work is something students will encounter in the classroom and in their different professional spaces.
Often a dreaded task, group work requires team members to work together to accomplish a set of tasks and
to work collaboratively towards an end goal, which typically takes the form of a presentation. Atkins' chapter
aims to breakdown group work into steps in order to help students get started and get organized. Atkins
also provides a number of online and computer-based resources students can utilize in order to deviate from
the usual dynamic of group work and instead provide new ways of thinking and approaching group work.
According to Atkins, these tools can "increase participation in your group by changing attitudes about group
work" and "also alleviate the problems associated with face-to-face discussion-based meetings and facilitate
participation by all group members." Atkins also explores a step-by-step approach on how groups can take their
work and determine the kind of presentation appropriate for their project. This chapter aims to digitize the
group work dynamic in hopes of refreshing and recharging group members' enthusiasm about their projects.
106 | ANTHONY T. ATKINS'S ."COLLABORATING ONLINE: DIGITAL STRATEGIES FOR GROUP WORK"

MLA Citation Examples  "Group members should decide on
                         an exciting way to conduct and
                          complete group work. Using a
                          technology like a wiki, Google
                        Docs, or a blog (or even a social

                       networking site), can do more than
                        excite group members about the
                         project; it can also alleviate the

                             problems associated with
                         face-to-face discussion-based

                              meetings and facilitate
                             participation by all group

                                       members."

Works Cited

  Atkins, Anthony A. "Collaborating Online: Digital Strategies for Group Work." Writing Spaces:
  Readings on Writing Volume 1, edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky, Parlor Press, 2010,
   pp. 235-248

In-text citation

"Group members should decide on an exciting way to conduct and complete group work. Using a
technology like a wiki, Google Docs, or a blog (or even a social networking site), can do more than
excite group members about the project; it can also alleviate the problems assocaited with face-to-
face discussion-based meetings and facilitate participation by all group members" (243).

References

   Atkins, A.A. (2010). Collaborating Online: Digital Strategies for Group Work." In Charles Lowe and
  Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.), Writing spaces: readings on writing, vol. 1 (pp. 235-248). New York:
   Parlor Press.

In-text citation
                      ANTHONY T. ATKINS'S ."COLLABORATING ONLINE: DIGITAL STRATEGIES FOR GROUP WORK" | 107

"Group members should decide on an exciting way to conduct and complete group work. Using a
technology like a wiki, Google Docs, or a blog (or even a social networking site), can do more than
excite group members about the project; it can also alleviate the problems assocaited with face-to-
face discussion-based meetings and facilitate participation by all group members" (243).

Chicago Citation Examples

Bibliography
  Atkins, Anthony A. "Collaborating Online: Digital Strategies for Group Work," in Writing Spaces:
  Reading on Writing Volume 1, ed. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (New York: Parlor Press,
   2010), 235-248.

In-text citation
"Group members should decide on an exciting way to conduct and complete group work. Using a
technology like a wiki, Google Docs, or a blog (or even a social networking site), can do more than
excite group members about the project; it can also alleviate the problems assocaited with face-to-
face discussion-based meetings and facilitate participation by all group members" (243).
108 | ANTHONY T. ATKINS'S ."COLLABORATING ONLINE: DIGITAL STRATEGIES FOR GROUP WORK"

About the author

                                  Writing Spaces Volume 1

                                              PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                                              https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-1/
                                              https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 1 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Topics in Volume 1 of the series include academic writing, how to interpret writing assignments, motives
for writing, rhetorical analysis, revision, invention, writing centers, argumentation, narrative, reflective writing,
Wikipedia, patchwriting, collaboration, and genres.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
   Publication Information: Lowe, Charles, & Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.). (2010). Writing Spaces: Readings on
Writing, Volume 1. WrtingSpaces.org; Parlor Press; The WAC Clearinghouse. https://wac.colostate.edu/
books/writingspaces/writingspaces1/
   Publication Date: June 14, 2010
     CHRISTOPHER LEARY'S "COMPOSING THE ANTHOLOGY: AN EXERCISE IN PATCHWRITING" | 109

21.

CHRISTOPHER LEARY'S "COMPOSING THE
ANTHOLOGY: AN EXERCISE IN
PATCHWRITING"

   Writing Spaces Volume 1

                     Read the chapter "Composing the Anthology: An Exercise in Patchwriting"

Patchwriting, or the practice of taking words and sentences from the writings of different authors and combing
them together to create something new, is often associated with plagiarism and cheating. Christopher Leary,
however, outlines their experimentation with patchwriting and "found poetry" to find ways to refresh and
reflect upon writing. Leary argues that "One of the things you come to realize as a patchwriter is that the
shifting boundaries between writing, editing, and cheating are not problems you need to resolve, but rather
opportunities you can exploit." These sentiments extend to having students create anthologies of different
writers in their writing class. While the students are not actually doing the writing themselves, Leary suggests
that this exercise provides students with opportunities to engage with texts in unusual and new ways, reading
each carefully and meticulously curating their anthology based on how the different writings fit with one
another. This chapter provides composition students with a new way of thinking about how they engage with
the different texts they encounter in the classroom, as well as to rethink how those texts fit in with their own
goals as writers.
110 | CHRISTOPHER LEARY'S "COMPOSING THE ANTHOLOGY: AN EXERCISE IN PATCHWRITING"

                            "Patchwriting was a mode I
                        gravitated toward while studying

                          for a degree in English at Long
                           Island University in Brooklyn.
                       Underemployed, single, without the
                         kind of budget that would allow
                       me to really partake in New York's
                        `nightlife,' without any cable TV or
                       Internet access, I had, during much
                         of this time, nothing to entertain
                           myself in my bare apartment
                           except for a bookshelf full of

                                          books."

MLA Citation Examples

Works Cited

  Leary, Christopher. "Composing the Anthology: An Exercise in Patchwriting." Writing Spaces:
  Readings on Writing Volume 1, edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky, Parlor Press, 2010,
   pp. 225-234.

In-text citation

"Patchwriting was a mode I gravitated toward while studying for a degree in English at Long Island
University in Brooklyn. Underemployed, single, without the kind of budget that would allow me to
really partake in New York's `nightlife,' without any cable TV or Internet access, I had, during much
of this time, nothing to entertain myself in my bare apartment except for a bookshelf full of books"
(225-226).

References
   Leary, C. (2010). Composing the anthology: An exercise in patchwriting." In Charles Lowe and
                         CHRISTOPHER LEARY'S "COMPOSING THE ANTHOLOGY: AN EXERCISE IN PATCHWRITING" | 111

  Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.), Writing spaces: Readings on writing, vol. 1 (pp. 225-234). New York:
   Parlor Press.
In-text citation
"Patchwriting was a mode I gravitated toward while studying for a degree in English at Long Island
University in Brooklyn. Underemployed, single, without the kind of budget that would allow me to
really partake in New York's `nightlife,' without any cable TV or Internet access, I had, during much
of this time, nothing to entertain myself in my bare apartment except for a bookshelf full of books"
(225-226).

Chicago Citation Examples

Bibliography
  Leary, Christopher. "Composing the Anthology: An Exercise in Patchwriting," in Writing Spaces:
  Reading on Writing Volume 1, ed. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (New York: Parlor Press,
   2010), 225-234.

In-text citation
"Patchwriting was a mode I gravitated toward while studying for a degree in English at Long Island
University in Brooklyn. Underemployed, single, without the kind of budget that would allow me to
really partake in New York's `nightlife,' without any cable TV or Internet access, I had, during much
of this time, nothing to entertain myself in my bare apartment except for a bookshelf full of books"
(225-226).
112 | CHRISTOPHER LEARY'S "COMPOSING THE ANTHOLOGY: AN EXERCISE IN PATCHWRITING"

About the author

                                  Writing Spaces Volume 1

                                              PARLOR PRESS AND WAC CLEARINGHOUSE
                                              https://writingspaces.org/writing-spaces-volume-1/
                                              https://twitter.com/writing_spaces

Released in 2010, the first issue of Writing Spaces was edited by Drs. Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky.
In addition to the Writing Spaces Website, volume 1 can be accessed through WAC Clearinghouse, as well as
Parlor Press.

   From Parlor Press
   Topics in Volume 1 of the series include academic writing, how to interpret writing assignments, motives
for writing, rhetorical analysis, revision, invention, writing centers, argumentation, narrative, reflective writing,
Wikipedia, patchwriting, collaboration, and genres.
   From WAC Clearinghouse
   Charles Lowe is Assistant Professor of Writing at Grand Valley State University where he teachers
composition, professional writing, and Web design. Pavel Zemliansky is Associate Professor in the School of
Writing, Rhetoric, and Technical Communication at James Madison University.
   Publication Information: Lowe, Charles, & Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.). (2010). Writing Spaces: Readings on
Writing, Volume 1. WrtingSpaces.org; Parlor Press; The WAC Clearinghouse. https://wac.colostate.edu/
books/writingspaces/writingspaces1/
   Publication Date: June 14, 2010
                                                            APPENDIX | 113

This is where you can add appendices or other back matter.
