Building Cost Planning: Best Practices and
                        Insights
BUILDING COST PLANNING: BEST
PRACTICES AND INSIGHTS

DR THILINI JAYAWICKRAMA; DR RUCHINI JAYASINGHE; DR
RAVINDU KAHANDAWA; PROF RAMEEZ RAMEEZDEEN; DON
LEELARATHNE; AND DR INOKA WITHANA GAMAGE

University of South Australia
Building Cost Planning: Best Practices and Insights Copyright  2023 by Thilini Jayawickrama, Ruchini Jayasinghe, Ravindu
Kahandawa, Rameez Rameezdeen, Don Leelarathne and Inoka Withana Gamage is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Additionally, permission has been sought for the following content, which is specifically excluded from the Creative
Commons Attribution Non-Commercial 4.0 Licence of this work, and may not be reproduced under any
circumstances without the express written permission of the copyright holders:

   Australian Institute of Quantity Surveyors. (2022). Australian cost management manual (3rd ed.,
      Vol. 1). AIQS.

   QV. (2024). CostBuilder. https://costbuilder.qv.co.nz/
   Rawlinsons Quantity Surveyors. (2023). Rawlinsons construction cost guide 2023 (31st ed.).

      Rawlinsons Publishing.
   University of South Australia. (2018-20). Mawson Lakes Building MC floor plans. Retrieved 23 May

      2024, from http://web.archive.org/web/20240523055500/https://i.unisa.edu.au/staff/facilities/
      space-information/floor-plans/mawson-lakes/building-mc--mawson-centre/

Book cover image derived from Pexels under a Pexels licence.
CONTENTS

Acknowledgement of Peoples and Country                        vii

About the Authors                                             viii

Accessibility Statement                                       xii

Acknowledgements                                              xv

Main Content

Chapter 1: Construction Industry                              1

Chapter 2: Cost Management of Building Construction Projects  11

Chapter 3: Cost Planning Techniques                           24

Chapter 4: Building Cost Information (Data/indices)           35

Chapter 5: Cost Analysis                                      56

Chapter 6: Cost Planning Construction Projects                65

Chapter 7: Cost Planning Stages                               77

Chapter 8: Definitions/Terminology                            115

Appendix                                                      170

Review Statement                                              171

Versioning History                                            172
                                                                                 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PEOPLES AND COUNTRY | VII

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PEOPLES AND
COUNTRY

Kaurna, Boandik and Barngarla

We respectfully acknowledge the Kaurna, Boandik and Barngarla First Nations Peoples and their Elders
past and present, who are the First Nations' Traditional Owners of the lands that are now home to the
University of South Australia's campuses in Adelaide, Mount Gambier and Whyalla. We are honoured to
recognise our connection to the Kaurna, the Boandik and the Barngarla lands, and their history, culture
and spirituality through these locations, and we strive to ensure that we operate in a manner which respects
their Elders and ancestors. We also acknowledge the other First Nations of lands across Australia with
which we conduct business, their Elders, ancestors, cultures and heritage.

Mihi

Kei te mihi kau ake Te Kunenga ki Prehuroa
ki te mana whenua o teh ki a Ngti Whtua ki Kaipara
te takahanga o ng tpuna e t nei te papa ako
o Te Kunenga ki Prehuroa.
Mei kore ake te tautoko o Ngti Whtua
hei phiri mai i te tini tangata
i ng tini ahurea e tat mai nei
ki Te Raki Paewhenua ki te whai i te mtauranga.
VIII | ABOUT THE AUTHORS

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Dr Thilini Jayawickrama is a Senior Lecturer at the University of South Australia, Adelaide. She has
experience in teaching construction cost planning courses for Quantity Surveying and Construction
Management undergraduates in Sri Lanka and Australia. After graduating with BSc (Honours) in
Quantity Surveying from University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka, she completed her PhD at the National
University of Singapore. Currently, she is the Course Coordinator for the course Construction Cost
Planning at UniSA STEM, University of South Australia, Adelaide. She has taught this course for nearly 5
years at UniSA, including UniSA Online and UniSA STEM.
Read more

Similar cost planning courses were coordinated and taught by her for 3 years in her previous career as a
Senior Lecturer in the Department of Building Economics, University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka. During
this period, she has been invited and taught this course at the programs offered by other accredited Sri
Lankan higher education institutions as a visiting lecturer. She has worked as a Quantity Surveyor at a
major construction company in Dubai, United Arab Emirates for 4 years. The projects involved include a
major shopping centre and the Dubai Airport expansion project.

   Dr Jayawickrama has industry and/or academic experience with a range of international and regional
standard forms of contracts, standard documents for measurement of buildings and civil engineering
works and cost planning, including Sri Lankan, Singapore, United Kingdom and Australian standards. She
has also followed a `BIM Management' course conducted by the Building and Construction Authority
(BCA) in Singapore. She incorporates her skills and knowledge in cost management for the design and
development of course materials and teaching techniques, including the use of the CostX software
program.

Dr Ruchini Jayasinghe is an Online Course Facilitator for Quantity Surveying Practice and Construction
Cost Planning courses for the Construction Management degree program at UniSA Online, University of
South Australia. She has teaching experience in the Quantity Surveying and Construction Management
undergraduate degree programs at both Sri Lankan and Australian Universities and institutions. She
is well conversant with The Australian New Zealand Standard Method of Measurement (ANZSMM),
Australian Cost Management Manual (ACMM) and CostX and has also followed Standard Methods of
Measurement in different contexts (UK, Sri Lanka and Asutralia).
Read more

Dr Jayasinghe holds a BSc (Honours) in Quantity Surveying from the University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka
and completed her PhD at the University of South Australia. She worked as a Lecturer in the Department
of Building Economics at the University of Moratuwa and as a visiting lecturer at the Institute of Quantity
Surveyors Sri Lanka (IQSSL) for Higher National Diploma and Professional Level programs.
                                                                                                                           ABOUT THE AUTHORS | IX

Dr Ravindu Kahandawa is a Lecturer in Quantity Surveying in the School of Built Environment at
Massey University, New Zealand. He is also the course coordinator of measurement 1 and 3 courses for
Quantity Surveying and Construction Management undergraduates in the School of Built Environment
at Massey University, focusing on teaching Measurement practices using the ANZSMM 2018 and Costx.
He has designed and developed course content, including assessment materials for these courses. He is also
part of the academic committee in the School of Built Environment.
Read more

Dr Kahandawa graduated from the University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka with a BSc. (Honours) in Quantity
Surveying. He has completed his PhD in construction at Massey University. Dr Kahandawa holds a
diploma in Project Management from Project Management Solutions, Sri Lanka, and a professional
Graduate Diploma in Information Technology from the British Computer Society. He is an Associate
Fellow of the UK Professional Standard Framework for teaching and learning support in higher education.
He was a project team member and a collaborator of a research project on cost modelling Earthquake
Damage Repair Loss Estimation in New Zealand, which received a research grant from Massey University
Research Fund. He has authored several publications related to cost modelling with special reference to
Earthquake Damage Repair Loss Estimation in New Zealand.

   Dr Kahandawa is also involved in a research project for the Auckland Council on waste management
in housing construction projects. He has provided cost consultancy services at a Sri Lankan consultancy
company for projects in Sri Lanka and the Maldives. He has been working closely with professional
Quantity Surveyors in New Zealand for his research and teaching current cost planning practices.

Dr Rameez Rameezdeen is as a Professor in Construction and Project Management at the University
of South Australia, Adelaide. He has 30 years of experience in the construction industry and academia,
both nationally and internationally. His dedication to teaching and research in the quantity surveying and
cost planning disciplines over the past 3 decades is notable. He was the former Head of Department, and
Professor of Quantity Surveying at the Department of Building Economics, University of Moratuwa, Sri
Lanka. He has an excellent track record of research in construction management, having received over $4
million in research grants nationally and internationally. He has published 7 book chapters, more than 100
journal papers and over 50 peer-reviewed conference papers. He is a peer reviewer for over 20 international
journals and serves as a member of scientific committees for international conferences.
Read more

Dr Rameezdeen is actively engaged with local industries and communities in the built environment and
infrastructure, including SA Water, Master Builders SA, Construction Industry Training Board (CITB),
Mates in Construction, Sara Construction, Legatus Group of LGA, Forest & Wood Products Australia,
and Engineered Wood Products Association of Australasia, for partnership in research, as well as teaching
and learning. He is a Council member and UniSA representative of the Australasian Universities Building
Educators Association (AUBEA) and has contributed to shaping the teaching-research nexus within the
Australasian universities that offer construction management degrees. He has also contributed to enhance
online education in construction management as the Associate Dean Online Education at UniSA Online
X | ABOUT THE AUTHORS

to design, create and implement new online degree programs in Construction Management that have
gained huge success. He has been invited to serve on committees with work extending beyond research to
shape professional practice related to construction management.

   He is an Associate of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (UK) and Associate of the Australian
Institute of Quantity Surveyors (AIQS). He was a Member of the Board of Directors for the Construction
Industry Development Authority (CIDA), which as the construction industry regulator, functions under
the Ministry of Construction and Engineering Services of Sri Lanka. He was a Member of the Technical
Committee for the development of national standards in Sri Lanka, including Standard Methods of
Measurement for Building Work and Civil Engineering, Construction Cost Estimating Guidelines
(CIDA), and Construction Contractor Grading Criteria (CIDA). He has also been invited to be a part of
the Judges Panel for the annual National Awards for Construction Excellence by CIDA and to cater as the
Hon. Secretary of the Institute of Quantity Surveyors Sri Lanka (IQSSL).

Mr Don Leelarathne has 20 years' major project experience, having worked in Australia, the Middle
East and Sri Lanka. Currently, he serves as a Director of the Project Cost Management Group (PCMG),
Victoria, Australia. His expertise includes Capital and Recurrent Cost Planning, Feasibility Studies, Bills
of Quantities, Procurement Selection, Value Management, Tax Depreciation, Bank Reports and Contract
Administration. His sector experience includes Research Facilities, Hospitality, Healthcare, Education,
Commercial, Mixed Use and Residential Developments. He specialises in the areas of Cost Planning and
Feasibility Studies for large scale commercial projects.
Read more

Mr Leelarathne has also been involved in major PPP projects in Australia, mainly in the Health, Education
and Research sectors. Victorian Integrated Cancer Care Centre and National Bio Research Centre are
recent projects he has been involved in under PPP procurement. He is a Fellow Member of the Australian
Institute of Quantity Surveyors (FAIQS) and a Member of the International Cost Engineers Council of
Australia (ICECA) and a Fellow Member of the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors (FRICS). He is
also a Registered Building Practitioner with the Building Practitioner Board Victoria and a Registered
Tax Practitioner (QS) with the Tax Practitioners Board, Australia. He extends his industry expertise to
cater to professional development bodies and academic institutions in various capacities. He is the current
Councillor and APC Chairman of the Victorian and Tasman chapter of the Australian Institute of
Quantity Surveyors, an APC Assessment Panel Member of the RICS and a Quantity Surveyor Registration
Assessor for the Victorian Building Authority. Mr Leelarathne is also a Guest Lecturer at the University of
Melbourne and RMIT University in Cost Management courses.

Dr Inoka Withana Gamage is a Senior Associate Contracts Manager at Jacobs, New Zealand, with over
2 decades of experience in Quantity Surveying, commercial management, and program governance. He is
a Chartered Quantity Surveyor and a member of NZIQS, RICS, and IQSSL, and has worked in several
countries, including New Zealand, the United Kingdom, Qatar and Sri Lanka.
Read more
                                                                                                                           ABOUT THE AUTHORS | XI

Dr Gamage's areas of expertise include Quantity Surveying, Commercial Management, Procurement &
Contracts, Program Governance, and Sustainability. He is also an accomplished researcher, with a focus on
Procurement & Contracts, Waste, and Sustainability. He earned his doctoral degree from Loughborough
University, United Kingdom, and completed his Quantity Surveying degree with first class honours at the
University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka.

   Dr Gamage is highly respected in the field of Quantity Surveying and Commercial Management, known
for his exceptional skills in managing complex projects. He has made significant contributions to the
industry and continues to inspire and benefit his colleagues.
XII | ACCESSIBILITY STATEMENT

ACCESSIBILITY STATEMENT

The University of South Australia is committed to promoting equal opportunity in education and aspires
to create an inclusive and equitable environment that supports full access and participation in all aspects
of university life. This includes supporting the creation of free, open, and accessible educational resources.
We are actively committed to increasing the accessibility and usability of the textbooks we produce.

Accessibility of this resource

The web version of this resource Building Cost Planning: Best Practices and Insights has been designed to
meet Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, level AA. In addition, it follows all guidelines in Appendix
A: Checklist for Accessibility of the Accessibility Toolkit - 2nd Edition. It includes:

   Easy navigation. This resource has a linked table of contents and uses headings in each chapter to
      make navigation easy.

   Accessible images. All images in this resource that convey information have alternative text. Images
      that are decorative have empty alternative text.

   Accessible links. All links use descriptive link text.
                                                                          ACCESSIBILITY STATEMENT | XIII

Accessibility checklist

Element Requirements                                                                                                                 Pass?
                                                                                                                                     Y
Headings Content is organised under headings and subheadings that are used sequentially.                                             Y
                                                                                                                                     Y
Images  Images that convey information include alternative text descriptions. These descriptions are
        provided in the alt text field, in the surrounding text, or linked to as a long description.                                 Y

Images Images and text do not rely on colour to convey information.                                                                  Y
                                                                                                                                     Y
Images  Images that are purely decorative or are already described in the surrounding text contain                                   Y
        empty alternative text descriptions. (Descriptive text is unnecessary if the image doesn't convey                            Y
        contextual content information.)                                                                                             Y
                                                                                                                                     Y
Tables Tables include row and/or column headers that have the correct scope assigned.                                                Y
                                                                                                                                     N/A
Tables Tables include a title or caption.
                                                                                                                                     N/A
Tables Tables do not have merged or split cells.                                                                                     N/A
                                                                                                                                     Y
Tables Tables have adequate cell padding.
                                                                                                                                     N/A
Links The link text describes the destination of the link.                                                                           N/A
                                                                                                                                     N/A
Links   Links do not open new windows or tabs. If they do, a textual reference is included in the link                               Y
        text.                                                                                                                        Y
                                                                                                                                     Y
Links Links to files include the file type in the link text.

Audio   All audio content includes a transcript that includes all speech content and relevant
        descriptions of non-speech audio and speaker names/headings where necessary.

Video   All videos include high-quality (i.e. not machine generated) captions of all speech content and
        relevant non-speech content.

Video All videos with contextual visuals (graphs, charts, etc.) are described audibly in the video.

H5P All H5P activities have been tested for accessibility by the H5P team and have passed their testing.

H5P All H5P activities that include images, videos, and/or audio content meet the accessibility requirements for those media types.

Formulas Formulas have been created using LaTeX and are rendered with MathJax.

Formulas If LaTeX is not an option, formulas are images with alternative text descriptions.

Font    Font size is 12 point or higher for body text.

Font    Font size is 9 point for footnotes or endnotes.

Font    Font size can be zoomed to 200% in the webbook or ebook formats.

Known accessibility issues and areas for improvement

There are currently no known accessibility issues.
XIV | ACCESSIBILITY STATEMENT

Let us know if you are having problems accessing this
book

We are always looking for ways to make our resources more accessible. If you have problems accessing this
resource, please contact us to let us know so we can fix the issue.

   Please include the following information:

   Name of the resource
   Location of the problem by providing a web address or page description
   Description of the problem
   The computer, software, browser, and any assistive technology you are using that can help us

      diagnose and solve your issue (e.g. Windows 10, Google Chrome (Version 65.0.3325.181), NVDA
      screen reader)

Contact us via Ask the Library: https://ask.library.unisa.edu.au
   This statement was last updated on Friday 24 May 2024.
   The Accessibility Checklist table was adapted from one originally created by the Rebus Community and

shared under a CC BY 4.0 licence.
                  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS | XV

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

  A note of thanks and acknowledgement is given to the Open Educational Resources
Collective, a Council of Australian University Librarians initiative, for their generous grant

                                 towards the creation of this resource.
XVI | ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
                                                                                                    CHAPTER 1: CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY | 1

CHAPTER 1: CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY

1.0 Introduction

The construction industry is vast and unique compared to other industries, such as manufacturing. This
chapter introduces the construction industry in general, including its nature and key stakeholders. The
industry deals with different types of construction, including buildings and infrastructure. The chapter
expands its focus on the building sector among various construction sectors. It provides a closer view of
the Australian and New Zealand building construction, where the cost planning activities in this book are
focused.

1.1 Overview of the construction industry

The construction industry encompasses construction, demolition, renovation, maintenance, and repair
of building and civil engineering works, including various associated services ranging from planning,
designing, controlling and managing. The construction industry inherits unique characteristics, given its
nature.

1.1.1 Construction industry characteristics

The construction industry is heterogeneous, which means each product/type is customised. Construction
projects involve a huge range of inputs, including materials, labour, plant and equipment. They are also
affected by a range of other factors, such as site conditions and market conditions. The industry is also
fragmented, where raw materials, suppliers, manufacturing plants and construction sites are scattered
across the globe. Even though the construction industry can be characterised as unique, complex, high cost,
and high risk, which complicates innovations, the industry flourisheswith technological advancements
and impressive achievements across the globe, including stunning cityscapes, skyscrapers, massive
infrastructure and sustainable construction every day. Its pragmatic, resilient and responsive characteristics
enable rebuilding the industry for steady and rapid growth amid disruptions from disasters such as the
COVID-19 pandemic and natural hazards.

1.1.2 Stakeholders in construction

The construction industry consists of a range of internal and external stakeholders. They can also be
known as direct and indirect stakeholders. This categorisation can be varied based on the nature of the
construction project and its type of contract. Key direct internal stakeholders in a construction project are
2 | CHAPTER 1: CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY

the client, contractor/builder and consultant. Subcontractors and suppliers are also categorised as direct
stakeholders. Some examples of indirect stakeholders are local, state and federal government departments
and agencies, local communities, financing entities, industry associations and advocacy groups. The end
users are considered indirect stakeholders in typical projects, who ultimately use or occupy the building or
infrastructure. A few examples are employees who work in a new office building and drivers who use a new
highway. However, their needs are important considerations for a construction project.

Interesting facts

      In some projects, `end users' can be considered direct stakeholders. For example, in
        large mixed development projects where different spaces are leased to various end
        users, interior fit-outs are designed and installed as per the requirements of those
        end users. There can be individual interior fit-out projects within the large
        development where end users become direct stakeholders.

      The government is an indirect stakeholder in typical private sector projects, but the
        government will be the client for many public sector projects.

The roles and significance of key direct internal stakeholders are discussed in this section and will be
referred to throughout the book.

   Client

 The client is the initiator                        Note: In Australian and New
   and the owner of the                              Zealand Standard Forms of
   project.                       Contracts, the client is referred to as `Principal'.

 The government is often         (Standards Australia, 1997; Standards New Zealand,
   known as the biggest           2023).
   client in a country.

 An individual or an
   organisation can act as a
   client in the private sector.
                                                           CHAPTER 1: CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY | 3

                                                           Contractor

                         Note: The contractor carries out   The contractor will have a
                         the actual construction. In this     binding agreement with
part of the world, the term `Builder' is used                 the client to physically
interchangeably with the term `Contractor'.                   execute the project.

                                                            A contractor can be an
                                                              individual, an organisation,
                                                              or a collection of
                                                              organisations.

                                                           Consultant

                                                            The consultant is

                                                           appointed by the client as

                                                           the client's representative.

                                                            Consultants are

                      Note: In different parts of the      professionals who provide
                      world, Standard Forms of Contracts   expert advice and
refer to the client's representative using different       administer the project,
terms:                                                     ensuring the project is
                                                           delivered according to the

 `Superintendent' in the `Standards Australia'            client's requirements and

Forms of Contracts (AS 4000-1997)                          project specifications.

 `Standards New Zealand' Forms of Contracts

(NZS 3910: 2023) specifies 2 roles - `Contract

Administrator' as the client's representative

and `Independent Certifier' as the neutral party

 `Engineer' in the International Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC)

Construction Contract (2nd ed., 2017 Red Book, reprinted 2022 with amendments)
4 | CHAPTER 1: CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY

       The client may engage one or more consultants in different project stages depending on the
       project's complexity and requirements.
       Professional consultants can be Project Managers, Architects, Engineers, Surveyors, Cost
       Managers and Legal Advisors.

1.1.3 Economics in construction industry

The construction industry is one of the major industries which significantly contributes to a nation's
economy. According to Research and Markets (2022), the expected growth in the global construction
industry is estimated as $10.5 trillion by 2023 and the growth rate is 4.2% from 2018 to 2023, where
the largest share of the growth takes place in China and Asia-Pacific region (Craig, 2022). The global
construction industry market is expected to grow at a rate of 9.8% until 2026 (The Business Research
Company, 2022).

1.2 The construction industry in Australia and New
Zealand

Australia and New Zealand are unique in their construction industry characteristics. This section provides
some country-specific information, including industry contributions to countries' economies, professional
bodies and industry standards.

1.2.1 Australian construction industry

The construction industry is one of the fastest growing industries in Australia with a significant influence
on the country's economy. The Australian construction industry contributes to 9% of country's gross
domestic product (GDP), with an annual growth rate of 2.4% projected from 2022 to 2027 (Parker Brent,
2022).

According to Australian Construction Industry Forum (ACIF) 2022 updates, the industry has been
attaining a rapid recovery with unexcepted industry growth after the significant disruptions faced during
the pandemic.

1.2.2 New Zealand construction industry

The construction industry plays a major role in New Zealand's national economy. According to the
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (2023) [PDF], the construction sector accounted for
                                                                                                   CHAPTER 1: CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY | 5

6.7% of GDP in 2022, with a 4.3% growth rate over the last few decades. A comparison of the GDP growth
of total industries and construction in New Zealand can be seen in Figure 1.1.

Figure 1.1: Seasonally adjusted quarterly GDP indices, created from data provided by Statistics New
Zealand (2022), licensed under a CC BY 4.0 International licence.

      Interesting facts

       In Australia and New Zealand, a larger percentage of construction businesses consist of
       small traders. For example, small traders account for 98% of the Australian construction

      industry (Master Builders Australia, 2021), and in New Zealand, 94% of construction-
      related enterprises have less than 10 employees (Statistics New Zealand, 2022).

1.2.3 Professional bodies

Professional bodies provide leadership and guidance related to a profession in an industry. These can
be professional regulatory bodies, and other bodies such as professional associations each serve different
functions. Regulatory bodies have the legal authority to enforce laws and regulations related to a particular
industry or profession. They act with the intent of protecting the public interest. However, professional
associations act with the intent of serving the interests of their members. Professional bodies promote
the professional development of the respective professions in the construction industry and establish
professional standards for technical and ethical competence. These bodies also contribute to educating and
6 | CHAPTER 1: CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY

developing the skills of professionals, thereby ensuring that the professionals' contribution to the industry
is up to the acceptable level to meet the industry requirements.

   Some professional bodies in Australia and New Zealand are introduced in this section.

Australia

Standards Australia
   Standards Australia is Australia's leading standards organisation, which represents the International

Standards Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).
This organisation aims to establish standards, engage in the creation and acceptance of various
international standards, and evaluate and sanction other entities to formulate Australian standards.

   Australian Building Codes Board (ABCB)
   ABCB is a standard writing body responsible for the National Construction Code (NCC), WaterMark
and CodeMark Certification Schemes, and regulatory reform in the construction industry. It ensures safe
and sustainable building and plumbing industries through regulatory and non-regulatory measures.
   Master Builders Australia
   Master Builders Australia is a national body which represents the interests, viewpoints and
contributions of all sectors in the construction industry, to promote best practices in building and
construction.
   Australian Institute of Building (AIB)
   AIB promotes excellence in the construction industry through education, training and professional
development of construction managers and other professionals involved in the building and construction
industry.
   Royal Australian Institute of Architects (RAIA)
   RAIA promotes excellence in architecture through education, training and professional development of
architects in Australia.
   Australian Institute of Quantity Surveyors (AIQS)
   AIQS is a peak professional body which sets standards, codes and ethics and provides education for
professionals working in the fields of cost planning, quantity surveying, cost estimating, contracts
administration and construction management.
   Engineers Australia
   Engineers Australia is responsible for setting standards for engineering education and professional
practice. It provides accreditation for engineering education programs.
   Green Building Council of Australia (GBCA)
   GBCA is a non-profit organisation established to lead and promote the sustainable transformation and
environmental practices of the built environment. GBCA developed the Green Star rating system, which
is a voluntary certification program that measures the sustainability of buildings and developments.

New Zealand

Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment (MBIE)
                                                                                                   CHAPTER 1: CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY | 7

   MBIE is a New Zealand ministry focused on growing New Zealand's economy and businesses,
improving government policy, providing public services, creating regulations and sharing advice.

   Standards New Zealand
   Standards New Zealand supports creating standards, codes and practices for products and services. This
organisation also created different types of Standard Forms of Contracts for buildings and civil engineering
construction such as NZS 3910:2023, NZS 3917:2013, NZS 3915:2005.
   New Zealand Institute of Building (NZIOB)
   New Zealand Institute of Building is a charitable trust representing the construction industry in order
to improve its performance, research, innovation and development of individual professionals.
   New Zealand Institute of Quantity Surveyors (NZIQS)
   NZIQS regulates and supports professional development of members such as quantity surveyors,
estimators and cost managers.
   New Zealand Institute of Architects (NZIA)
   This organisation represents most of the registered architects and promotes architecture in New
Zealand.
   Building Research Association of New Zealand (BRANZ)
   Building Research Association of New Zealand is a science-led organisation. It was set up under the
Building Research Levy Act in 1969 to support research to create a building system that delivers better
outcomes for all.
   Master Builders
   This organisation represents builder firms and advocates for standards for construction trade practices
in New Zealand.
   Association of Consulting and Engineering
   This non-profit membership organisation aims to support consultants as a collective group, improve
preparedness and uphold the professionalism of consultancy firms.
   New Zealand Green Building Council (NZGBC)
   This is a non-profit organisation dedicated to improving the use of green building practices in the
construction industry.
   Engineering New Zealand
   Engineering New Zealand is a non-profit membership association. It is dedicated to promoting the
interests of engineers and engineering professionals by actively engaging in relevant discussions and
representing its members' viewpoints on current matters.
   Masterspec
   Masterspec supports design practices by providing specification systems for New Zealand's construction
industry.
   Site Safe New Zealand
   This organisation supports maintaining health and safety in construction and high-risk industries
through research, training, consultancy and auditing services.
8 | CHAPTER 1: CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY

1.2.4 Standards

Standards are formulated by groups of experts in order to codify best practices, methods and technical
requirements of an industry. Standards help maintain professional and public interests.

Australia

National Construction Code (NCC) is Australia's primary standard that provides guidelines for the
technical design and construction provisions of buildings. NCC encompasses minimum performance
requirements that should be fulfilled when constructing buildings in relation to the structure, fire safety,
access and energy efficiency, health and amenity, etc. All buildings in Australia should comply with the
requirements mentioned in NCC.

   Australian Standards (AS) is a set of voluntary documents developed and maintained by Standards
Australia, that consists of specifications, procedures and guidelines for the Australian Construction
industry. They have developed Standards Forms of Contracts for building and construction such as AS
4000-1997 General Conditions of Contract and AS 4902-2000 General Conditions of Contract for
Design and Construct (D&C). Some examples of other industry standards are AS/NZS 1170: Structural
design actions; AS/NZS 3500: Plumbing and drainage and AS/NZS 3000: Electrical installations.

New Zealand

In New Zealand, all work related to buildings must comply with the New Zealand Building Code. These
codes help maintain the safety, health and durability of the occupants and users. The building code is
enforced by the Building Act 2004. Building consent authorities assess the plans and specifications and
check if they comply with the building code. When building consent authorities are satisfied that the
proposed building meets the regulations, building consent is given. The building consent confirms that
the building plans meet building code requirements (Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment,
2023).

   Construction projects in New Zealand should also comply with Standards New Zealand like
Construction Contracts Act 2002, Building Regulations Act 1992, and Construction Contracts
Amendment Act 2015.

      Interesting facts

       There are other guidelines and manuals published by professional bodies to guide industry
       best practices.
       For example, the Australian Cost Management Manual (ACMM) has been published by the
                                                                                                   CHAPTER 1: CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY | 9

       AIQS and endorsed by the Australasian Procurement and Construction Council Inc. (APCC)
       for cost management practices in construction projects. Similarly, the NZIQS has published
       an elemental analysis of the costs of building projects.
       Currently, Australian and New Zealand professional bodies are working in collaboration to
       publish industry guidelines. For example, a strategic alliance between Australian and New
       Zealand professional bodies has published the Australian and New Zealand Standard
       Method of Measurement of Building Works (ANZSMM) and Australia and New Zealand
       Building Information Modelling (BIM) Best Practice Guidelines.

1.3 Building sector

According to the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of United Nations (2008), buildings are
one of the complete products in the construction industry. Among different types of construction, the
scope and the purpose of a building are mainly human occupancy, in contrast to a non-building which is a
structure developed for other purposes. Buildings are predominately categorised as `residential' and `non-
residential'. The scope of building projects varies from a single-storey residential dwelling/commercial
warehouse to a skyscraper.

   According to The Business Research Company (2022),the building sector acquires a major portion of
the global construction market, accounting for 48.1% of the total market in 2022. Development of the
building sector has been promising, with a 10.6% growth rate predicted from 2021-2026.

   Reflection task

     Consider the following questions to review what you have learned in this chapter.
         1. Which different forms of contracts mentioned in this chapter did you already know
             about? What new ones did you learn?
         2. What are the similarities and differences in the construction sector that you can identify
             in both countries under the following topics?
                   size of the industry
10 | CHAPTER 1: CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY

                   professional organisations
                   standards.

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
        https://oercollective.caul.edu.au/building-cost-planning/?p=55#h5p-3
                                               CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS | 11

CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

2.0 Introduction

This chapter provides an overview of the concept of cost management and highlights the importance of
cost planning in building projects. The chapter starts by identifying the goals of a construction project.
The chapter then clearly defines the terms `price', `cost' and `value' and highlights that each term has its
own attributes in understanding the concepts in cost management. It also defines the term `Budget' as
the most common and important aspect of cost planning. Then the chapter briefly discusses the cost
management process across different phases of a construction project. The chapter also briefly explains
different procurement methods that can vary some activities in the cost management process.

2.1 Goals of a construction project

The client's primary objectives for a construction project are to obtain the final product within the agreed
cost, time, and quality targets. These objectives are interconnected and are clear benchmarks to judge a
project's success or failure. The relationships of these objectives can be illustrated in a triangle, often called
the `golden triangle in construction`. These 3 objectives are illustrated and explained in Figures 2.1a
and 2.1b.
12 | CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

  Figure 2.1a: Golden triangle in a construction project (Source: Created with reference to Yu et al.,
  2006)

Figure 2.1b: Cost, time and quality: Objectives of a construction project (Source: Created with reference
to Yu et al., 2006)

Clients do not have unlimited funds or time to achieve high-quality construction fulfilling their needs.
Therefore, a construction project requires estimated time and cost limits when achieving the quality
requirements, so the project is considered within the client's acceptable limits. There are trade-offs between
                                               CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS | 13

3 objectives and the client can attain value for money in a project by balancing time, cost and quality.
However, achieving these 3 objectives simultaneously is not a simple task and is known to be very complex.

    Scenario: Balancing time, cost, and quality

           If a client wants to reduce construction time, it can be done by increasing the
             number of labourers and machinery in work. This will increase the cost of the

            work. However, new construction methods and technologies can
            be introduced to reduce the cost.

           Structural integrity is a must for a quality project and cannot be compromised by cost
             savings. If so, it will result in safety issues, and high maintenance costs. Using some
             economically advanced technologies could potentially change the specifications and
             provide an economically sound and effective structural design without
             compromising quality.

           The workmanship required for fine arts or finishes such as cornices, architraves, and
             other decorative elements consumes a considerable amount of time. The quality of
             these elements cannot be compromised due to the time required. However, by using
             precast elements instead of in-situ construction, time savings are possible.

Each resource used in a construction project carries a cost. The client is financing the project and the
amount of money that the client has allocated or can afford for a project is known as the client's `budget'.
The rule of thumb is not to exceed the client's budget. Hence, the cost can be identified as the governing
factor of time and quality of construction.

2.2 `Price', `cost', `value' and `budget'

Price, cost, value and budget are common terms when costing a construction project and sometimes are
used interchangeably. However, each of these terminologies carries a different meaning in the construction
industry. The difference occurs based on the client's and contractor's perspectives (see Figure 2.2). The
contractor's cost is all expenses incurred by the contractor for a given project. After adding the contractor's
profit to this cost, it becomes the client's cost. This is known as the price that the client pays to the
contractor. In cost planning, cost means the price to the client and it can include other costs to the client
and goods and services tax (GST). The budget is what is available to spend for a project. Therefore, the cost
to the client (price) should not exceed the client's budget. In the cost planning process, the design may need
to be refined to maintain the cost within the `budget'.
14 | CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

                                                                                                               Figure 2.2:
                                                                                                               Relationship
                                                                                                               between cost and
                                                                                                               price, by
                                                                                                               Jayawickrama, T.,
                                                                                                               Jayasinghe, R. &
                                                                                                               Kahandawa, R.,
                                                                                                               licensed under
                                                                                                               a CC BY-NC 4.0
                                                                                                               licence.

A project budget can be determined based on the availability of funds.
   For public sector projects, government agencies set a project budget based on a master plan and

budgetary allocation per financial year.

    Scenario: State government budget

     The below is an example of a state government in Australia announcing the budget allocated
     for a hospital project. The project's cost planning should be undertaken within this announced
     budget.

             `The Victorian Government is investing $595 million to redevelop and expand
             the Ballarat Base Hospital.
             The redevelopment will deliver a new emergency department, a women and children's
             hub, state-of-the-art theatre suite and an extra 100 inpatient and short stay beds. A new
             and expanded critical care floor will bring together operating theatres, procedure rooms,
             an expanded intensive care unit, endoscopy suites and consulting rooms. This will deliver
             capacity for an additional 4,000 surgeries every year. Once completed, the upgraded
             hospital will have the capacity to treat at least 18,000 more emergency patients and an
             extra 14,500 inpatients per year.'

                      -- Victorian Health Building Authority, 2024)
     Private sector project budgets depend on financial capacity and lending capacity approved by
     lending agencies (i.e. banks).

Compared to `price' ,'cost' and `budget', `value' is a subjective term. Value is the perceived benefits or worth
of construction to the client. Value of a construction project can be considered in terms of economic,
                                               CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS | 15

social, environmental, political, aesthetic, moral and other factors. A commonly used term is the `economic
value' of the construction project. If the final project exceeds the client's expectations at the minimum
possible cost, then the maximum economic value can be attained.

2.3 What is cost management?

As explained in Chapter 1, construction projects are unique and complex in nature. Construction projects
involve many resources and long durations compared to other industries which require careful
management of cost.

       Cost management: Definitions
       `The technique(s) used for managing the cost of a project from brief to final account.'

                -- AIQS (2022, p. 4)
       `Cost management of a project includes establishing the budget and then effectively
       monitoring and reporting against that budget on a regular basis, cost planning the evolving
       design, preparing appropriate contract documentation and advising on variations and claims
       during the progress of the project.'

                -- AIQS (2012, p. 11)
       Cost management for a general project is `the processes involved in planning, estimating,
       budgeting, financing, funding, managing, and controlling costs so that the project can be
       completed within the approved budget'.

                -- Project Management Institute (2017, p. 231)
       Cost management items related to the Quantity Surveyor's role include `managing finances
       of any kind of project, keep work within time, and estimated budget; efficiently manage
       construction cost and production'.

                -- NZIQS (2023)

Based on these definitions, it is understood that cost management is a series of actions implemented in
managing the cost of a project in different stages of the construction project, rather than a one-off activity.
Therefore, we can simply say that cost management is a process of managing the cost of a project
throughout the project's life cycle. This process is usually explained throughout different stages of a
project's life cycle. Cost management might also be called `cost engineering' in some countries.
16 | CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

2.3.1 Project stages

Different countries and regions follow standard documents or manuals providing categorisation of project
stages and functions of each stage.

Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) Plan of Work

RIBA is a global professional body in architecture originated in UK. RIBA Plan of Work is a globally
known framework that organises the process of managing building projects and administering building
contracts. This framework is also followed by cost managers in the UK construction industry and most
other countries in their cost management process. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) has
adopted the RIBA Plan of Work in their standards related to the cost management processes and presented
in RICS New Rules of Measurement (2021).

OGC (Office of Government Commerce) Gateway Process

The OGC Gateway Process is an alternative to the RIBA Plan of Work by the Office of Government
Commerce in UK. Some UK government departments and public sector organisations adopt this
framework for designing and managing building projects.

Australian Cost Management Manuals (ACMM)

Australian Cost Management Manuals consist of a series of manuals published by the AIQS and endorsed
by APCC for cost management of the construction process. They organise the cost management activities
throughout a construction project following its stages.

New Zealand Construction Industry Council (NZCIC) Design Guidelines

NZCIC is a not-for-profit industry association of building, construction and property sector associations.
Concerning the poor documentation prevailed in the New Zealand building industry, a committee
endorsed by the NZCIC drafted the Design Guidelines. This document specifies the design process of
`building' projects in New Zealand providing general checklists and benchmarks.

Comparison of cost management stages in standard documents

Despite region-specific differences in terms, the standard documents mentioned in this section generally
cover the key stages in the life cycle of a construction project. Table 2.1 compares the cost management
stages as given in standard documents in UK, Australia and New Zealand.
                         CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS | 17

Table 2.1: Cost management stages in standard documents (Source: Adapted from New Rules of
  Measurements 1 (RICS, 2021), Design Guidelines (NZCIC, 2022) and ACMM (AIQS, 2022)

             Royal Institute         Royal         Office of        New Zealand       Australian
                of British      Institution of   Government         Construction          Cost
               Architects:                        Commerce
                                  Chartered                           Industry       Management
              Plan of Work        Surveyors:        (OGC)              Council          Manual
                   2020         New Rules of
                               Measurement 1

                                    (2021)

             Strategic Rough order of Business Definition (0) cost estimate Justification (1) - -

Pre-design                     Order of cost     Delivery
                               estimate(s)       Strategy (2)
             Preparation and   (option costs)                       Project          Brief (A)
             Brief (1)                           Design Brief and   establishment
                               Elemental cost    Concept                             Outline
             Concept Design    estimate          Approval (3A)      Concept Design   Proposals (B)
             (2)
                               Formal cost plan
                               1

             - - - Preliminary Design -

             Spatial           Formal cost plan 2 Detailed Design   Developed        Sketch Design
             Coordination                            Approval (3B)  Design           (C)
             (3)

             Technical         Formal cost plan                     Detailed Design Documentation (D)
             Design (4)        3

Design                         Pre-tender
                               estimate
Handover
In use       Contractor        Pricing           Investment         Procurement Tender (E)
End of life  Engagement        documents (for    Decision (3C)
             (part of the      obtaining tender
             technical design  prices)
             stage) (4)
                                  Post-tender
             Manufacturing     estimate
             and
             Construction      -                                    Construction
             (5)                                                    Adminstration
                                                                    and Observation  Construction
             Handover (6)                                                            (F)
                                                                    Post
             In use (7)        Formal cost plan  Readiness for      Completion
                               (renew/           Service (4)
                     -         maintain)

                               (Measured in      Operations         -                -
                               accordance with   Review and
                               NRM 3)            Benefits
                                                 Realisation (5)

                               -                 -                  -                -
18 | CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

Despite the level of comprehensiveness, different terminologies and different approaches to categorising
project stages, the key project stages found in these standard documents are Pre-Design, Design,
Construction, Handover, In Use and End of Life. Each stage will be briefly discussed hereinafter.

Pre-design stage/s

Pre-design stage/s provide the project set-up and involve actions before the actual design starts. Client's
requirements are communicated in this phase. NZCIC Design Guidelines and the ACMM cover pre-
design activities in a single stage. In contrast, RIBA Plan of Work and RICS standard documents cover
those in 2 stages. OGC Gateways standard, on the other hand, includes three stages for the pre-design
activities, in which the third stage finalises the pre-design stage and continues to the design stage.

Design

Despite different terminologies, all these standard documents show similar categorisations of design stages,
except the NZCIC guidelines having a separate stage for preliminary design and the OGC Gateways
standard having 3 stages starting from pre-design and also covering the construction stage. The design
stages include vital activities in the pre-construction phase in which the design is developed from concept/
outline designs to detailed designs. The actual design development can involve several stages until the
design is finalised and lead to complete documentation for tender, concluding most of the activities in the
pre-construction phase.

Construction

Construction is usually covered through a single stage. Since RICS standard documents focus on cost
estimating and planning which are pre-construction cost management activities, they do not mention
the construction stage. Yet, the ACMM covers the cost management process and, hence, includes the
construction stage.

Handover, In Use and End of Life

RIBA, RICS, OGC Gateways and NZCIC standards contain a separate stage for handover. NZCIC and
ACMM do not contain an in use stage. Even though the construction industry practices require whole life
cycle costing, including end-of-life work, none of these standards contain this stage yet.

       Note: This book follows the cost management stages given in ACMM and NZCIC.
       The steps in this section are mostly aligned with the six stages from Stage A to Stage F,
                                               CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS | 19

       presented in the ACMM (Volume 1) cost management line diagram. The line diagram shows
       the cost management activities carried out in each stage and the output which will be
       documented and presented to the client.
       This line diagram is presented in the Appendix of this book and will be referred to
       throughout the book.

2.3.2 Cost management process activities

This section covers major steps in the cost management process.

Cost budgeting

According to the ACMM Volume 1 (2022, pp. 4) `cost budgeting is a method of arriving at the sum of
money within which it is expected that the project will be cost planned'. This activity is done at the very
beginning of the cost management process to establish the initial budget. Generally, the project design team
is responsible for establishing the budget.

Cost planning

The ACMM Volume 1 (2022, p. 4) defines cost planning as:

              a systematic application of Cost Management to the design process between Brief Stage Cost and
              pre-tender estimate with the purpose of establishing, regulating and reconciling the Project Cost.

Cost planning is not a one-off activity, but a process carried out through the pre-construction cost
management stages in line with the design development stages to identify the costs of a construction
project. Therefore, different cost planning techniques are used at each stage based on the availability of
design details and project information in each stage. At the initial stages, the budget can be expressed as
a range due to lack of certainty and will become more accurate with more details in the later stages. Cost
planning helps a project achieve acceptable value for money, valuing project risks by creating budgets and
cost plans, comparing costs of different alternatives, and controlling the budget throughout the project.

   Client's quantity surveyor/cost planner carries out the cost planning activities. However, it needs the
continuous involvement of the project design team and other consultants (i.e. services engineers) to provide
relevant details and cost components to update the cost plan with the design development.
20 | CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

       Note: Cost planning is the focus of this textbook and will be discussed in later chapters
       along with different cost planning stages.

Tendering

After the design development and cost planning processes, documentation will be completed and the
tendering will take place to select the contractor/builder to carry out the construction work. The process
is also known as `bidding' and the competitive contractors/builders will be referred to as `tenderers' or
`bidders'.

   This process generally involves:

 1. developing tender documents
 2. calling tenders, or inviting preselected bidders
 3. contractors filling the bidding documents together with the estimate developed by the contractor's/

      builder's estimator (providing the price offered)
        a. bidders visiting the site
       b. providing additional information to contractor queries

 4. bidders submitting completed bidding documents for evaluation
 5. evaluating the bidding documentation by client's team and selecting the suitable contractor
 6. final negotiations and signing the contract.

However, there are variants based on the procurement method and types of contracts such as selecting the
contractor and negotiating the contract later.

Cost estimating

Cost estimating should not be misunderstood with cost planning. The term `estimating' is used
interchangeably during cost planning but mostly refers to the pricing of a project by the contractor's/
builder's estimator to submit as a part of bidding documents.

Cost controlling

Construction projects are unique and complex in nature and involve many uncertainties. Therefore,
variations are common in construction projects due to various reasons including changes to client's needs
and unforeseeable circumstances. These will impact the project time, cost and quality. After an initial
budget has been developed and accepted, cost controlling process would apply for a project. Cost control
processes are applied to keep the final cost of the project within the acceptable cost ranges. With the
progression of the project, the actual and estimated cost should be compared and the cost plan should be
                                               CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS | 21

updated. If the cost of the project exceeds or is projected to exceed accepted levels, the client should be
informed and action should be taken to make changes to the project construction and procurement process
to bring the project to acceptable levels or change the acceptable levels.

   It is understood that cost controlling should be conducted so an acceptable budget has been identified
and not wait until the construction starts. This is because it is easy to make changes to the project at the
initial stages of the project with less cost impact compared to the latter stages. Some changes might require
rework, which would impact both project cost and time and require more work to be done in less time.

Final accounts

Final account reflects the final agreed cost of the construction project. Final accounts are developed at the
end of the construction project after all work is completed. There will be no changes to the final cost of the
construction project after the final accounts have been completed. The final accounts are first developed
by the contractor/builder and evaluated by the client or client's representative. All parties to the contract
should agree to the cost to be final accounts. When there are multiple contracts to a project, final accounts
of all the contracts will be the final accounts of the project. Until final accounts are developed and finalised,
all valuation payments for work done are subject to change.

Cost analysis

According to the Building Cost Information Service (BCIS) (2012, p. 9):

              the purpose of cost analysis is to provide data that allows comparisons to be made between the costs
              of achieving various building functions in a project with those of achieving equivalent functions in
              other projects.

Cost analysis can be considered as the process of analysing cost data from previous projects so that those
data can be used in the cost planning and estimation of new projects.

   Standard documents such as BCIS of RICS, ACMM and NZIQS elemental analysis of costs of building
projects provide the basis for a systematic cost analysis following the elemental breakdown of building
costs. The documents used to prepare the cost analysis should be stated. More often, this is the agreed price
for the works - i.e. the priced bill or schedule of prices.

   Chapter 5 is about cost analysis of construction projects.

2.3 Procurement methods

The term `procurement' has broader meanings, but procurement methods in construction explain the
contractual arrangements, project financing and payment methods. The selected procurement method
for a project affects the cost management process and builder's involvement in different stages. Several
characteristics of procurement methods that are commonly used in Australia and New Zealand are
discussed below.
22 | CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

   Traditional method/Construct only

   Client is responsible for the design and construction documentation and has the full control of the
      design and project outcome.

   Client engages consultants to undertake full design and documentation.
   Competitive tendering is carried out using the design and documents to select a contractor.
   Cost of tendering for contractors is low due to no design exercises involved during tendering.
   The selected contractor carries out the construction work only.
   Payment is usually based on a lump sum fixed price.

Design & Construct (D&C)

   Client engages a design consultant to prepare a concept or schematic design.
   This schematic design is provided to tenderers to develop as part of the tender process to inform the

      tender price and program.
   Cost of tendering for contractors may be higher due to cost of design and higher due diligence.
   Contractor is engaged to complete the detailed design and construct the project.
   Contractor bids a program that becomes the agreed baseline for the project.
   Payment method can be a combination of lump sum fixed price, schedule of rates, cost

      reimbursement, and target cost. A sharing of savings and overruns can involve.
   Contractor is responsible for design and constructability and has greater involvement over the design

      outcome.

Early Contractor Involvement (ECI)

   Client develops a functional brief which informs a concept or schematic design, and a pretender
      cost estimate for construction.

   Contractors bid a fixed price to develop schematic and/or detailed design during the design phase.
   Cost of tendering is lower because the single contractor is paid a fee for participating.
   Payment is usually based on a lump sum fixed price.
   Collaboration between the contractor and client on design may lead to better overall design

      outcomes.

Managing contractor

   Client engages a design consultant to prepare concept design.
   Competitive tendering process is used to select a Managing Contractor based on preliminaries, and

      design and management fee.
   Managing contractor designs the project with client's input and coordinates the construction and

      project delivery.
                                               CHAPTER 2: COST MANAGEMENT OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS | 23

   Cost of tendering for contractors is lower compared to D&C mode as there is no up-front tender
      design involved.

   Subcontract trade packages are competitively tendered by the Managing Contractor.
   Payment is usually based on a lump sum fixed price for Managing Contractor, reimbursement of

      subcontractor, target cost with a share of gain/pain.
   Greater client influence and input in design, constructability and delivery, reducing the risk that the

      client's requirements will not be met.

The lump sum fixed payment is applicable for all available methods, given the well-defined project scope.
Procurement methods such as construct-only, ECI, D&C and managing contractor use a lump sum
fixed price method. While providing the client with the most certainty by minimising the risk of capital
expenditure, it allocates most of the risk to the main contractors. In contrast, D&C and managing
contractor do not purely rely on a fixed price lump sum method; thus, they follow a combined payment
method to reduce the contractor's risk.

    Did you know?

     Compared to Construct Only, the ECI outcome was considered extremely successful, and the
     projects were delivered ahead of the contract program and on budget in a COVID-19
     environment. The significant involvement of the builder maximises the value for money and
     improves end-year outcomes.
     However, in general, the majority of public sector building construction projects follow the
     traditional/construct-only method, as the government, as a client, can maintain significant
     control over the projects.

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
        https://oercollective.caul.edu.au/building-cost-planning/?p=72#h5p-4
24 | CHAPTER 3: COST PLANNING TECHNIQUES

CHAPTER 3: COST PLANNING
TECHNIQUES

3.0 Introduction

Cost planning is carried out in the early stages of the project cost management process, from the very initial
brief stage through several design stages until the tender document cost plan. Cost consultants update
the cost plans throughout these stages. Therefore, cost planning is not a one-time activity but a process
carried out through the pre-construction cost management phase of a project. Various cost planning
techniques are used in different stages depending on the level of information available. It is important to
identify the suitable cost planning technique for each situation.

3.1 Availability of information

As a project evolves from the early design stages to the construction phase, more design
details and other project information become available with the design development. Increasing levels of
information facilitate increasing levels of accuracy of cost predictions. Therefore, suitable cost planning
techniques should be selected as appropriate to the project stage and the available information.

   Before discussing various cost planning techniques, let's see what type of information affects the cost of
a project.

3.1.1 Type of a project/function of a building

There are different types of construction serving various functions. Building types can be classified as
residential, commercial, educational, healthcare, industrial, and so on based on those functions. There are
specific requirements for each type of project. This helps identify general and specific requirements of a
project which incur various costs.
                         CHAPTER 3: COST PLANNING TECHNIQUES | 25

3.1.2 Size of a project

Project size can be indicated by the floor area, number of floors, and also the number of functional units
for certain types of projects. For example, a single house does not have a specific functional unit.

3.1.3 Scope/quality of a project

The terms `scope' and `quality' are sometimes used interchangeably. Also, the term `quality' has other
broader meanings.

Examples

  Client (Private sector)

In this example, the type of project is `hotel', in which the indication of the size of the project
comes with 50 guest rooms. It also indicates the quality as `3-stars'.
Star categories indicate different levels of services provided in hotels and thus the quality of
26 | CHAPTER 3: COST PLANNING TECHNIQUES

       buildings and facilities. A 5-star hotel certainly incurs higher costs than a 3-star hotel the
       same size or accommodating the same number of guest rooms.

Client (Government)
       In this example, the type of project is `hospital', in which the indication of the size of the
       project comes by accommodating 100 beds. There is no clear indication of the quality, and
       thus, you need to ask more details from your client. The client can indicate the service level
       of the hospital which carries different requirements.

The scope should be stated clearly with inclusions and exclusions because any changes to the scope can
result in a significant change to the cost, and also misunderstandings can occur by overlooking the cost
items.
                                                                                             CHAPTER 3: COST PLANNING TECHNIQUES | 27

          Cost Consultant

       In this example, the cost consultant states the exclusions. Therefore, the client knows that
       the cost of solar panels is excluded from the current budget and can have a clear
       understanding of his financial commitments. Having solar panels can also be considered as
       an indication of the overall quality of the development.

3.2 Cost planning techniques

Cost planning is usually carried out by breaking down the components of a building/project and pricing
them to derive the total cost. This is again based on the cost planning stage and the available information.
You can find various cost planning techniques and categorisations in other books. This book will discuss
the most common techniques followed in Australia and New Zealand. Cost planning techniques can be
broadly classified as budget-setting techniques (in the early design stages to set the budget) and budget-
distributing techniques (with detailed designs).

   Budget-setting techniques:
28 | CHAPTER 3: COST PLANNING TECHNIQUES

   functional unit method
   area method
   functional area method.

Budget-distributing techniques:

   elemental cost planning.

3.2.1 Functional unit method

This is the simplest method that can be used in budget setting, in which only the client's brief is available
with the least amount of information. The functional unit is determined based on the project type, which
expresses the intended use of the building.

    Scenario

     Before discussing cost planning construction projects, let's take a simple example from our daily
     activities.
     Scenario: Imagine that you are asked to organise a morning tea for classmates. You expect 20
     attendees, and the budget is $500. You wish to cater cupcakes, mini pizzas and fruit juice
     bottles. You know that some cafes offer discounts, but you prefer some other cafes due to the
     quality and taste of food. How do you find out whether you can manage this budget?
     Tip: First, as you know the budget and number of attendees, you can calculate the cost per
     person. We called this a `per head cost`. Then you can check if your menu is affordable or
     otherwise make any changes easily by checking the available food prices.

                                                                                                               Figure 3.1: Per
                                                                                                               person cost, total
                                                                                                               cost and budget,
                                                                                                               by Jayawickrama,
                                                                                                               T., Jayasinghe, R.
                                                                                                               & Kahandawa, R.,
                                                                                                               licensed under a
                                                                                                               CC BY-NC 4.0
                                                                                                               licence.
                                                                                             CHAPTER 3: COST PLANNING TECHNIQUES | 29

`Per head cost' in this example is a `unit cost'. This can also be applied in cost planning construction
projects, in which the functional unit is definable.

       Functional unit: Definition
       `... the units of performance or occupancy for which a building or section of a building is
       functionally designed' (AIQS 2022, p. 7).
       Functional unit is `a unit of measurement used to represent the prime use of a building or
       part of a building' (RICS 2021b, p. 25).

This rate method is simple and faster. Since this method does not go into specific details, it will have a lot
of limitations in its accuracy. This technique is more appropriate for public projects such as hospitals and
schools where a functional unit can be identified.

   Examples of functional units are:

   hotel - number of rooms
   car park - parking spaces
   hospital - number of beds
   school - number of students.

It is not meaningful to use in projects where a functional unit cannot be indicated to appropriate the size
of the building such as a house (a house for 2 adults and 3 kids does not provide a meaningful functional
unit. Size indication of 2-bedroom or 3-bedroom house is not necessarily a functional unit compared to the
small size of the building and other functional areas, which are not necessarily proportional to the number
of bedrooms).

   Also, this rate might not be suitable where all facilities are not equally shared, such as mixed development
projects, because functional unit is an item that uniformly represents the building, including main facilities
and sub-facilities.
30 | CHAPTER 3: COST PLANNING TECHNIQUES

    Exercise: Hospital project

A city hospital project had 200-bed capacity and cost $30,000,000. What would be the
estimate of a similar city hospital project if it were going to have 110 beds?

Answer
Cost per functional unit (bed) = $30,000,000  200

Cost per bed  = $150,000

Estimated cost = $150,000  110 beds

= $16,500,000 ($16.5 million)

3.2.2 Area method

The area method is also a simple technique of cost planning. This method requires the total area of the
building. Usually, the Gross Floor Area (GFA) is applied in this technique. This technique can be used for
any building type, including the types where the functional unit cannot be identified.

Gross Floor Area (GFA): Definition
This is the main building area as a sum of all functional areas. There are slightly different
definitions and measurement rules given in ACMM (2022) and by NZIQS (2017).
See Chapter 8 for more details about GFA, including measured examples.
                                            CHAPTER 3: COST PLANNING TECHNIQUES | 31

Exercise: School project

A school project had a GFA of 850 m2 and cost $1,785,000. What would be the estimate of a
similar school project if it had a GFA of 1,250 m2?

Answer           = $1,785,000  850 m2
Cost per m2 GFA

Cost per m2 GFA = $2,100

Total estimated cost = $2,100/m2  1,250m2

= $2,625,000

3.2.3 Functional area method

The functional area method is commonly used in the early cost planning stages.

Functional area (FA): Definition

`Any group of accommodation that has a common work function within a particular type of
a building. It includes all circulation necessary within that area' (AIQS 2022, p. 6).

This technique can also be used in any type of building. Despite the common function of the building,
various functional areas of a building serve different purposes, and the cost of constructing those
functional areas can be varied due to factors such as the method of construction and types of finishes
applied.

   In a hospital, bed-based service areas, administration areas and emergency departments are serving
      various functions related to the health service function of the building.

   In a school, classrooms, playrooms, laboratories and offices are serving various functions related to
      educational functions of the building.

   In residential buildings, wet areas such as bathrooms require waterproofing and tile finishes, whereas
      living areas can be finished with timber flooring. The types of finishes used are based on the different
      functional areas and the cost of construction varies.
32 | CHAPTER 3: COST PLANNING TECHNIQUES

Example: Boarding houseproject

Ref.                  Functional areas    Area (m) Rate ($/m) Cost

a)                    Reception and office 36       3,500  126,000

b)                    Bedrooms            480       2,800  1,344,000

c)                    Bathrooms           100       6,500  650,000

d)                    Plant and storage   80        4,000  320,000

e)                    Circulation/Travel areas 115  1,800  207,000

Total Building Cost*                                       2,647,000

   *This example only indicates building cost based on the functional areas. Other cost components should
be included in the cost plan to calculate the total project cost (See Chapter 6 and Chapter 7 for other costs).

3.2.4 Elemental cost planning

An elemental cost planning is a budget-distributing technique that can be applied when more design
information is available. It is based on an elemental breakdown of works and measurement of elements and
sub-elements to which rates are applied.

      Element: Definition
      `A portion of a project that fulfils a particular physical purpose irrespective of construction
      and/or specification' (AIQS 2022, p. 5).
      Sub-element: Definition
      `A part of an Element that is physically and dimensionally independent and separable in
      monetary terms' (AIQS 2022, p. 11).
      For example, the element `External Walls' can be divided into sub-elements such as Brick
      Walls, Brick Veneer Walls, Concrete Block Walls, In-situ Concrete Walls and so on.
                                                                                             CHAPTER 3: COST PLANNING TECHNIQUES | 33

Figure 3.2: Illustration of elements in a building, by Jayawickrama, T., Jayasinghe, R. & Kahandawa, R.,
licensed under a CC BY-NC 4.0 licence.

According to AIQS (2022), elemental cost planning can be started in a simple form when outline proposals
are available. A detailed elemental cost plan can be then prepared in later stages when more details are
available and further developed into a tender document cost plan.

   Standard documents specify elemental breakdowns and define elements along with the unit of
measurement and rules to measure elemental quantities. See Chapter 8 for a comparison of elemental
breakdown between AIQS (2022) and NZIQS Elemental Analysis (2017).

Elemental quantity

If the necessary drawings are available, elemental quantities are measured in accordance with the definitions
and measurement rules specified in a standard document (See Chapter 8 for measured examples).
Otherwise, GFA will be used as the element unit quantity.

Elemental unit rate

The `Elemental Unit Rate' is often derived by dividing the cost of an element by the Elemental Quantity
when a Detailed Elemental Cost Plan is available. It is a cost data interpolated by cost analysing similar
previous projects. These cost data should be then adjusted to time, location and quality (See Chapter 4
and Chapter 5).
34 | CHAPTER 3: COST PLANNING TECHNIQUES

       Elemental Unit Rates are considered benchmark rates for cost planning and provide
       important cost information.
       For example, experienced cost planners can determine whether an elemental rate is realistic
       for a given type of project in the market at current rates and compared to other benchmark
       buildings. This helps identify any errors in measurement of pricing .

Elemental cost

Elemental cost is the multiplication of Elemental Quantity and Element Unit Rate. The total cost of the
building is then derived as the sum of all elemental costs as shown in Figure 3.3. This provides the basis
for cost planning and cost controlling and facilitates value management practices.

Figure 3.3: Elemental cost breakdown, by Jayawickrama, T., Jayasinghe, R. & Kahandawa, R., licensed
under a CC BY-NC 4.0 licence.

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
        https://oercollective.caul.edu.au/building-cost-planning/?p=80#h5p-5
                                                                     CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES) | 35

CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST
INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES)

4.0 Introduction

This chapter discusses cost data and information that can be used in the cost planning process, including
factors affecting construction costs, types and sources of cost data/information, and their use in different
cost planning stages. The chapter delves into cost indices, which are a special type of cost data used in the
cost planning process.

4.1 Cost data and information

A prerequisite of any kind of cost management system, including cost planning, is the need for reliable cost
data in the form of cost information (Smith et al., 2016). In computer science, the difference between data
and information was elaborated by Daniel Keys Moran, who is a famous American science fiction writer
and programmer as:

      `You can have data without information, but you cannot have information without data' (Martha & Mary,
      2023, p. 3).

In technical terms, cost data are converted to cost information. It should be noted that cost information
and cost data need to be understood contextually based on the factors affecting the costs, type and
application of cost data/information in different stages of cost planning. Figure 4.1 is an illustration of
the evolution of cost information from cost data in a construction project. However, in the construction
context, the terms `cost data' and `cost information' are used interchangeably.
36 | CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES)

Figure 4.1: Evolution of the level of cost information, by Jayawickrama, T., Jayasinghe, R. & Kahandawa,
R., licensed under a CC BY-NC 4.0 licence.

GFA = Gross Floor Area, UFA = Usable Floor Area
   As illustrated in Figure 4.1, the level of cost information gradually changes as per the level of project

and design information available. Initially, the scope and quality level of the hotel are not provided. Later,
the number of rooms defines the size and the star grade defines the quality level of the hotel. The specific
location and time further define the scope and hence, increase the comprehensiveness of cost information.
It further improves when the floor area is refined, and by the end with the confirmed GFA.

4.2 Factors affecting construction costs

There are a range of factors affecting construction costs in different contexts and hence, these should be
reflected in cost information. Most of the sources of cost information (i.e. published) offer averaged cost
information for typical scenarios, and hence, care must be taken when using such generic cost information
and adjustments may be needed based on the factors affecting the cost data such as size and quality of
project, location, market conditions, type of procurement and unusual/different features or circumstances.
Therefore, this section provides the understanding of those factors.

Type and size of project

The type (i.e. residential, commercial) and size (i.e. number of storeys) of a building can significantly
impact its cost, for example:

   Single storey administrative office building
   Single storey primary school building
   Two-storey office building
   Multi-storey apartment building.
          CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES) | 37

Location

Costs can heavily depend on the geographical location of the project due to many factors such as:

 economic conditions
 availability of labour (or transportation from other locations)
 change in labour productivity through travel and other external influences
 availability of materials (in the locality or otherwise transport from other states/countries)
 regional workloads of contractors
 accessibility (confined sites)
 environmental factors (climate, topography, geology)
 local government restrictions
 industrial allowances for working on remote sites
 taxation.

      Example: Location

             In the Adelaide CBD, construction costs can be higher due to confined access to sites
                and traffic management compared to regional areas. On the other hand, resource
                shortages (i.e. labour and materials) in regional areas can affect the cost.

             In New Zealand, compared to Auckland, projects in Whangrei should have a higher
                cost since contractors are typically based in Auckland, and they have to travel to that
                area.

A locality index will be applied to adjust available cost information considering these factors (see Section
4.3.1).

Market conditions

The overall economic conditions, including inflation rates, interest rates, currency exchange rates, and
market trends, can affect the cost of the project. Economic recessions or booms can influence the
availability and cost of resources and services.
38 | CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES)

      Example: Market conditions

             The cost of labour varies based on factors such as labour supply and demand, skill
                level required, labour union agreements, and prevailing wage rates in the area.

             Similarly, the cost of materials is subject to fluctuations due to changes in supply and
                demand, market conditions, raw material prices and transportation costs.

Cost data published at a certain point in time may become outdated due to above conditions, and should
be adjusted for the current prices. Price Indices are used for these adjustments (see Section 4.3.1).
Moreover, given the nature of construction projects with longer durations, appropriate escalation factors
should be applied in cost planning.

Unforeseen circumstances

Due to the unique nature of construction projects, construction costs are highly influenced by unforeseen
circumstances and may incur additional costs. Factors such as complex designs, special materials,
challenging site conditions, regulatory compliance, or environmental considerations can contribute to high
risk and extra costs. Therefore, cost information should be adjusted to cover such conditions.

4.3 Types of cost information

Different types of cost data/information, either unpublishedor published, are used throughout the cost-
planning process. These types can be found on several price databases in Australia and New Zealand.

Building cost per m2 of GFA

Building cost per m2 of GFA is provided with the type and size of the project.

      Example: Building cost per m2 of GFA

       Australia
             Single-storey primary school in Adelaide without air conditioning: $1945-2100
                                                                     CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES) | 39

                m2/GFA.
             Single-storey residential house unit in Brisbane with tile roof and built on a flat site

                with brick veneer wall: $1355-1460m2/GFA (See Figure 4.2a).
       New Zealand

             Primary/middle one storey school, with built-in cupboards and fittings, heating and
                ventilation, sprinklers, data/IT wiring, toilet facilities in Auckland: $6100m2/GFA.

             Secondary school up to two storeys, with built-in cupboards and fittings, heating
                toilet facilities in Wellington: $5500m2/GFA (See Figure 4.2b).

Figure 4.2a shows some extracts from Rawlinsons Construction Cost Guide which capture the building
cost per m2 of GFA in the Australian context.

Figure 4.2a: Building cost per m2 of GFA in Australia (Source: Rawlinsons Quantity Surveyors, 2023, used
with permission.)

Figure 4.2b shows extracts from QV CostBuilder which capture different building cost per m2 of GFA in
the New Zealand context.
40 | CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES)

Figure 4.2b: Building cost per m2 of GFA in New Zealand (Source: QV CostBuilder, 2024, used with
permission.)

Building cost per functional unit

Building cost per functional unit is determined based on the functional unit which expresses the intended
use of the building.

      Example: Building cost per functional unit

       Australia
             Single-storey standard finishes, with no air conditioning, one playroom per 10
                children: $188,800-20,270 per child.
             Three-storey apartment with one- or two-bedroom units, excluding balconies, no lift,
                with basic standard finish in Sydney: $134,500-145,000/apartment (See Figure 4.3a).

       New Zealand
             Car park in multi-storey car park building in Auckland is NZD 26,500-29,500 per 28m2
                car park (Figure 4.3b).

Figure 4.3a shows extracts from Rawlinsons Construction Cost Guide which capture the building cost per
functional unit in the Australian context.
                                                                      CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES) | 41

Figure 4.3a Building cost per functional unit in Australia (Source: Rawlinsons Quantity Surveyors, 2023,
used with permission.)

Figure 4.3b shows extracts from QV CostBuilder which capture different building cost per functional
unit in New Zealand context.

Figure 4.3b Building cost per functional unit in New Zealand (Source: QV CostBuilder, 2024, used with
permission.)

Elemental cost per unit

Elemental cost per unit is determined based on the quantity and specification of the building elements in a
project.

      Example: Elemental cost per unit

       Australia
42 | CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES)

             Substructure of a warehouse low bay letting brick walls: $123.50/m2.
             Substructure of a warehouse low bay letting pre-case tilt-up walls: $109.75/m2 (See

                Figure 4.4a).
       New Zealand

             Substructure of a warehouse under 20m clear span colour steel cladding: $210/m2.
             Substructure of a warehouse under 20m clear span 1200mm high precast or block

                walls with colour steel cladding above: $209.48/m2 (See Figure 4.4b).

Figure 4.4a shows extracts from Rawlinsons Construction Cost Guide which capture the elemental cost per
unit in the Australian context.

Figure 4.4a: Elemental cost per unit in Australia (Source: Rawlinsons Quantity Surveyors, 2023, used
with permission.)

Figure 4.4b shows extracts from QV CostBuilder which capture the elemental cost per unit in the New
Zealand context.
                                                                     CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES) | 43

Figure 4.4b: Elemental cost per unit in New Zealand (Source: QV CostBuilder, 2024, used with
permission.)

Sub-elemental cost per unit

Sub-elemental cost per unit is determined based on the quantity and specification of the building sub-
elements under each element.

      Example: Sub-elemental cost per unit

       Australia
             20MPa concrete for foundation beams in Adelaide: $296/m3.
             20MPa concrete for columns in Adelaide: $424/m3 (See Figure 4.5a).

       New Zealand
             20 MPa with 19mm aggregate, standard ready-mixed concrete delivered to site is
                NZD 372.00/m3 (See Figure 4.5b).

Figure 4.5a shows extracts from Rawlinsons Construction Cost Guide which capture the sub-elemental cost
per unit in the Australian context.
44 | CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES)

Figure 4.5a: Sub-elemental cost per unit rates (Source: Rawlinsons Quantity Surveyors, 2023, used with
permission.)

Figure 4.5b shows extracts from QV CostBuilder which capture the sub-elemental cost per unit in the
New Zealand context.

Figure 4.5b: Sub-elemental cost per unit (Source: QV CostBuilder, 2024, used with permission.)

4.3.1 Building cost and price indices

Building cost and price indices are another type of published cost data/information.

      `Indices are indicators of the performance or behaviour of a factor that is indexed. They are a very useful tools
      available for estimators to capture the cost and price behaviour of the whole industry, building materials,
      labour or plant.'

                 -- (Ashworth & Perera, 2015, p. 119)
                                                                     CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES) | 45

Price indices are a specific type of cost information developed to make price adjustments considering the
factors explained in Section 4.2. Since indices are predicted for a certain period from the current point of
time, for price fluctuations within the construction project duration, appropriate escalation factors should
be evaluated and applied.

   Adjusted costs can be calculated as follows:

                      Adjusted cost for the new project = Cost  Current Index  Base Index

   Base date index number (either tender date or earlier agreed date)
   Current index for the month for which the amount is to be adjusted
   Cost of the labour, plant and equipment and material.

Three types of indices, Building Costs Indices (BCI), Locality Index (LI) and Tender Price Indices (TPI),
are discussed in the following sections.

Building Costs Indices

According to AIQS (2022, p.3), `Building Costs Indices (BCI) is a numerical index relative to a base of
100 that reflects fluctuations in Building Costs and market conditions from the base date.' It represents
long-term fluctuations of costs incurred by the contractor, considers the changes in the cost of major
construction inputs (labour and materials) and ignores changes in profit levels, overheads, productivity and
discounts.

      Example: Building cost indices

             BCI for July 2015 in Sydney is 274.
             BCI for October 2023 in Canberra is 427.

Tender Price Indices

Tender Price Indices (TPI) not only consider the changes to costs of labour and material but also reflect
the competition in the marketplace and risk and profit factored in the contractors' bids. The tender price
index is produced by examining and analysing priced BQs for accepted tenders.
46 | CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES)

Locality Index

According to AIQS (2022, p. 8), locality index is `a measure of the variation in cost from any index base for
transporting and obtaining labour, material and equipment outside the location of that base. It excludes all
design changes and site and climatic factors.'

   It is used as a means to compare the similar nature of projects due to the regional variations in cost and
expressed as a percentage compared to a base location.

      Example: Locality index

       In Australia, prices vary between major cities (Adelaide, Brisbane, Melbourne, Sydney, etc.)
       and also between suburbs.

             Building Price Index in Adelaide by 31 March 2020 is 116.56.
             Building Price Index in Sydney by 2018 is 120.00.
             Adelaide base index = 100, Port Augusta = 115, Victor Harbour = 103.

Figure 4.6 presents locality indices in a map of Adelaide.
                                                                     CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES) | 47

Figure 4.6: Locality Index/Regional Indices of Adelaide (Source: Rawlinsons Quantity Surveyors, 2023,
used with permission.)
48 | CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES)

      Example: South Australian locality indices

       According to Figure 4.6, within South Australia, locality index differs in Port Lincoln
       compared to the base city Adelaide.

             Adelaide = 1.00
             Port Lincoln = 1.291

Labour Cost Index

`The labour cost index (LCI) measures changes in salary and wage rates for a fixed quantity and quality of
labour input. Service increments, merit promotions and increases (or decreases) relating to performance of
the individual employee are not included in the index' (Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 2024a).

      Example: Labour cost indices

       In New Zealand, all sector nationwide salary and wages index under LCI.
             September 2023 = 1390
             September 2019 = 1229

Product Price Index (PPI)

`The inputs index measures the change in costs of production (excluding labour). The outputs index
measures the change in prices received by producers' (Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 2024b).

      Example: Product price indices

       In New Zealand, the PPI utilises an index reference period corresponding to the December
       2010 quarter which is set at 1000.
       PPI for Construction Industry Building Construction:
                                                               CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES) | 49

        September 2019 = 1219
        September 2022 = 1476

Exercise: Cost estimates

You have used cost data from Dec 2018 in Project A to estimate the cost of Project B in
December 2020, which is similar in nature (see project details below). What has been the cost
estimate of Project B?
Project A details

      GFA = 250m2
      Total cost as at December 2018 = $550,000
Project B details
      GFA = 275m2
BCI in December 2018 is 153.3.
BCI in December 2020 is 159.5.
Answer
Project A
Total cost as at Dec 2018 = $550,000
Cost per GFA = $550,000  250 = $2,200
Project B
Total cost = $2,200  275m2

              = $605,000
Adjusted cost of the Project B = Cost  (current index  base index)
= 605,500 (159.5  153.3)
= $629,468.36
50 | CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES)

4.4 Sources of cost data/information

This section discusses various sources of cost data/information.

4.4.1 Databases

Cost information can be stored in cost databases, which can benchmark rates maintained by analysing the
cost of similar past projects. Cost databases can be published or unpublished depending on the sensitivity
and confidentiality of the cost information. Irrespective of whether the information is published or not,
cost databases have the following characteristics:

   should be able to update
   should be easily accessed.

Databases can be set up in software programs such as Access or Excel. Any takeoff software such as
Bluebeam and CostX can also be used to create and use a rate library function, which caries unit rates of
the items.

   There are personal and organisational databases that can be used for cost planning.

Personal databases

Individual professionals (i.e. cost planners/quantity surveyors) can maintain their own databases and use
them in similar future projects. Cost data can be generated from personal practice using various contractual
documents (i.e. priced BQs, contractors' claims, final accounts), cost advice from suppliers, contractors or
sub-contractors and from their own experience. This saves cost planners time in finding reliable and up-to-
date cost information, because construction cost planning involves a lot of information and cost data. Such
information is usually treated as confidential and used only at a personal level, hence, unpublished.

Organisational cost databases

Most cost consultancy organisations maintain cost databases (in-house cost data) as confidential sources
of information. Some may not even maintain a proper cost database due to the risk of disclosing the
information to a third party. As a result, personnel tend to maintain their own databases.

      Example: Organisational cost databases

             Riders Digest was annually published by Rider Levett Bucknall (RLB) for different
                                                                      CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES) | 51

                states in Australia and New Zealand [PDF] with the purpose of keeping Cost
                Consultants and clients up-to-date regarding Building and Building Services Cost
                ranges, benchmarks and price indices.
             CostBuilder New Zealand published by QV is one of the largest construction cost
                databases available in New Zealand. It contains information on Building Costs per m2,
                Elemental costs of Buildings, Cost Planning Rates and detailed rates.

State government/government department cost databases

Most governmental agencies maintain cost databases and provide cost information related to national
economic indicators, public projects, policies and regulations. These can be used in understanding the
trends, economic forecasts and budgetary allocations at the national level in construction projects.

      Example: State government/government department cost databases

             Everything you need to know about a school building project [Word 280KB] by the
                Victorian School Building Authority, Australia contains the information of standard
                budget breakdowns for the school projects such as a percentage or range between
                percentages (%) (allocated for construction, professional fees, project management
                and communications, project contingencies and furniture, equipment), additional
                funding allocations, project funding and project milestones.

             Statistics New Zealand publishes cost indices which are used in price fluctuation
                formulas.

            Cost estimating guideline for public sector health capital projects [PDF] is
              developed to aid Quantity Surveyors and Cost Estimators in creating and
              refining cost projections for Te Whatu Ora healthcare facilities across all
              phases of the project in New Zealand.

International databases

International databases compile cost data from multiple countries and regions, offering comparative
analysis and insights into global economic trends, market dynamics and cross-border investments. These
databases are used by multinational corporations, investors and policymakers.
52 | CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES)

      Example: International database

       Building Cost Information Service (BCIS) International collects, collates, analyses, models,
       and interprets cost information.

    Did you know?

     Step-in to BIG Data!
     Cost consultancy and cost management companies have been using the concept of `data
     centres', which are physical infrastructures designed to provide customised solutions in the field
     of cost management and Quantity Surveying. Data centres are evolving throughout the globe
     as organisations move to the cloud, which could accommodate thousands of servers to meet
     the current demand.

4.4.2 Construction annual price books

Annual price books compile standardised cost data for construction projects, elements and materials,
labour, plant and equipment pricing for budgeting purposes.

      Example: Construction annual price books

             Rawlinsons Construction Cost Guide is published annually and quarterly updates are
                issued. It is one of the largest databases in Australia, which includes detailed prices,
                Building Indices, Building Cost per m2, Elemental cost per unit and Comparative Costs.

             Cordell Construction Cost Index (CCCI) Australia and New Zealand is published by
                CoreLogic Australia and is a quarterly industry benchmark that tracks and monitors
                                                                     CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES) | 53

                the movement of the residential market.

4.4.3 Technical Journals

Technical journals publish articles, studies and research findings related to the construction industry,
including cost analysis, pricing strategies, and economic trends. Researchers, professionals and academics
often rely on these publications for in-depth analysis.

      Example: Technical journals

             Construction Economics and Building Journal published journal by AIQS
             Built Environmental Economist jointly published by AIQS and NZIQS

4.4.4 Market rates

Cost planners can seek quotations from subcontractors, suppliers and builders' merchants to enhance the
reliability and relevance of cost information.

      Example: Market rates

       Networking with cost consultants from different organisations and industry practitioners is
       another good but informal source of cost information. This helps gather the most recent and
       trending cost information.
       Cost planners rely on readily accessible project cost information to ensure the accuracy and
       credibility of the cost-planning process. Utilising published cost data/information is favoured
       due to time constraints, the expenses linked with maintaining an extensive `in-house'
       system, and the capability to aggregate costs across multiple projects, thus revealing true
       benchmark costs and avoiding `one-off' outliers.
       Despite the advantage of consistent, comparable data in the cost planning stage, published
54 | CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES)

       cost data typically only represent costs for normal or average projects. Therefore, caution
       should be exercised when using them, taking into account the unique aspects of the project
       and ensuring clarity regarding the inclusions and exclusions.

    Exercise

     Try out the following task to gain a deeper understanding of how these sources should be
     applied.
     You have completed a Detailed Elemental Cost Plan and done the Building Analysis and come
     up with the following data for a multi-storey residential building: Building Rate ($/m2 GFA) is
     $3,280.
     However, the price range given in a published source of cost information (e.g. Annual Price
     Book) is $2,250 to $2,850 for a multi-storey residential building. Explain the difference between
     these figures.
     Note: Assume no time adjustments or location adjustments are required.
     Answer
     There may be elements designed outside the expected cost range - e.g. due to site conditions
     and unique design. Therefore, it's better to keep the published cost information as an indicator
     and select the cost information derived from the Building Cost analysis developed using a
     recently completed for a similar project.

4.5 Application of cost information in cost planning
stages

As discussed in Section 4.3, different types of cost information are required according to the cost planning
stages. Figure 4.7 illustrates the cost information applied in the concept, schematic and detailed design
stages.
                                                                     CHAPTER 4: BUILDING COST INFORMATION (DATA/INDICES) | 55

Figure 4.7: Cost data/information used in the cost planning process, by Jayawickrama, T., Jayasinghe, R.
& Kahandawa, R., licensed under a CC BY-NC 4.0 licence.

During the concept design stage, cost information used is related to the type, function and size of the
project such as cost per GFA, cost per functional area, and cost per functional unit. Once the level of
information increases at the schematic design stage, cost per functional area and cost per element/GFA are
used. Finally, cost per element is applied at the detailed design stage.

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
                   https://oercollective.caul.edu.au/building-cost-planning/?p=78#h5p-6
56 | CHAPTER 5: COST ANALYSIS

CHAPTER 5: COST ANALYSIS

5.0 Introduction

This chapter examines the cost analysis process, which involves converting historical project data into cost
information. The analysed cost data from previous projects can be utilised to formulate cost plans for
upcoming projects. This chapter presents a detailed guide to performing a cost analysis in accordance with
Australian and New Zealand standards.

5.1 Overview of cost analysis

The cost analysis process helps estimate future project costs by examining past construction project costs
and using them to plan and compare costs of new projects.

       Cost analysis: Definitions
       `... a full appraisal of costs involved in previously constructed buildings ... aimed ... at
       providing reliable information which will assist in accurately estimating (the) cost of future
       buildings. It provides a product-based cost model, providing data on which initial elemental
       estimates and elemental cost plans can be based.'

                -- RICS (2012a, p. 12)
       `Cost analysis can be defined as the systematic breakdown of costs, according to the sources
       from which they arise.'

                -- Seeley (1976)
       `A systematic breakdown of tender cost data into the standard elements of a building.'

                -- Smith et al. (2016)

Costs of past projects should be analysed, arranged and stored in a systematic manner to retrieve when
needed for cost planning future projects. Cost information obtained should be reliable, up-to-date and
sufficiently detailed as useful for cost planning future projects. A comprehensive cost analysis exercise
provides cost information such as unit costs, per area costs or more specific information such as cost per a
particular element.

   Following a standard document is the best practice to perform a systematic cost analysis.
                                                                                                                  CHAPTER 5: COST ANALYSIS | 57

   There are standard documents that can be used for cost analysis exercises in different regions. They
provide the basis for measurements (definitions and measurement rules for building areas, elements, etc.)
and templates to present cost analysis.

   In Australia, Australian Cost Management Manual (ACMM) Volume 1 (AIQS, 2022)is followed
      for cost analysis as well as cost planning.

   In New Zealand, the Elemental Analysis of Costs of Building Projects (NZIQS, 2017) is followed.
   In the UK, Elemental Standard Form of Cost Analysis: Principles, Instructions, Elements and

      Definitions, 4th (NRM) edition (RICS, 2012b) is a dedicated guide to performing a comprehensive
      cost analysis.

5.3 Types of rates developed from cost analysis

A cost analysis process develops different unit rates. Some common rates developed by cost analysis are:

   functional unit rate
   functional area and other area rates
   elemental rate.

The use of different unit rates under cost planning methods is discussed in Chapter 3 and more details
about cost information are discussed in Chapter 4.

5.3.1. Functional unit rate

The rationale behind the functional unit rate is that the total costs of typical buildings, such as car parks,
schools and hotels, are proportionally linked to the number of functional units (see Section 3.2.1) of
the building. This rate is the most suitable for developing initial project budgets due to lack of available
information in early design stages. To ensure accurate unit rates, it is necessary to analyse as many similar
projects as possible to derive an average rate.

               Total cost of the project  Total number of functional units = Functional unit rate
58 | CHAPTER 5: COST ANALYSIS

      Example: Functional unit analysis

       The total accepted tender cost of a hospital building for 140 beds was $120,000,000. The
       project was located in Melbourne and the accepted tender cost is from 2008. Let's calculate
       the functional unit rate.
       Functional unit rate for a hospital in Melbourne in 2008 = 120,000,000  140 =
       $85,714.28/m2

5.3.2 Functional area and other area rates

When developing these rates, floor areas are considered as unit quantities.
   A building can be divided into different functional areas (see Section 3.2.3 for more details). A

functional area rate is established by assigning elemental costs and the cost of preliminaries proportionately
to specific functional areas.

   ACMM and NZIQS Elemental Cost Analysis standards define several building areas as follows:

   Gross Floor Area (GFA)
   Fully Enclosed Covered Area (FECA)
   Unenclosed Covered Area (UCA)
   Building Area (BA)
   Usable Floor Area (UFA)
   Treated Area (this is mainly used for areas served by engineering services)
   Net Lettable Area (NLA)/Net Saleable Area
   Net Rentable/Tenantable Area.

Chapter 8 provides definitions of key areas with measured examples.

                         Total cost of the project  Gross Floor Area = Rate per m2 of GFA

GFA calculations: Australia versus New Zealand

It is necessary to follow the same basis for both cost analysis and cost planning - i.e. the same measurement
rules should be applied for quantities taken as per the standard followed.
                                                                                                                  CHAPTER 5: COST ANALYSIS | 59

   For example, GFA calculation methods are different in Australian and New Zealand standards:

   GFA calculation in Australia excludes external walls
   GFA calculation in New Zealand includes external walls.

For measured examples, see Chapter 8.

Example: GFA calculations

The total accepted tender cost of a hospital building for 140 beds was $120,000,000. The
project was located in Melbourne, and the accepted tender cost is from 2008.
The Fully Enclosed Covered Area (FECA) of the building is 39,116m2, and the Unenclosed
Covered Area (UCA) is 5,334m2. The total cost for FECA is 114,000,000.00, and UCA is
6,000,000.00.
Total GFA is FECA plus UCA = 39,116m2 + 5,334m2 = 44,450m2
Rate per m2 of GFA = $120,000,000  44,450m2 = $2,699.66m2
Rate per m2 of FECA = $114,000,000  39,116m2 = $2,914.41m2
Rate per m2 of UCA = $6,000,000  5,334m2 = $1,124.86m2

These calculations are summarised in the table below.

Area type Full area (m) Area as % of GFA Cost per m ($) Cost ($)

FECA  39,116.00  88   2,914.41  114,000,000

UCA   5,334.00   12   1,124.86  6,000,000

GFA   44,450.00  100  2,699.66  120,000,000

5.3.3 Elemental analysis

In the elemental analysis process, costs are allocated to each element, and an elemental rate is developed
by dividing the cost of the element by the quantity of the element. Methods of measurement and units
of measurement applied to each element quantity are given in each standard. Inclusions and exclusions in
each element should be clearly identified as per the measurement rules. Section 3.2.4 provides more details
of element quantities and Chapter 8 provides a few measured examples for key elements as per Australian
and New Zealand standards.
60 | CHAPTER 5: COST ANALYSIS

                          Total cost of element  Quantity of element = Element unit rate
                   Elemental rates are also developed by using GFA as the element quantity.

                                      Total cost of element  GFA = Elemental rate
                         GFA can also be used when element quantities are not measured.

Example: Elemental cost analysis

The total accepted tender cost of a hospital building for 140 beds was $120,000,000
(including margin). The project was located in Melbourne, and the accepted tender cost is
from 2008 (2008.8.31). The GFA of the building, according to the Australian Cost

Management Manual (AIQS, 2022), is 44,450m2, and according to the NZIQS Elemental
Analysis of Costs of Building Projects standard (NZIQS, 2017), is 44611m2. The
reference for the project is HB-20080-Q11.

The project has 892 number of D1 and 456 number of D2. D1 size is 0.8m  2.1m (area per D1

door 1.68m2). D2 size is 0.9m  2.1m (area per D1 door 1.89m2). The total cost for all the

doors is $2,300,000. The following is an example cost analysis for doors according to the
Australian Cost Management Manual and the NZIQS Elemental Analysis of Costs of Building

Projects standard.
Total area of D1 doors = 0.8m  2.1m  892 = 1498.56m2
Total area of D2 doors = 0.8m  2.1m  456 = 861.84m2
Total area for doors = 1498.56 m2 + 861.84 m2 = 2360.4m2

Australian Cost Management Manual

Project               GFA in m2  Reference

Hospital building in  44,450     HB-20080-Q11
Melbourne, 2008
                                                                     CHAPTER 5: COST ANALYSIS | 61

Code Element            Quantity   Elemental       Gross Floor Area Rate ($/m2)                                  Elemental Co
ND Internal doors       2360.4               Rate                                                                2,300,000.00
                                                   (Total element cost/GFA)
                                  Unit ($/unit)
                                                   51.74
                                  m2 974.41

Elemental Analysis of Costs of Building Projects

Project         Hospital building in Melbourne, 2008 (GFA 44,611m2)   GFA                                        44,611m2
Element Title:
Tender Date:    Internal Doors                                        Element No:                                E11

Element         2008.8.31                          Margin Included in Element Cost:                              Yes

Internal door   Quantity          Unit             Element Unit Rate  Elemental cost ($/m2) Element ($ Total Cost
                                                   ($/unit)

                a                                  b = d/a            c = d/GFA                                  d

                2360.4            m2               974.41             51.56                                      2,300,000.0

5.4 Cost analysis process

This section explains the cost analysis process.

5.4.1 Basis for cost analysis

The first step of cost analysis is to select the base documents from past projects.
   According to ACMM, the total project costs used to develop cost breakdowns are taken from the

`accepted tender prices (including accepted tender price adjustments for provisional sums)' of past projects.
   According to Elemental Standard Form of Cost Analysis 4th NRM edition, `the costs analysed shall be

the agreed price for the works described. Normally, costs analysed can be the agreed price at `commit to
construct', e.g. accepted tender contract sum, agreed target, etc.' (RCIS, 2012b).

   The reason for using `accepted tender prices', `accepted tender contract sum' or similar is that a project's
construction cost is closely based on the tender price. However, the rules for analysis can be applied at any
stage during the project, but this basis should be clearly stated to have a uniform basis of analysed costs.
62 | CHAPTER 5: COST ANALYSIS

5.4.2 Information used for cost analysis

It's recommended to obtain the following details from previous projects for the cost analysis process and to
present with cost analysis documentation:

 1. Project details - Project name, tender date, locations, job reference
 2. Contract details - Contract amount, tender range, type of contract, tender date, reference

      document and brief description
 3. Key measurements - GFA, net lettable area, number of stories, wall/ floor ratio, gross floor area,

      FECA, UCA, usable floor area, net rentable floor area, building area, and area efficiency
 4. Cost and other factors - Total cost of the project, whether margin included in cost or not, cost

      weighting %, m2 rate and, Cost Index Reference Series Used
 5. Element and sub-element details - Elemental group type, description, quantity, unit, unit rate,

      elemental cost and total cost of the element.

5.4.3 Establishing unit rates

The cost analysis process does not simply calculate costs from one project. Establishing unit rates requires
analysing costs from multiple projects. For this process, elemental cost analysis should be conducted for
multiple similar projects, and rates from similar functional units should be cumulated to create average
rates.

   Figure 5.1 showcases a sample matrix derived from cost analyses conducted on 10 university lecture
room buildings. It includes columns for elemental rates and total building costs incorporated with
elemental cost analysis rates of the 10 university lecture room buildings. Using these rates, mean and
average elemental rates are computed. These elemental rates offer greater accuracy than using rates from
just one building. Amalgamation of these rates enables the development of per m2 rates for various
components such as groups, shell, fit-out, services and the overall building cost.

                                                                                                             Figure 5.1: Per m2
                                                                                                             rate for Lecture
                                                                                                             theatre for
                                                                                                             University
                                                                                                             building (matrix),
                                                                                                             by Jayawickrama,
                                                                                                             T., Jayasinghe, R.
                                                                                                             & Kahandawa, R.,
                                                                                                             licensed under a
                                                                                                             CC BY-NC 4.0
                                                                                                             licence.
                   CHAPTER 5: COST ANALYSIS | 63

Industry insights

Some companies conduct cost analysis activities when required during the cost planning stages (i.e. to

acquire benchmark rates).
   Most professionals mainly focus on developing per m2 rate of GFA since the elemental cost analysis

process is time-consuming.

Exercise

The total accepted tender cost of a car parking building for 350 car parking was $10,500,000
(including margin). The project was located in Sydney, and the accepted tender cost is from 2012
(2012.9.31).
The GFA of the building, according to the Australian Cost Management Manual, is 8,750m2, and
according to the NZIQS Elemental Analysis of Costs of Building Projects standard is 8,823m2.
The reference for the project is CP-FEE01.

The project has 32 number of D1 and 88 number of D2. D1 size is 1.6m  2.1m. D2 size is 0.9m 
2.1m. The total cost for all the doors is $425,000.

    1. Calculate the functional unit rate
   2. Calculate the per m2 unit rate according to the Australian Cost Management Manual

        (AIQS, 2022) and NZIQS Elemental Analysis of Costs of Building Projects standard (NZIQS,
        2017)
   3. Conduct an elemental cost analysis for doors according to the Australian Cost
        Management Manual and NZIQS Elemental Analysis of Costs of Building Projects
        standard

Reflection task

Based on your understanding from previous chapters, now you can try this question.
64 | CHAPTER 5: COST ANALYSIS

     Read the following information from Project A (old project) and Project B (new project) to find
     the cost of the roof element for Project B.
     Project A details

           GFA= 1000m2
           Cost per m2 of GFA for the Roof Element = $158.25/m2 (Unpublished data - in-house rate)
           Measured quantity of the element from the completed project = 375m2
     Project B details
           Measured quantity of the element from the proposed project = 275m2
     Answer
     Information from Cost Analysis
     Cost of the roof retrieved from the Project A = 1000m2  $158.25/m2 = $158,250.00
     Element unit rate = $158,250  375m2 = $422.00/m2 (Information used in future cost planning in
     Project B)
     Note: You can also use a construction price book to derive this elemental unit ($422.00/m2).
     Information for Cost Planning
     Element unit rate (retrieved from previous Project A) = $422.00/m2
     Cost of the element of the proposed Project B = 275m2  $422.00 = $116,050.00

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
                   https://oercollective.caul.edu.au/building-cost-planning/?p=76#h5p-7
                                                                        CHAPTER 6: COST PLANNING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS | 65

CHAPTER 6: COST PLANNING
CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

6.0 Introduction

Cost is a key aspect of a construction project, and cost management is a process that is carried out
throughout various stages of a construction project. Chapter 2 (Table 2.1) presented the cost management
stages of a construction project as specified in the standard documents in several contexts, including
Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom. The pre-construction cost management phase involves
design development and cost planning processes, which are usually carried out simultaneously until the
tender documentation. However, there can be changes based on the selected procurement method, and
consultancy firms might follow this process with slight differences. This chapter focuses on the
fundamentals of cost planning construction projects, including the basis of a cost plan, and concludes with
the elaboration of major cost items in a cost plan.

6.1 Cost plan

The cost of a construction project is derived by pricing all relevant components of a project. A cost plan
is a descriptive statement that shows the proposed distribution of the budget through the elements or
sub-elements of the project. In this way, cost plans provide design parameters and cost targets for the
design development within the project budget. Therefore, cost plans involve a process rather than a one-
off estimate, and this process helps to give the client value for money by achieving a good balance of
expenditure between the various components of the building project. A range of information is required
in these pricing exercises at various stages.

   Cost planning is carried out by using available project details combined with various other documents
prepared by different players in a construction project. As the design develops, these documents will be
updated with the latest information, and cost plans will also be updated with an increased level of project
information. Historical data with adjustments based on sensitive factors like time, quality and location is a
key ingredient in a cost plan (see Chapter 4).

       A cost estimate and a cost plan should not be confused.
       Note: Chapter 1 discussed the different parties to a construction contract and various
66 | CHAPTER 6: COST PLANNING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

       professionals involved in a construction project. This section refers to the client, cost
       planner, quantity surveyor, cost consultants, contractor and estimator.

             When costing is carried out by the contractor's estimator for bidding purposes, we
                call it a contractor's/builder's estimate.

             When costing is carried out by the client's representative (cost consultants, cost
                planner, quantity surveyor) for cost management purposes in the pre-construction
                phase, we call it a cost plan.

             A cost plan will be updated with the design development. This involves designing to
                a cost (i.e. budget).

             The term estimate is used for a one-time figure at different points in the cost
                planning process.

             Therefore, the terms `estimating' and `estimates' are used in this book throughout the
                cost planning process.

Bills of Quantities (BQ) is also a key document used for cost managing construction projects. It's
important to differentiate these terms. Table 6.1 compares the characteristics of cost plan and BQ.

Cost plan                                                       Bills of quantities

Involves a process and update alongside the design              Prepared at the tender document stage for tendering
development stages during the pre-construction cost             purposes and used for contract administration in
management phase.                                               later stages of cost management.

Prepared from early stage information through to the near       Prepared with detailed measurements when
completion of documentation.                                    sufficient information is available.

Prepared in elements as per Australian Cost Management          Prepared in trades, measured as per Australian and
Manuals and NZIQS Elemental Cost Analysis. (NZIQS,              New Zealand Standard Method of Measurement
2017)                                                           (ANZSMM) (AIQS et al., 2022).
e.g. Substructure, External Walls, Roof, Windows                e.g. Masonry, Concrete, Painting
                                                                *One element contains several trades
Provides other project costs as well, thus creates a wholistic  e.g. External Walls includes Masonry, Insulation and
view of the total end project cost to the client.               Painting
These other costs can include demolition costs, land costs,
professional and legal fees, authority fees and sometimes       Generally provides only the total construction cost.
operational costs and life cycle costs.
                                                                Sent unpriced BQ to builders for preparing tenders.
Not seen by builders.
                                                                Priced by builders' estimators.
Priced by cost planners.

Table 6.1: Comparison of cost plan and BQ
                                                                        CHAPTER 6: COST PLANNING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS | 67

6.2 Basis of the cost plan

Cost planning is a process and cost plans are documents prepared to predict the end cost to the client
with applicable rates. Cost plans are updated with the design development, and the rates applied should
be relevant to the project's current context. Therefore, it is paramount to state the basis of a cost plan, in
terms of documents used, rates applied and the standards followed. Stating the inclusions and exclusions is
also important to provide the client with a clear picture of the cost prediction. This section discusses what
needs to be stated as the basis of a cost plan.

6.2.1 Basis of measurement of works

Available information in terms of drawings, specifications, site reports and other documents provides the
basis for costing a project. Due to being an evolving process, cost plans need to be updated with the
availability of information with the latest revisions of documents. It is very important to state the list of
documents used for preparing a cost plan, including the date each document was produced because there
may be several revisions. This can be included as a schedule/table with a list of documents and the date
issued/received. This provides the basis for the measurement of building works.

       In the early stages of cost planning, when the design information is unavailable, appropriate
       allowances should be established in close consultation with the design team, and
       assumptions should be stated. This is common in cost planning building services where
       allowances are made with the advice of services engineering consultants.

6.2.2 Basis of pricing: Base rates, price indices, allowances

Cost plans are mostly prepared using historical cost data unless the latest rates are available to the cost
planner. Therefore, it is necessary to state the basis of those historical cost data with the base date, location
and quality of the base project. Price indices or allowances should be used to adjust the historical cost data
(see Chapter 4). These details should also be stated clearly as the basis of a cost plan.

6.2.3 With or without tax

In Australia and New Zealand, goods and services tax (GST) is applicable, and any cost presented should
state whether it includes or excludes GST. If the amounts are including GST, the percentage should be
stated.
68 | CHAPTER 6: COST PLANNING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

6.3 Professional practice and documentation

This section provides several good practices a professional cost consultant may follow during the
documentation of any cost advice, including the preparation of cost plans as follows:

   Follow and refer to standards.
   Use clear and concise documentation.

As explained in Section 2.3.1, there are standard documents published by professional bodies in various
regions. As professionals, it is always recommended to follow standard documents rather than following
ad-hoc methods.

   There are several benefits to following standards while documenting cost plans:

   Standards provide a uniform basis that can be understandable and can be easily followed by all
      those involved in a project. It also facilitates easy updates and an iterative process with progressive
      information. This is important for cost planning where the cost plan is updated with the design
      development with progressive design information.

   Standards also contain defined breakdown of items, and therefore, the cost plan will contain only the
      necessary information, making it concise.

   Another benefit of standards is ease of comparison, which helps using benchmark costs,
      reconciliation of costs between stages and effective cost controlling.

   Standards aid effective communication between the project team members and other parties as
      they would be familiar with the standard.

   Standards help maintain accuracy as it helps not to miss important components in a process.
   Therefore, using standards will provide trustworthy estimates (i.e. for banks and other financial

      bodies for approvals).

In Australia, the ACMM is followed to prepare cost plans. In both Australia and New Zealand, the
ANZSMM is followed to prepare BQs or schedules of quantities (SOQ). SOQ is widely used in New
Zealand.

   In addition to these standard documents, there can be standard guidelines published by state
government organisations. In Australia, there are guidelines published for building work and other capital
works by various government departments. For major public sector projects, the relevant guidelines should
be followed in preparing cost plans based on the type of project, apart from the ACMM.
                                                                        CHAPTER 6: COST PLANNING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS | 69

      Example: Standard documents

             In Australia, a healthcare project such as a hospital should follow the standards of the
                Department of Health, Capital Works Guidelines and Department of Health Project
                Brief.

             In the state of Victoria (Australia), government school building projects should follow
                the guidelines of the Victorian School Building Authority (VSBA).

             In New Zealand, Cost Estimating Guideline for Public Sector Health Capital Projects
                [Word, 1.86MB] was developed for the healthcare sector.

             In public sector civil works, Waka Kotahi NZ Transport Agency has produced a Cost
                Estimation Manual (SM014) for the development of estimates for capital projects.

6.4 Major cost items

This section explains major cost items in a cost plan in accordance with the templates and definitions
provided in the ACMM Volume 1 (AIQS, 2022). The Elemental Analysis of Costs of Building Projects
(NZIQS, 2017) covers cost items other than the construction cost under `other development costs'.
70 | CHAPTER 6: COST PLANNING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

Element                                                                Cost

*Elemental/Functional area costs (including or excluding building services) $ XXXXX

Building Services (related to the building, unless included above)     $ XXXXX

Preliminaries (related to the building cost)                           $ XXXXX

Building Cost                                                          $ XXXXX

Project specifics

Alterations                                                            $ XXXXX

External Works                                                         $ XXXXX

External Services                                                      $ XXXXX

Preliminaries (related to construction cost other than building cost)  $ XXXXX

Net Project Cost/Construction Cost                                     $ XXXXX

Special provisions

Design Contingencies (%)                                               $ XXXXX

Contract Contingencies (%)                                             $ XXXXX

Escalation                                                             $ XXXXX

Loose Furniture, Loose Equipment                                       $ XXXXX
All Costs in Connection with Design, Documentation & Supervision       $ XXXXX
Statutory Charges                                                      $ XXXXX
Headworks                                                              $ XXXXX

Client Costs                                                           $ XXXXX
Gross Project Cost (excluding GST)                                     $ XXXXX

6.4.1 Building cost

Building cost constitutes a major part of the construction cost of a project. Building cost can be derived
through suitable cost planning techniques (see Chapter 3) depending on the availability of information (i.e.
based on functional area costs or elemental costs). This includes building services cost and the proportion
of preliminaries related to the building.

6.4.2 Project specifics

Project specifics are presented separately in a cost plan. These vary from project to project. For example, if
the same building layout is used in 2 projects, despite the similar building areas, external works will depend
on the site conditions. The proportion of preliminaries related to these items should also be included.
                                                                        CHAPTER 6: COST PLANNING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS | 71

   Project specifics can include, but are not limited to:

   alternations
   external works and services external to the building
   any other cost items specific to the project.

6.4.3 Services costs

Services costs are usually known as `engineering services costs'. This cost in a project is based on advice from
services engineering consults or separately provided by them. Building services costs are presented with
building costs, while external services costs are presented with external works.

6.4.4 Preliminaries

In the early stage of cost planning, a percentage of relevant costs are calculated as preliminaries. The
percentage is decided as appropriate for the project, taking cognisance of program, the complexity of
the work and current market conditions. Ideally, these should be estimated as specific to the project
requirements.

6.4.5 Construction cost

ACMM (AIQS, 2022) defines this as the `Construction Cost' or the `Net Project Cost'. It constitutes the
building cost plus project specifics and the related preliminaries. Construction cost plus special provisions
and other client's costs will give the total end project cost to the client. This also reflects the major difference
between a tender document cost plan and a priced BQ, where the later does not include other project costs
to the client, but what is offered by the contractor to carry out construction works.

6.4.6 Special provisions

Risk management items such as contingencies and escalation are calculated as special provisions. There
are also other items which might not be included in the main contract, but will incur in the project, and
therefore, should be considered in the client's budget. These are calculated under special provisions.

   A list of items that are considered under special provisions can be found in the elemental breakdown
given in the ACMM.

   Works to utilities off-site: Some projects require diversions or capacity enhancements of public utility
mains off-site up to the on-site connections, in accordance with project requirements. Examples include
the installation of additional electrical substations, improvements to public access roads, or work related to
other utility connections, such as water, sewer and gas.

   Loose furniture and equipment: These include furniture and equipment not normally covered by the
main construction contract. However, this will be a cost to the client as per project requirements. These are
72 | CHAPTER 6: COST PLANNING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

not normally installed before the completion of construction and mostly include furniture and equipment
that are not stationary but movable (e.g. mobile equipment). These will depend on the type of project (e.g.
hospitals and aged care facilities require special mobile equipment).

   Professional fees: This cost covers all the design and documentation consultants such as architects,
engineering consultants, surveyors, specialist consultants and quantity surveyors. There can be specialist
advisors such as a health advisor on a hospital project involved in the project designing and planning due
to its specific requirements. It also includes the cost of any value management studies carried out during
the design development and cost planning stages. Project director fees, site supervision charges, and project
management fees also need to be calculated into the total project cost.

   Statutory charges: Costs incurred due to charges and levies in relation to the project duration from
planning and design up until the project inspections need to be calculated in cost planning. These also
include authority charges for testing.

6.4.7 Contingencies

The ACMM (AIQS, 2022. p. 4) defines `contingency as an allowance for risks and unforeseen items which

could be encountered generally applied to the `Net Construction Cost`.

                                        As mentioned in Chapter 1, construction projects are

                                        unique, complex and subjected to many external conditions.

Contingencies cover                     Also, changes to the scope (variations) throughout a
     `unknowns'.                        construction project are inevitable. Therefore, risk factors
                                        should be considered while planning construction projects

Remember, contingency is not            in terms of time, cost and other resources.

a substitute for proper cost            Risk allowances should be included throughout the cost

planning.                               management of construction projects.

                                        AIQS (2022) considers 4 types of contingency factors in

                                        cost management:

1. Planning Contingency
2. Design Contingency
3. Contract (Construction) Contingency
4. Project Contingency.

The cost planner includes a suitable provision for contingency allowances depending on the nature of the
project using their intuition, past experience and historical data. Contingencies are usually calculated as
percentages and can vary given the level of design development on a project.

   Some public authority guidelines on building works provide recommended percentages to be used on
their projects. These can vary with the project type, complexity and special requirements.
                                                                        CHAPTER 6: COST PLANNING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS | 73

      Contingency percentages could go higher on complex projects such as those
      including major alterations and renovations or `hi-tech' projects such as advanced

       laboratories.

Planning contingencies

   Early-stage cost plans involve planning risks. For example, those cost plans are based on
      approximation of functional areas and there is a risk of not being able to plan and design spatial
      relationships accurately (i.e. functional areas/circulation areas).

   Sometimes the sketches are also not available in very early stages. Therefore, an allowance can be
      made to cover this risk.

   However, this risk will disappear along with the design development and usually reduced to zero
      when the building layouts and dimensioned drawings are available.

Design contingencies

   Cost planning as a process evolving with the design development needs to consider the risk of
      `unknowns' in the design, depending on the level of information available.

   An allowance is made as a percentage of the net construction cost to cover this design development
      risk.

   This amount should be shown separately in the cost plan.
   The design contingency allowance will be gradually reduced over the design development and will be

      zero at the tender document stage when the design is finalised and ready to tender.

In the initial stages, a higher contingency percentage would be added for the design development changes
(in New Zealand, this can go up to 30%).

      Example: Contingencies

       In the example hospital project in Australia (see Chapter 7), the design contingency
       allowance has been gradually reduced from 5% to 0% throughout the design development
       stages.
74 | CHAPTER 6: COST PLANNING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

         *Cost plan Design contingency allowance
         Stage A 5%
         Stage B 5%
         Stage C1 3%
         Stage C2 1.5%
         Stage D 0%

       *This is as per the cost planning stages in accordance with the ACMM. Chapter 7 explains
       these stages in detail.

Contract (Construction contingencies)

   Variations are inevitable in construction projects, and unforeseen conditions can be encountered
      during construction.

   An allowance is made as a percentage of the net construction cost to cover these risks of changing
      scope of work.

   This is an important risk management component.
   This amount should be shown separately in the cost plan.
   This allowance will be constantly included in all cost planning stages and will not disappear like

      planning and design contingencies because this it involves the risks during construction.

      Example: Construction contingencies

       In the example hospital project in Australia, (see Chapter 7), the construction contingency
       allowance of 5% is applied in all stages of cost plan.

Project contingencies

An allowance may be added to cover delays and/or inflation, major changes required by the client or
authorities, fee negotiations, latent conditions and similar.
                                                                        CHAPTER 6: COST PLANNING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS | 75

What's happening in the industry?

Project contingencies or project prolongation contingencies are used to cover overall project delays.
Government agencies have specified these contingency percentages applicable to their projects and
therefore, specifically applied in government projects.

6.4.8 Escalation

Costs associated with construction projects tend to fluctuate over the time. Given the nature of
construction projects with longer durations, appropriate escalation factors should be included in cost
plans.

   Several time periods need to be considered when applying escalation factors.

                                                                                                               Figure 6.1: Project
                                                                                                               timeline, by
                                                                                                               Jayawickrama, T.,
                                                                                                               Jayasinghe, R. &
                                                                                                               Kahandawa, R.,
                                                                                                               licensed under a
                                                                                                               CC BY-NC 4.0
                                                                                                               licence.

1. Escalation from the date of base cost plan to the date of the new cost
plan

In any cost plan, the prepared date should be stated. If the rates used are applied from a previous project
(historical data), they will be adjusted for the time difference. Relevant indices should be used to calculate
the escalation and convert those rates into current rates. Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 provide more details
about cost data derived by cost analysing previous projects and the use of indices.

2. Escalation from the date of the new cost plan to the tender date/start of
construction

There can be a considerable time (several weeks or months) from the date of preparing the cost plan and
the tender/start of the construction. Any escalation during this time should be considered as this will affect
the prices and cost to the client.

   As per cost planners in the industry, the time taken between tender and construction start is generally
not very significant. Therefore, the terms `escalation to tender' or `escalation to commencement' are used
interchangeably in cost plans. Any considerable time periods need be taken into account considering the
market conditions.
76 | CHAPTER 6: COST PLANNING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

3. Escalation from the start of construction to project completion

The construction stage can span over months or years. The prices of key project inputs can fluctuate during
this project duration. Depending on the procurement method and the payment method (see Section
2.3 for procurement methods), such fluctuations can affect the project cost. It is prudent to include a
contractual provision to capture these fluctuations. In Australia, such a clause is usually known as `rise
and fall' and in New Zealand, as `cost fluctuations'. When there is a contractual provision, major and cost
effective items such as cost of steel materials, concrete materials and labour costs will be adjusted using a
specified formula. This potential additional cost to the client should be considered and included in cost
planning. Cost planners calculate a percentage to apply for this escalation by considering the project's
predicted cashflow distribution using project's `S curve' and market conditions.

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
        https://oercollective.caul.edu.au/building-cost-planning/?p=82#h5p-8
                                                                                                     CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 77

CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

7.0 Introduction

This chapter explains the cost planning stages as per the Australian Cost Management Manual Volume 1
(AIQS, 2022) and the Elemental Analysis of Costs of Building Projects (NZIQS, 2017). Cost planning
is given much emphasis in the cost management process in Australia and New Zealand and knowing
the standard process and industry insights is very important for construction professionals. Chapter 6
introduced the major items to be considered in a cost plan, and this chapter presents their applications in
each cost planning stage with real-life examples and lessons learned.

7.1 Cost planning process in the Australian context

ACMM presents a construction project's cost management activities under 6 stages (Stage A to Stage F)
and demonstrates them in a line diagram. Figure 7.1 is an extract from this line diagram showing the
pre-construction cost management and cost planning activities (the complete line diagram is available in
Appendix A). As provided in Section 2.3.2, ACMM explains cost planning as the application of cost
management to the design process from the Brief Stage (Stage A) until the Tender Documentation Stage
(Stage D). After Stage D, tendering will take place and construction will begin. The focus of this textbook
is on cost planning, and therefore, Stage A to Stage D will be explained hereinafter referring to this line
diagram.
78 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

Figure 7.1: Cost management stages and activities (Source: AIQS, 2022, used with permission.)

The accuracy of a cost estimate will usually increase with the level of information available. A construction
project involves a range of documents, including drawings, specifications, schedules and other reports (e.g.
soil investigation report). More detailed documents will be available in each progressive project stage. As the
cost planning process evolves with the design development, the accuracy and certainty of estimates will be
increased with the availability of information (see Chapter 6). Based on the information available, suitable
cost planning techniques (see Chapter 3) can be applied. Before discussing each stage, Figure 7.2 presents
an overview of the documents generally available, information used, and suitable cost planning techniques
in each cost planning stage of ACMM.

   In the industry practice, these stages are also specified as concept design, schematic design, tender
design and detailed design.
                                                                                                     CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 79

Figure 7.2: Documents available and information used in different stages, by Jayawickrama, T.,
Jayasinghe, R. & Kahandawa, R., licensed under a CC BY-NC 4.0 licence.

Best practices for cost planning

During the cost planning process, reconciliation in the form of comparison of cost items between 2 stages
(See Section 7.2) helps identify the impacts of design development on project costs. It is a part of Tender
Document Cost Plan (Stage D) as per ACMM. This can also be done simply in other stages to see the
impact of design/scope changes to the cost.

   Value management studies are also carried out to give the best value for client's money and to maintain
the end project cost within the budget, by comparing alternative designs, materials, methods and so on.

   Cost planning activities in each stage are detailed hereinafter.

7.1.1 Brief (Stage A)

AIQS (2022, p. 2) defines the Brief Stage Cost as `a first cost indication to the client based on an outline
statement of the client's needs. The indicative cost is intended only as a guide for feasibility' and planning
purposes; it is not an estimate and should not be quoted as such'.

   The major purposes of this stage can be establishing the initial budget or to confirm that the Client's
budget is feasible. It indicates the Client's financial commitment and affordability. Therefore, it determines
the continuation of the project and subsequent cost planning (whether to continue or not with the
project).
80 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

   In actual projects, Stage A can involve further developed design information cost plans.

Documents available

 In this initial stage, the Client's brief is used as the basis to produce an indicative cost.
 The Client's brief can be an outline statement of the Client's needs.
 Drawings are usually not available in this stage.
 Any available sketches and information will be used.

Information used

                                  Type of building/project: The type of building is always

                                 related to its purpose and function. This help identify the

Example: Information               specific requirements of a project.
used                              Types can be residential, commercial, office building,

                                   hospitals, schools, stadiums and so on.

In Australia, classes of office   Quality: Some building types can be categorised based on
buildings are described as          their quality. This is usually done based on the level of

premium, A-grade and B-          services provided in relation to its primary function during

grade, which indicates the       the operational stage of the building. The building should

quality of the building.         be completed in a way to facilitate that level of service.

Premium office buildings are      Hotels can be categorised with star grades (5-star, 4-star).

probably more expensive than      Offices can be categorised as Premium, A-grade or B-grade.

other building classes.           Location: Even with the same building design and

                                 materials, the cost of 2 projects can differ due to their

                                 location.

                                  Project areas such as in a central business district (CBD),

city fringe, suburban areas.

 Space requirements: Although the design and building layout is not decided, the client will

probably have an idea of the size of the project to be.

 This can be indicated in the number of functional units, and/or floor areas (lettable office area/

useable floor area).

 Any available project specific information will be used in this stage.

The common industry practice in Australia is to provide the functional area schedule in the Stage A cost
plan. It is generally used at the Master Planning Stage of the project.

   Master plan documents are prepared by main consultants and sub-consultants. They define the scope of
work.
                                   CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 81

7.1.2 Outline proposals (Stage B)

The purpose of this stage is to identify the best means of satisfying the client's requirements by comparing
alternative proposals. The selected proposal will be the basis for cost planning in the next stage.

Documents available

   Outline proposals and/or design options prepared by the architect or design team (several outline
      proposals might exist).

Information use

 Project description (in this stage, more information will be available compared to the Client's brief in
   Stage A) (see Figure 7.2).

 Scope of the works related to the size, plan shape of the building, etc.
 Alternative designs can be available for building configuration, form and area efficiency.
 More information on functional areas.
 Building services plan drawings.

7.1.3 Sketch design (Stage C)

The purpose of this stage is to confirm and set the final budget. Therefore, it is prepared based on the
approved design produced by the project design team based on the selected outline proposal in Stage B.
This cost plan provides the client with an estimate of the total end cost of the project, identifies any risks to
achieving completion of the project within the overall project budget and identifies any opportunities for
further development of the cost plan at the completion of the design development phase of the project.

Documents available

   Site layout, including contours and external works information (extent of roads, paths, landscaping,
      service mains, covered ways, fencing, etc.).

   Dimensioned sketch plans, elevations, sections.
   Structural sketches with dimensions of members and details.
   Schedule of finishes.
   Specification notes.
   Building services design and specifications.

Information used

Alternative construction methods, materials and systems will be considered to ensure that the overall
design is the most effective. This can be done by establishing elemental cost benchmarks (see Section 4.3).
82 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

Cost planning can be performed using elemental breakdowns with specific construction methods and
materials.

   Although the overall design in terms of building shape, plan size and building configuration is finalised
when moving from Stage B to Stage C, the design in terms of methods and materials such as specific
finishes and services can be further analysed and refined to meet the budget. Elemental breakdown with
specific methods and materials will be important in this task.

Figure 7.3: Finishes elements comprise a breakdown of various types, by Jayawickrama, T., Jayasinghe, R.
& Kahandawa, R., licensed under a CC BY-NC 4.0 licence.

       Interim cost plans may be prepared in this stage before finalising the design and to maintain
       the costs within the budget. Thereafter, the final tender document cost plan can be
       prepared in Stage D.
       Remember the difference between cost and the budget? (See Section 2.2)

7.1.4 Tender document cost plan (Stage D)

Tender Document Cost Plan (Stage D) is used at the documentation stage of the project getting ready
for tendering. This stage will provide a detailed cost plan with finalised construction drawings and
specifications. This cost plan is also based on accurate assessments of marketplace cost conditions and
escalation.

   There may be several other important activities in this stage to ensure that the overall design is contained
within the budget:

   Comparison with cost plans in previous stages will be carried out to report on the variances in the
      form of Reconciliation Statements (see Section 7.3). This enables the design team to be aware of
      the cost implications of the design to ensure the completed design is contained within the agreed cost
      limit/budget. It also facilitates comparisons in elemental basis to meet elemental cost limits. This is a
      common practice in government projects.
                                                                                                     CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 83

   Cost checks on major elemental or area measurements and elemental costs is another important
      activity in this stage. Some rules of thumb can be used for this based on the experience of cost
      planners. Examples are presented later in this chapter.

      Example: Cost checks

       Cost checks can be carried out by comparing major elemental quantities for accuracy. Any
       differences have to be identified with reasons. Such comparisons can include the following:

             Substructure (SB) + Upper Floors (UF) and Fully Enclosed Covered Area (FECA)
             Ceiling Finishes (CF) and FECA
             Floor Finishes (FF) and FECA
             External Walls (EW) + Internal Walls (NW)  2 and Wall Finishes (WF) (this element

                refers to internal finishes)
       Note: These elements, elemental codes and area measurements are as per ACMM.
       Measured examples are available in Chapter 8.
       The following ratios can also be checked:

             [External Walls (EW) + Windows (WW)] / FECA

            WW / (EW + WW)

Documents available

   Final working drawings and specifications.
   Engineering services cost plans.

Information used

   All the details of the project necessary for cost planning will be available at this stage with more
      accuracy.

7.2 Cost plans with a sample project

This section presents an example hospital project in Australia to demonstrate cost planning in each stage.
The project is now completed, but this explains the steps carried out during design development and cost
planning process.
84 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

      Example: Hospital project

       Project information
       Project title: ABCD Hospital Redevelopment in Melbourne
       Client: The Department of Health, Victoria, and a Health Services facility
       Scope of the project: The project consists of the new build construction of a hospital
       building, together with significant earthworks to raise site levels and the construction of a
       separate ambulance station.
       Budget: The approved funding and budget for the project was $22.7 million. There is no
       surplus or deficit in the current approved budget.
       Project milestones

             Out to tender: mid-January 2013
             Construction start date: 15 April 2013
             Construction completion: 15 August 2014

       Reference documents

             Department of Health Project Brief
             Australian Cost Management Manual
             Department of Health, Capital Works Guidelines

       Assumptions
       The term cost estimate is used in this section, but it should not be confused with Builder's
       estimates (see Section 6.1).

             Cost estimates assume that a traditional procurement route will be adopted for the
                project and which will be competitively tendered to achieve a fixed price lump-sum
                for each element of the works.

             Cost estimate also assumes that the project will be constructed as a single stage
                construction.

             No allowance is included for any additional costs associated with adopting non-
                traditional forms of building procurement.

             If a `cost-plus' or similar route is adopted, or if a sufficient quantity of suitable
                tenderers cannot be achieved within the marketplace, then it is likely that a cost
                premium will be realised and must be added to the budget.
             CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 85

Cost plan A

In this example, cost planners prepared this in the Brief Stage (Stage A) based on functional/departmental
areas of the hospital. Chapter 3 also provides a simple example of a cost plan based on the functional areas
for a boarding house project.

Documents used as the basis of the Cost plan A

Sketch drawings and documents, which were available on May 2012, were used for this cost
plan, including:

      master plan sketch drawings (There were several options of master plan sketches
        available to consider at this initial stage.)

      proposed schedule of accommodation (functional areas)
      the master plan estimate for services provided by the services consultant
      no separate structural or civil drawings were available.

Basis for measurement and pricing

      Cost estimates were based on area measurements taken from architectural drawings
        adopting historical costs of similar projects from the project's cost consulting
        company's database of health project costs.

      Functional area method is the cost planning technique used here. These are also
        known as `departmental areas'.

      Building Services costs have been incorporated with departmental area rates while
        External Services are shown separately as project specifics. Both costs are from
        engineering cost estimates based on the advice from the services consultant.

      Costs of Central Energy Systems, Infrastructure Services and External Services are
        project-specific estimates based on the advice from the services consultant. This cost
        also includes any infrastructure upgrades required for the continuation of the project
        (i.e. ACMM element of Work to utilities off-site (see Section 6.4.2).

      Cost estimates were based on the current rates at the time, including site and locality
        allowances (see Chapter 4) as at May 2012 (BPI 190).

Preliminaries

      Preliminaries related to building works are captured within the departmental area
        rates.

      Preliminaries related to site works are calculated at a percentage.
86 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

      Project specifics

             In addition to the common items such as site works, landscaping and services, this
                project needs to consider environmentally sustainable (ESD) initiatives.

            ESD allowance is calculated as 2.5% of building costs.

             Also, there is a specific requirement to fill the site area with suitable materials above
                the flood level.

      Special provisions

       Based on Department of Health Guidelines, allowances have been included for:

             Design Contingency at 5.0%
             Construction Contingency at 5.0%
             Escalation to tender issue (evaluated separately)
             Escalation to completion (evaluated separately)
             Locality allowance for building works has been included in the benchmark rates
             Locality allowance for site works has been calculated at a percentage.

      Other project costs

             Other project cost items are calculated using appropriate percentages.
             Consultant fees are calculated using an appropriate amount.

      Exclusions

             Land acquisition cost is not included in this cost plan at this stage.
             Demolition of old hospital is funded separately and is not included in this cost plan at

                this stage.
             Project Prolongation Contingency.
             Allowance Temporary Accommodation for the Hospital,
             Hospital Operations Costs.
             Impact of Carbon Tax.
             GST.

Cost plan A summary

Date of Cost plan A: 20 May 2012
                                              CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 87

                   Project Component          Area   Rate    *Total 1
                                              (m2)   ($/m2)
Administration                                 163   3,345         546,000
Bed-Based Services                             858   3,894       3,342,000
Emergency Department                            76   3,956
Support Services                               462   3,638         301,000
Primary Health                                 658   3,337       1,681,000
Medical Clinic                                 278   3,683       2,196,000
Ambulance Station                              217   3,280       1,024,000
Subtotal - Gross Departmental Area            2,712  3,615
**Interdepartmental Travel (10%)               272   2,434         712,000
Subtotal - Gross Building Area                2,984  3,507      9,802,000

Project Specifics                                                  662,000
Central Energy & Infrastructure Services                      10,464,000
***Site Works including Landscaping
External Services                                    2.5%      2,990,000
ESD Initiatives                                      5,537     2,066,000
Allowance for flood Resilience Works
Net Construction Cost                                            387,000
                                                                 262,000
Special Provisions                                               351,000
Design Contingency                                           16,520,000
Construction Contingency
Project Prolongation Contingency                     5.0%        826,000
Total Construction Cost                              5.0%        826,000
                                                                Excluded
Other Project Costs                                  6,090   18,172,000
Fittings, Furniture & Equipment (FF&E)
IT & Communications & Audio-visual Equipment         8.0%    1,454,000
Consultant Fees
Authority Charges, Headwork Fees, etc.               5.0%    909,000
Agency Management Support/Administration
                                                             1,483,000

                                                     0.6%    110,000

                                                     0.8%    137,000
88 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES                           0.8%                             137,000
                                                               7,508                        22,402,000
       Department of Health (DH) Management Support/
       Administration
       Total Project Cost (@ May 2012)

Escalation To Tender (evaluated separately)                                                 109,500
Escalation To Completion (evaluated separately)                                             188,500

Land Acquisition                                                                            Excluded

Total Project End Cost (Excluding GST)                         7,608                        22,700,000

Allowance for Demolition of Old Hospital                                                    400,000

                                   1 Totals are rounded up to the nearest 1,000 multiples.

                                          Details of site works
                             Site Specific Allowances have been included.

Site Preparation & clearance                                                                     77,000.00
Building Demolition                                                                              30,000.00
Rock Removal                                                                                     20,000.00
Removal of Contamination material                                                                20,000.00
Roads and Paths                                                                                350,000.00
Carparking (50 cars)                                                                           400,000.00
Ambulance turning bays/Carpark                                                                 120,000.00
Road sealing work                                                                                50,000.00
Walls & Fences                                                                                   60,000.00
External pedestrian steps/ramp footpath (Extraover Allowance)                                    60,000.00
Entry Canopy                                                                                     96,000.00
Fire Water Storage                                                                             140,000.00
Garden Sheds                                                                                     22,000.00
Service Vehicle Shed                                                                           210,000.00
Landscaping                                                                                    206,000.00
Subtotal                                                                                    1,861,000.00
****Preliminaries & Locality Allowance on Site Works (11%)                                     205,000.00
Total Site Work                                                                             2,066,000.00
                                   CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 89

Learnings from sample Cost plan A

Functional/Departmental areas

As the detailed drawings are not available at this stage, cost planners use sketches or
approximation of functional areas. These are also known as `departmental/accommodation
areas'.

*Rounded figures

The amounts are rounded up to the nearest 1,000 multiples. This is a general practice of
using approximate figures in early stage cost plans. This will indirectly increase the figures to
cover any risks. However, more accurate figures will be used in later stages with the
availability of more accurate project information.

**Interdepartmental travel

As the layout of functional areas are not finalised at this stage, a percentage allowance (10%
in this example) is made for the circulation areas between the functional areas to obtain the
total building area. In this cost plan, it is called `interdepartmental travel areas'. As per
ACMM, Interdepartmental travel includes links, wall thickness, lifts and plant areas are
included in the project.

Rates of various functional areas
Rates per m2 of various functional areas have been applied. As mentioned in Chapter 4 and
Chapter 5, benchmark rates can be derived by cost analysing similar previous projects .

Per gross area rates

Per gross building area rates are calculated for each subtotal. This provides a benchmark
rate to have a better idea of the cost of the overall project in comparison to previously
completed projects.

****Preliminaries & locality allowance on site works

A single figure has been used to capture preliminaries and locality allowance for site works.
Such practices are common in early stage cost plans, where the purpose is to capture all cost
items for budgeting purposes. In later stages, these cost items will be presented separately
and with details.
90 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

Cost plan B

The hospital building design was developed to have 15 beds with an approximate GFA of 3,156 m2.

      Documents used

       This Stage B cost plan has been prepared using the following documents provided by the
       relevant consultants:

             architectural drawings (Proposed Schedule of Accommodation/Area Schedule, Site
                Plan, Floor Plan of the selected concept design)

             engineering drawings (Structural and Civil Sketches)
             geotechnical report
             services engineering feasibility cost estimate (prepared by the engineering services

                cost consultant of the project)
             structural foundation and fill options analysis.

      Basis for measurement and pricing

             The rates included in the cost plan have been generated using the project's cost
                consulting company's database of historical costs, adjusted for the specific nature of
                this project (i.e. time, location).

             An elemental basis has started to be used in this stage.
             The rates for engineering services have been provided by the project's services

                consultants.
             The rates are current at the time as at May 2012 (BPI 190).

      Preliminaries and contingencies

             The preliminaries allowance is based on 12% of the total construction costs and is
                shown separately in the cost plan summary.

             Design contingency allowance is still 5% in this stage as the design risk still
                pertains.

      Project costs

             Project cost items are calculated using similar percentages to Stage A.
             Consultants' fees - The figure provided by the project management company

                increased to $1.5 million.
                                                                                            CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 91

Assumptions

      Substructure - The estimate for the substructure is based on the site fill design option
        provided by the structural engineers

      External Walls - Assumed brick veneer external wall construction with 15% of
        external wall area as external feature cladding.

      Windows - Assumed 25% of external wall area for aluminium framed windows.
      External Doors - Assumed 8% of external wall area for external doors.
      Infrastructure - Sewer relocation costs are based on indicative cost estimate provided

        by the relevant engineering cost consultant.

Exclusions

The following items are expressly excluded from the cost plan:

      project prolongation contingency
      allowance of temporary accommodation for the hospital
      hospital operations costs
      land cost
      Impact of Carbon Tax
      GST.

The following items have been costed, however, they will need to be separately funded (not
within the project budget mentioned in Stage A):

      demolition of the existing hospital.

The estimate for the demolition of the existing hospital was only preliminary at this stage.
The following items are assumed to be included elsewhere in the client's overall project
budget:

      artworks
      client finance costs
      client insurances
      client legal costs
      client marketing costs
      models/visuals.
92 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

      Risks and opportunities

       The following items present the most significant costs risks to the project given the current
       stage of the design:

             risk of further increases to GFA due to changing project requirements
             potential to re-use site silt layer to be verified
             authority charges and fees to be confirmed.
       The following items present opportunities to reduce the current cost estimate, which could
       be explored at later stages in the design:
             reduce cost for imported structural fill based on finding a local supply of suitable

                quality
             adjustment of current building location to reduce the extent of fill
             adopt the most suitable substructure option as selected for the filled area
             refine Fittings, furniture and Equipment (FF&E) and IT & Communications (ICT)

                budgets.

Cost plan B summary

Date of Cost plan B: 09 July 2012
   Gross Floor Area (GFA): 3,156 m2
                                                       CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 93

                            Description                Total           Cost  % of
                                                                     per m2  TEC
Shell                                                                of GFA
Fit-out                                                                        12.0
Services                                               2,716,424     861       12.1
Subtotal - Building Costs                                                      16.3
                                                       2,761,500     875
Project Specifics
Centralised Energy and Infrastructure Services         3,695,676 1,171
External Works and External Services
ESD Initiatives                                        9,173,600 2,907 40.4
Flood Resilience Works
Subtotal                                                 2,606,130   826 11.5
Preliminaries @ 12%                                      2,317,176
Net Construction Costs                                               734 10.2
                                                           262,000
Contingencies                                              369,900   83      1.2
Design Contingency @ 5%                                14,728,806
Construction Contingency @ 5%                            1,767,457   117     1.6
Total Current Construction Cost                        16,496,263
                                                                     4,667 64.9
Escalation to construction commencement - Apr 2013 @
0.50%                                                                560     7.8
Escalation to construction completion - Oct 2014 @ 1%
Total Estimated Construction Cost (TCC)                              5,227 72.7

Other Project Costs                                        824,813   261     3.6
Fittings, Furniture and Equipment (FF&E) @ 8%              824,813
ICT @ 5%                                               18,145,889    261     3.6
Consultant fees
Authority charges, headworks fees, etc. @ 0.6%                       5,750 79.9
Agency management support/administration @ 0.75%
                                                             90,729  29      0.4
                                                           181,459
                                                       18,418,077    57      0.8

                                                                     5,836 81.1

                                                       1,473,446     467     6.5
                                                         920,904
                                                                     292     4.1
                                                       1,500,000
                                                         110,508     475     6.6
                                                         138,136
                                                                     35      0.5

                                                                     44      0.6
94 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES                       138,136      44               0.6
                                                       22,699,207   7,192             100.0
         DH management support/administration @ 0.75%
         Total Estimated End Cost (TEC)

Total End Project Cost is expressed as 22,700,000.
                    Extracts of Elemental breakdowns for Shell, Fit-out and Services
      Description    Total                   CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 95

Shell                              Cost per m2 %
Substructure                          of GFA
Columns
Upper Floors            801,624    254  29.5
Staircases              157,800
Roof                     78,900    50   5.8
External Walls
Windows                         -  25   2.9
External Doors          946,800
Subtotal - Shell        613,900    -    -
                         89,000
                         28,400    300  34.9
                     2,716,424
                                   195  22.6

                                   28   3.3

                                   9    1.0

                                   861  100

Fit-out                 261,948    83   9.5
Internal Walls           88,368
Internal Screens        233,544    28   3.2
Internal Doors          631,200
Wall Finishes           394,500    74   8.5
Floor Finishes          347,160
Ceiling Finishes        678,540    200  22.9
Fitments                126,240
Special Equipment    2,761,500     125  14.3
Subtotal - Fit-out
                                   110  12.6

                                   215  24.6

                                   215  4.6

                                   875  100

Services             410,280       130  11.1
Sanitary Fixtures    410,280
Sanitary Plumbing                  130  11.1
Water Supply                -
Gas Service                 -      -    -
Space Heating               -
Ventilation                 -      -    -
Evaporative Cooling         -
                                   -    -

                                   -    -

                                   -    -
96 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES                 1,192,968      378     32.3
                                                       233,544        74     6.3
                            Air Conditioning           959,424      304     26.0
                            Fire Protection            331,380      105      9.0
                            Electric Light & Power             -       -
                            Communications             157,800        50       -
                            Transport Systems                     1,171      4.3
                            Special Systems         3,695,676             100.0
                            Subtotal - Services

Reconciliation to Previous Cost Plan

                        Description                                       Total $
Current Cost Plan (Cost plan B)                                            22,700,000
Previous Cost Plan (Cost plan A)                                           22,700,000
The increase from previous cost plan                                       NIL

Budget Reconciliation

                        Description                                       Total $
                                                                           22,700,000
Current approved budget for the project                                    22,700,000

Current estimated total end cost (as per Cost plan

B)

There is no anticipated surplus or shortfall to currently approved funding.

Learnings from sample Cost plan B of the hospital project

Basis of the cost plan: This Stage B cost plan is prepared based on the selected outline
proposal. GFA is available. Stage A cost plan was based on functional areas of the building,
where this Stage B cost plan includes elemental breakdown of costs.

Elemental Breakdown: The cost plan summary presents the building cost under
categories, namely shell, fit-out and services. However, this cost plan is prepared using an
elemental breakdown. Elemental breakdowns of Centralised Energy and Infrastructure
Services, External Works and External Services are also available.
                                                                                                     CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 97

       Preliminaries are now added as a percentage (12%) to the Net Construction Cost;
       whereas, preliminaries for building works were captured in benchmark rates in the Stage A
       cost plan.
       Calculation of Escalation: It is interesting to note that in the Stage A cost plan, Escalation
       is applied at the end before calculating the other project costs. However, in this cost plan,
       escalation is applied at the Total Construction Cost before calculating the other project cost
       allowances. If you do a simple calculation, this order makes no difference when applying
       percentages. However, the consultancy fees are a fixed amount and should be calculated at
       current rates.

Cost plan C

From Stage B to Stage C, the design is further refined, and the GFA is now 3,148 m2, whereas it was 3,156
m2 previously.

       Additional Department of Health funding of $452,958 is now approved.

      Scope of work

       The project now includes the following:
             demolition of the old hospital
             cost of all land purchases
             all initial consultants fees engaged by the client.

      Basis for measurement and pricing

             Elemental cost planning is used in this stage.
             The rates were current at the time of Sep 2012 (BPI 195).
             ESD design allowance is now fixed at $ 175,000.

      Special Provisions

             Escalation %
             Design contingency allowance is now 3% in this stage (within the Department of
98 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

                Health Guidelines).

      Other project costs
      The cost estimate includes the following costs in accordance with project
      requirements:

             purchase of the original land $299,990 (expended)
             initial consultancy fees $127,887 (expended)
             demolition of the old hospital $320,000 (estimated).
       The estimate for the demolition of the existing hospital was only preliminary at this stage.
       This estimate was tested in the marketplace in the later few weeks.

      Preliminaries

             The preliminaries allowance is now calculated at 11% of the total construction costs as
                appropriate to the project scope.

      Assumptions

             Substructure - The estimate for the substructure is based on the site fill design option
                provided by the structural engineers and assumes locally sourced material to be used
                for site fill.

             Infrastructure - Sewer relocation costs are based on indicative cost estimates
                provided by the relevant engineering cost consultant.

             Other assumptions made in the previous stage are no longer required as the design is
                now further developed.

       Remember interim cost plans may be prepared in this stage (see Section 7.2.1)
       This project has an interim cost plan and, therefore, these are named as cost plan C1 and C2.

Cost plan C1 summary
Date of Cost plan C1: 22 October 2012

   GFA: 3,148 m2
                                                            CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 99

                                Description                 Total       Cost   % of
                                                                       per m2  TEC
Shell                                                                  of GFA
Fit-out
Services                                                    3,180,284 1,010 13.7
Subtotal - Building Costs
Project Specifics                                           2,890,558  918 12.5
Centralised Energy and Infrastructure Services
External Works and External Services                        3,785,103 1,202 16.3
ESD Initiatives
Flood Resilience Works                                      9,855,945 3,131 42.5
Subtotal
Preliminaries @ 11%                                         2,461,700  782 10.6
Net Construction Costs
Contingencies                                               2,334,090  741 10.1
Design Contingency @ 3%
Construction Contingency @ 5%                               175,000    56 0.8
Total Current Construction Cost
                                                            404,040 1.7

                                                            15,230,775 4,838 65.6

                                                            1,675,385 532 7.2

                                                            16,906,160 5,370 72.9

                                                                507,185 161 2.2
                                                                845,308 269 3.6
                                                            18,258,653 5,800 78.7

Escalation to construction commencement - Apr 2013 @ 0.25%  45,647     15 0.2
Escalation to construction completion
Total Estimated Construction Cost (TCC)                     155,210    49 0.7

                                                            18,459,509 5,864 79.6
100 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES                    1,292,166 410 5.6

       Other Project Costs                               646,083 205 2.8
       Fittings, Furniture and Equipment @ 7%
       ICT @ 3.5%                                        1,550,000 492 6.7
       Consultant fees
       Authority charges, headworks fees, etc. @ 0.5%    92,298        29 0.4
       Agency management support/administration @ 0.75%
       DH management support/administration @ 0.75%      138,446       44 0.6

                                                         138,446       44 0.6

Allowance for Sewer Diversion Works                          135,200       43 0.6
Original Land Purchase                                       249,990       79 1.1
Additional Land Purchase                                       50,000      16 0.2
Demolition of Old Hospital                                   320,000     102 1.4
Initial Planning and Business Case Cost                      127,887       41 0.6
Total Estimated End Cost (TEC)                           23,200,025    7,370 100.0

Extracts of Elemental breakdowns for Shell, Fit-out and Services
       Description          Total  CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 101

                                        Cost per m2 %
                                           of GFA

01 SB  Shell                   820,864      260     25.8
02 CL  Substructure             73,101        23     2.3
03 UF  Columns                                 -
04 SC  Upper Floors                    -       -       -
05 RF  Staircases                      -    412        -
06 EW  Roof                  1,301,847      202     40.9
07 WW  External Walls          638,072        57    20.1
08 ED  Windows                 180,400        53     5.7
       External Doors          166,000               5.2
                                          1,008
       Subtotal - Shell     3,180,284             100.0

09 NW  Fit-out                 203,593    65      7.0
10 NS  Internal Walls          210,945
11 ND  Internal Screens        355,950    67      7.3
12 WF  Internal Doors          751,707
13 FF  Wall Finishes           394,595    113     12.3
14 CF  Floor Finishes          420,245
15 FT  Ceiling Finishes        491,573    238     26.0
16 SF  Fitments                 61,950
       Special Equipment                  125     13.7
                            2,890,558
                                          133     14.5

                                          156     17.0

                                          20      2.1

       Subtotal - Fit-out                 916 100.0

17 SF  Services             883,827       280     23.4
18 PD  Sanitary Fixtures           -
19 WS  Sanitary Plumbing           -      -       -
20 GS  Water Supply                -
21 SH  Gas Service                 -      -       -
22 VE  Space Heating               -
23 EC  Ventilation                 -      -       -
       Evaporative Cooling
                                          -       -

                                          -       -

                                          -       -
102 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

      24 AC  Air Conditioning               1,206,198                                                      382          31.9
      25 FP  Fire Protection                  231,378
      26 LP  Electric Light & Power           967,890                                                      73           6.1
      27 CM  Communications                   330,540
      28 TS  Transport Systems                        -                                                    307          25.6
      29 SS  Special Systems                  165,270
                                                                                                           105          8.7
                                       3,785,103
                                                                                                           -            -

                                                                                                           52           4.4

             Subtotal - Services                                                                           1,199 100.0

             Extract of detailed item-wise cost breakdown for Substructure

Item               Description                                                                             Quantity Unit Rate     Total

01 Substructure                                                                                                                     509,020
                                                                                                                                      12,254
      Ground Slab                                                                                                                     15,420

A 100 thick concrete slab. SL82 mesh top, 30mm cover on 0.2mm moisture barrier on 50mm compacted sand bed  3,284 m2 155                1,200
                                                                                                                                       1,800
B Termite Barrier                                                                                          557 m 22                    3,600
                                                                                                                                       1,200
C Allow for setdowns to wet area                                                                           257 m2             60
        Pad Footings                                                                                                                   1,400
                                                                                                                2 m3 600               1,400
D Pad Footing 300 x 500 X 1600D (PF1)                                                                           3 m3 600
E Pad Footing 1200 x 1200 X 600D (PF2)                                                                          6 m3 600              81,200
F Pad Footing 900 x 900 X 600D (PF3)                                                                            2 m3 600            134,400
G Pad Footing 450 dia X 600D (PF4)
                                                                                                                2 m3 700              38,145
        Strip Footing                                                                                           2 m3 700              19,825
H Strip footing 500 x 500D [SF500]                                                                                                 820,864
I Strip Footing 500 D [SFA, SFB]                                                                           116 m3 700
                                                                                                           192 m3 700
        Edge Beams/Internal Beams
J Edge Beam 300W x 500D (EB300)                                                                            305 m2             65
K Internal Beam 300W x 500D (IB300)

        Sundries
L Miscellaneous connections (5%)
M Allowance for 500mm high precast perimeter upstand beam along external walls

        Total - Substructure
                                                 CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 103

Reconciliation to Previous Cost Plan

                        Description                 Total $
Current Cost Plan (Cost plan C1)                     23,202,025
Previous Cost Plan (Cost plan B)                     22,700,000
The increase from previous cost plan
                                                         502,025

The reason for this increase is the inclusion of the following scope into the cost plan:

   demolition of the existing hospital
   land purchase and
   initial consultant fees.

                                              Budget Reconciliation

Description                                         Total $
Approved Project Funding                            22,700,000
Additional Department of Health Funding             452,958
Total Available Funding (Budget)                    23,152,958

Current estimated total end cost (as per Cost plan  23,202,025

C1)                                                 49,067

Shortfall to current funding

      An interim cost plan (Cost plan C2) had to be prepared due to this shortfall.

Interim Cost plan C2 summary
The design is further refined and the GFA is now 3,181 m2, whereas it was 3,148 m2 previously.

   Date of Cost plan C2: 13 January 2013
   GFA: 3,181 m2
104 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

No.                            Description  Total       Group total  Cost/m
                                                                         GF
01 SB  Shell                                  826,000   3,206,000         1,
02 CL  Substructure                            73,000   2,928,000
03 UF  Columns                                          3,931,000         1,
04 SC  Upper Floors                                  -
05 RF  Staircases                                    -
06 EW  Roof                                 1,206,000
07 WW  External Walls                         721,000
08 ED  Windows                                244,000
       External Doors                         136,000
09 NW  Fit-out
10 NS  Internal Walls                         216,000
11 ND  Internal Screens                       149,000
12 WF  Internal Doors                         352,000
13 FF  Wall Finishes                          815,000
14 CF  Floor Finishes                         397,000
15 FT  Ceiling Finishes                       440,000
16 SE  Fitments                               505,000
       Special Equipment                       54,000
17 SF  Building Services
18 PD  Sanitary Fixtures                    1,064,000
19 WS  Sanitary Plumbing                             -
20 GS  Water Supply                                  -
21 SH  Gas Service                                   -
22 VE  Space Heating                                 -
23 EC  Ventilation                                   -
24 AC  Evaporative Cooling                           -
25 FP  Air Conditioning
26 LP  Fire Protection                      1,332,000
27 CM  Electric Light & Power                 279,000
28 TS  Communications                         753,000
       Transport Systems                      239,000
                                                     -
                                                                CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 105

29 SS  Special Systems                                                   264,000
00 PR  Subtotal
       Preliminaries (Proportion for Elements 01 to 29) at 11%                     10,065,000
       Total Building Cost                                                           1,107,000

                                                                                   11,172,000

30 CE  Centralised Energy Systems                                                  2,377,000
31 AR  Alterations & Renovations
       Site Works                                                                                      -
32 XP  Site Preparation
33 XR  Roads, Footpaths and Paved Areas                                            2,816,000
34 XN  Boundary Walls, Fencing and Gates
35 XB  Outbuildings and Covered Ways                                     948,000
36 XL  Landscaping and Improvements
       External Services                                                 942,000
37 XK  External Storm Water Drainage
38 XD  External Sewer Drainage                                           85,000
39 XW  External Water Supply
40 XG  External Gas                                                      587,000
41 XF  External Fire Protection
42 XE  External Electric Light and Power                                 254,000
43 XC  External Communications
44 XS  External Special Services                                                   515,000
       ESD Allowance (Fixed)
45 XX  External Alterations & Renovations                                515,000
00 PR  Preliminaries (Proportion for Elements 30 to 45) at 11%
       Net Construction Cost                                             Included

                                                                         Included

                                                                         Included

                                                                         Included

                                                                         Included

                                                                         Included

                                                                         -

                                                                         Included

                                                                         -

                                                                                   628,000

                                                                                   17,508,000             5,

46 YY  Special Provisions                                                          1,138,000
       Infrastructure Upgrade Allowance [Included in Centralised Energy
       Systems]                                                          Included
       Design Contingency (1.5%)
       Construction Contingency (5%)                                     262,600
       Total Construction Cost
                                                                         875,400

                                                                                   18,646,000             5,
106 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES                                           4,307,000   1,

              Other Project Costs                                        Fixed  1,175,216
              Fittings, Furniture and Equipment
              IT & Communications & Audiovisual Equipment                Fixed  446,129
              Consultant Fees
              Authority Charges, Headwork Fees, etc.                     Fixed  1,550,000
              Agency Management Support/Administration
              DH Management Support/Administration                       Fixed  60,000

              Allowance for Sewer Diversion Works                        Fixed  138,456
              Original Land Purchase
              Additional Land Purchase                                   Fixed  138,456
              Demolition of Old Hospital
              Initial Planning and Business Case Cost                    Fixed  116,000
              Total Current Project Cost (as at Nov 2012)
                                                                         Fixed  249,990
              Escalation (On Total Construction Cost)
                                                                         Fixed  25,000
              Total Project End Cost (excluding Goods and Services Tax)
                                                                         Fixed  280,000

                                                                         Fixed  127,887

                                                                                22,953,000  7,

                                                                                200,000

                                                                                23,153,000  7,

Extract of detailed item-wise cost breakdown for Substructure
                                                                                   CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 107

No.               Description                                                      Quantity     Unit Rate     Total

01 Substructure                                                                         3,330                     516,150
                                                                                            67                      3,685
     Ground Slab

        100 thick concrete slab. SL82 mesh top, 30mm cover                                      m2 155
1.1 on 0.2mm moisture barrier on 50mm compacted sand

        bed

1.2 Extra over for 150 thick ground slab                                                        m2  55

1.3 Termite Barrier                                                                700 m 22                     15,400
                                                                                                                15,540
1.4 Allow for setdowns to wet area                                                 259          m2  60
        Pad Footings                                                                                             1,200
                                                                                   2            m3 600           2,400
1.5 Pad Footing 300 x 500 X 1600D (PF1)                                                                          4,800
1.6 Pad Footing 1200 x 1200 X 600D (PF2)                                           4            m3 600           1,800
1.7 Pad Footing 900 x 900 X 600D (PF3)
1.8 Pad Footing 450 dia X 600D (PF4)                                               8            m3 600           1,400
                                                                                                                 5,600
        Strip Footing                                                              3            m3 600           1,400
1.9 Strip footing 500 x 500D [SF500]
1.10 Strip Footing 500 D [SFA, SFB]                                                2            m3 700          77,000
1.11 Strip footing 300 x 500 [SF300]                                                                          126,000
                                                                                   8            m3 700
        Edge Beams/Internal Beams                                                                               38,619
1.12 Edge Beam 300W x 500D (EB300)                                                 2            m3 700          15,000
1.13 Internal Beam 300W x 500D (IB300)                                                                        825,994
                                                                                   110          m3 700
        Sundries
1.14 Miscellaneous connections - 5%                                                180          m3 700
1.15 Allowance for 500mm high precast perimeter upstand beam along external walls
                                                                                   150          m2 100
        Total

                  Reconciliation to Previous Cost Plan

                             Description                                                        Total $
     Current Cost Plan (Cost plan C2)                                                            23,153,000
     Previous Cost Plan (Cost plan C1)                                                           23,202,000
     The decrease from the previous cost plan
                                                                                                      49,000
108 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

There were value management exercises carried out resulting in savings from the previous cost plan C1.
                                               Budget Reconciliation

                        Description                 Total $
                                                     23,152,958
Total Approved Budget                                23,153,000

Current estimated total end cost (as per Cost plan       41.77

C2)

Shortfall to current funding

Learnings from sample Cost plan C of the hospital project

 Interim cost plans are required if the estimated project cost exceeds the approved
   budget. This usually happens between Stages C and D because in Stage D, the tender
   document cost plan will be prepared with finalised details.

 Design contingency allowance was initially reduced to 3% from Stage B, and
   further into 1.5% in the cost plan C2 as the design has been further developed now
   that more detailed information is available. Hence, the design risk is now low and the
   design contingency allowance has been reduced.

Cost plan D

This is the Documentation Stage and the Tender Document Cost Plan is prepared in this stage marking
the final stage of the cost planning process.

      Basis of measurement of works and pricing

             Trade-wise costing is done in this stage.
             Net Construction Cost has been calculated with more detailed costing of work

                items with current rates at the time. Therefore, escalation allowance is not
                separately presented and captured within the construction cost.
             Preliminaries are now calculated in detail with current rates instead of allocating a
                percentage, and included in the Net Construction Cost.
                                                                                                   CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 109

      Special Provisions

             Design contingency allowance is now 0% because the design is finalised at this
                stage.

             Contract contingency allowance remains through to the construction stage.

Date of Cost plan D: 28 February 2013
   GFA: 3,181 m2
110 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES                      Cost per GFA          Total
                                                               ($/m2)          17,932,400
                                    Element Group
              Net Construction Cost                                     5,637
              Special Provisions
              Design Contingency (0%)                                            0
              Construction Contingency (5%)                              896,620
              Total Current Construction Cost              5,919 18,829,020
                                                                     Included
              Escalation
                                                           5,919 18,829,020
              Total Estimated Current Construction Cost
              (TCC)                                                    1,155,216
                                                                         446,129
              Other Project Costs (Fixed)
              Furniture & Equipment                                    1,557,000
              IT & Communications & Audiovisual Equipment                  90,000
              Consultant Fees                                            138,456
              Authority Charges, Headwork Fees, etc.                     138,456
              Agency Management Support/Administration
              DH Management Support/Administration                       116,000
                                                                         249,990
              Allowance for Sewer Diversion Works                          25,000
              Original Land Purchase                                     280,000
              Additional Land Purchase                                   127,887
              Demolition of Old Hospital
              Initial Planning and Business Case Cost      7,279 23,153,154

              Total Project Cost - Current (at Feb 2013)   7,279 23,153,000

              Total Project End Cost (excluding GST)
              (Rounded)

7.2 Cost planning process in the New Zealand context

The New Zealand Construction Industry Council (NZCIC) Design Guidelines provide the stages in a
construction project and the Elemental Analysis of Costs of Building Projects (NZIQS, 2017) is used for
cost management exercises, following its elemental breakdown, definitions and measurement rules. This
section provides insights into the cost planning process of construction projects in New Zealand.
                                   CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 111

7.2.1 Project establishment stage

At this stage, the project will be started and established. The client or the consultants will start collecting
preliminary information regarding the site, time frame, budget and stakeholders. Client's brief information
will be created at this stage, which should help manage the rest of the project stages. Factors that impact the
consultant's scope and program like the procurement process will be established at this stage.

Costing

No estimate will be prepared at this stage. Only the client's budget restrictions will be identified.

7.2.2 Concept design stage

At this stage, different design concepts are explored to check if the client's brief is achievable. In this sense,
the site is checked to see if the project can be developed there and the concept estimate is prepared to check
the feasibility of the project. To go forward from design to resource consent, the required consultants are
engaged in this process. An outline of the legal constraints and compliance is also accumulated. When the
client approves the concept design, program and initial estimate, the next stage can begin.

   In some projects, a single stage will cover project establishment and concept design.

Cost

   Concept cost estimates will be prepared for each concept design to check the project's feasibility.

Costing process

 Cost planners typically use the functional area method or functional unit method (see Chapter 3) to
   estimate the project cost.

 Historical cost data will be used for costing and then adjusted based on the location, building type,
   price and date (see Chapter 4).

Industry insights

      Similar to that of the Australian context, the functional area method is preferred
        in this stage.

      Historical data from comparative past projects, QV Cost Builder database and market
        insight updates from Rider Levett Bucknall (RLB) are used as data sources to develop
112 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

                the unit rates. Some companies maintain their own database for this purpose (see
                Chapter 4).

7.2.3 Preliminary design stage

The concept design was further developed at this stage into the preliminary design. The preliminary design
would include a scale, spatial sizes, cross-section drawings, elevation drawings, major structural elements
zones and plant rooms. This includes selecting major elements such as building material, structure type
and mechanical process. These selections and designs should be compatible with governmental regulations,
resource consent and building consent requirements. Specialised consultants will be selected and hired at
this stage to develop Resource Consent.

       Resource Consent involves obtaining approval from the local council for activities that
       have an impact on the environment (Ministry for the Environment, 2021).

Based on the updated design and details, the project program and estimate will be updated. At this stage,
preliminary estimates are developed to check project feasibility. At the end of this stage, Resource Consent
might be applied.

Cost

   Preliminary cost estimates will be prepared for each concept design to check the project's feasibility.

Costing process

   Cost estimators typically use the Elemental Analysis of Costs of Building Projects (NZIQS, 2017) to
      estimate the project cost. Based on the available details, QS practitioners will decide detailed depth of
      the estimation process.

   Historical data are used for elemental costs and should be adjusted based on the location, building
      type, price, date and construction element type variations.
                                                                                                    CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES | 113

      Industry insights

             In addition to published data sources, instance quotations from builders are
                sometimes used as data sources to develop the unit rates. This depends on access to
                such quotations in the network as contractors/builders sometimes are not willing to
                provide quotations for these estimates.

7.2.4 Developed design stage

A developed design will be completed at this stage so the client and relevant stakeholders can approve the
aesthetics, functionality and cost of the project. The design should clearly define and coordinate major
building elements and gross building areas. The scope of all building elements is finalised so that there are
only a few missing details. Design documentation with scales, levels, and dimensions will be produced. All
parties must work together to complete this stage.

   In some projects, this stage is combined with the preliminary design stage so that there will be one
estimate developed.

Cost

   An elemental cost plan is developed.

Costing process

   Similar to the preliminary stage, the Elemental Analysis of Costs of Building Projects (NZIQS) can
      be used to estimate the project cost or previous estimates are updated at this stage.

7.2.5 Detailed design stage

At this stage, a detailed design will be developed to have clear and defined quality and quantity of all
building systems, elements and materials. Design professionals from all disciplines work together and
coordinate to develop a detailed design which should include drawings, specifications, schedules and
performance requirements. These details designs will be used to apply for building consent which should
include tender document details. Cost planners develop a tender estimate to evaluate the contractor's
tender submissions which might be a Schedule of Quantities.
114 | CHAPTER 7: COST PLANNING STAGES

Cost

   Preparation of tender document.
   Consultant's Schedule of Quantities for tender evaluation is developed based on detailed design.

Costing process for tender document preparation

   The Elemental Analysis of Costs of Building Projects (NZIQS, 2017) or ANZSMM (AIQS et al.,
      2022) is used to develop the cost estimate. Specific documents used depend upon the consultant's
      and client's requirements.

   The consultant will develop their own BOQ or SOQ to evaluate the tender document.
   If the ANZSMM is used, NZIQS has developed a sample BOQ/SOQ which might be used by QS to

      develop the estimate and the BOQ/SOQ can be included in the tender document.

7.2.6 Procurement stage

In this stage, the cost planning process is concluded, and the final contract price is agreed with the selected
builder.

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
                   https://oercollective.caul.edu.au/building-cost-planning/?p=91#h5p-9
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 115

CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

8.0 Introduction

This chapter introduces, defines and explains the standard wordings and items used in the cost planning
process. These include standard areas and elements. This chapter uses actual university buildings from
Australia and New Zealand to discuss how to measure the aforementioned standard areas and elements.
The definitions in the Australian context are sourced from the Australian Cost Management Manual
(AQIS, 2022), while those in the New Zealand context are sourced from the Elemental Analysis of Costs
of Building Projects (NZIQS, 2017).

8.1 Standard areas

The definitions of standard areas in both Australia and New Zealand vary. Therefore, the following
sections separately provide the definitions of standard areas in each country and explain them with a
worked example using edited drawings of an actual building, named `Building A'. Building A includes a
library, lecture halls and administration areas.

8.1.1 Fully Enclosed Covered Area (FECA)

       Fully Enclosed Covered Area (FECA): Definition
       `The sum of all such areas at all building floor levels, including basements (except
       unexcavated portions), floored roof spaces and attics, garages, penthouses, enclosed
       porches and attached enclosed covered ways alongside buildings, equipment rooms, lift
       shafts, vertical ducts, staircases and any other fully enclosed spaces and usable areas of the
       building, computed by measuring from the normal inside face of exterior walls but ignoring
       any projections such as plinths, columns, piers and the like which project from the normal
       inside face of exterior walls.
       It shall not include open courts, light wells, connecting or isolated covered ways and net
       open areas of upper portions of rooms, lobbies, halls, Interstitial Spaces and the like that
       extend through the Storey being computed.'

                -- AIQS (2022, p. 6)
116 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

There is no such separate definition for FECA in the New Zealand context. The following are the worked
examples of the FECA of Building A in Levels 1, 2 and the Roof Level (examples of the FECA of Building
A in Levels 1, 2 and the Roof Level) [PDF].

   The FECA of the building area, is measured as follows:
Table 8.1: FECA areas for Building
                    A

Building A Level FECA area

Level 1  2,159 m2

Level 2  900 m2

Level 3 (Roof level) 183 m2

Total    3,242 m2
118 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.1a: Building A - FECA - Level 1
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 119

Figure 8.1b: Building A - FECA - Level 2
120 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.1c: Building A - FECA - Level 3 (Roof Level)

The key points to understand from the calculations in Figures 8.1a, 8.1b and 8.1c are as follows:
   Level 1 - The courtyard is excluded from Level 1 when measuring the FECA, as it is not fully
      enclosed and not covered from the above.
   Level 1 - The space underneath the sloped tier is used as the service area.
   Level 2 - The sloped tier is considered under Levels 1 and 2 as it is a double height. Therefore, this
      area has not been measured in Level 2 FECA.
   Level 2 - The balcony is not enclosed by full-height walls and it is excluded from FECA and
      measured under UCA.

      Why are voids excluded and lifts and vertical ducts included in FECA?

       As per the definition, FECA should be a floor area and a usable area. Empty spaces, called
       voids, don't count as usable areas because they're double-height spaces with a floor at that
       level. Therefore, the void can be excluded from FECA.
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 121

       Even though the lift does not have a fixed floor, the lift still serves at each floor level.
       Similarly, vertical ducts are also used for a particular purpose, such as running the services
       for each floor. Therefore, lifts and vertical ducts are included in the FECA.

8.1.2 Unenclosed Covered Area (UCA)

       Unenclosed Covered Area (UCA): Definition
       `The sum of all such areas at all building floor levels, including roofed balconies, open
       verandas, porches and porticos, attached open covered ways alongside buildings,
       undercrofts and usable space under buildings, unenclosed access galleries (including ground
       floor) and any other trafficable covered areas of the building which are not totally enclosed
       by full height walls, computed by measuring the areas between the enclosing walls or
       balustrade (i.e. from the inside face of the UCA excluding the wall or balustrade thickness).
       When the covering Element (i.e. roof or upper floor) is supported by columns, is cantilevered
       or is suspended, or any combination of these, the measurements shall be taken to the edge
       of the paving or to the edge of the cover, whichever is the lesser.
       UCA shall not include eaves overhangs, sun shading, awnings and the like where these do
       not relate to clearly defined trafficable covered areas, nor shall it include connecting or
       isolated covered ways.'
       Unit of Measurement: Square Metres (m)

                -- AIQS (2022, p. 12)

There is no such separate definition for UCA in the New Zealand context.
   The following are worked examples of the UCA of Building A in Levels 1, 2 and the Roof Level

(Example for UCA from Building A [PDF]).
   According to the worked example in Figures 8.1a, 8.1b and 8.1c, only the trafficable, unenclosed and

covered areas are marked under UCA at all 2-floor levels. There is no such UCA that can be identified at
the roof level. The reason for considering the unenclosed covered areas around the curved lecture theatre is
that those are trafficable. The UCA of the building area measures as follows:
Table 8.2: UCA areas for Building
                    A

Building A Level UCA area

Level 1  54 m2

Level 2  18 m2

Level 3 (Roof level) 0 m2

Total    72 m2
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 123

Figure 8.2a: Building A - UCA - Level 1
124 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.2b: Building A - UCA - Level 2
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 125

Figure 8.2c: Building A - UCA - Level 3 (Roof Level)

8.1.3 Gross Floor Area (GFA)

There are two definitions for GFA in both countries. The following is the definition in the Australian
context:

       Gross Floor Area (GFA) (Australia): Definition
       `The sum of the Fully Enclosed Covered Area and Unenclosed Covered Area as defined in
       this document'. Unit of Measurement: Square Metres (m)

                -- AIQS (2022, p. 7)

According to the Australian context, GFA can be obtained by adding the measured FECA and UCA.
Therefore, FECA and UCA are parts of GFA.

   The following are worked examples of the GFA of Building A in Levels 1, 2 and 3 (Roof Level) (Example
for GFA from Building A [PDF]).
126 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

   The UCA of the building area measures as follows, according to the worked example in Figure 8.3a,
8.3b and 8.3c.
Building A Level      Table 8.3: GFA (Australian) areas for Building A
Level 1                                                           GFA area
Level 2                                                            2,159 m2
Level 3 (Roof Level)                                                918 m2
Total                                                               183 m2
                                                                  3,260 m2
128 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.3a: Building A - GFA - Level 1
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 129

Figure 8.3b: Building A - GFA - Level 2
130 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.3c: Building A - GFA - Level 3 (Roof Level)

The following is the definition in the New Zealand context:

       Gross Floor Area (GFA): Definition (New Zealand)
       `The area used for the calculation of element costs is the gross floor area, measured over all
       the exterior walls of the building, over partitions, columns, interior structural or party walls,
       stairwells, lift wells, ducts, enclosed rooftop structures and basement service areas. All
       exposed areas such as balconies, terraces, open floor areas and the like are excluded.
       Generally, projections beyond the outer face of the exterior walls of a building such as
       projecting columns, floor slabs, beams, sunshades and the like shall be excluded from the
       calculation of gross floor areas.
       Where the outer face of the exterior walls of a building are not regular vertical surfaces, the
       overall measurements shall be taken at floor levels and notes made of the vertical profile of
       the wall line.
       Where mezzanine floors occur within a structure the gross floor area of this mezzanine shall
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 131

       be added to all other complete floor areas and become a constituent part of the gross floor
       area'

                -- NZIQS (2017, p. 4)

According to the New Zealand context, the following are worked examples of the GFA of Building A in
Levels 1, 2 and 3 (Roof Level) (Example for GFA from Building A in New Zealand Context [PDF]).

   The UCA of the building area measures as follows, according to the worked example in Figures 8.4a,
8.5b and 8.5c.
Building A Level      Table 8.4: GFA (New Zealand) areas for Building A
Level 1                                                                    GFA area
Level 2                                                                    2,204 m2
Level 3 (Roof Level)                                                         922 m2
Total                                                                        201 m2
                                                                            3,327 m2
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 133

Figure 8.4a: Building A - GFA (NZ) - Level 1
134 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.4b: Building A - GFA (NZ) - Level 2
                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 135

Figure 8.4c: Building A - GFA (NZ) - Level 3

The main difference between the Australian and New Zealand contexts is that New Zealand does not
consider FECA and UCA measurement separately, nor those areas mentioned in the definition of GFA.
Table 8.5 provides a comparison of GFA measurement between the Australian and New Zealand
contexts.

Table 8.5: Comparison of GFA in both Australian and New Zealand
                                     contexts

              Australia                       New Zealand

Measurement   Measured from the               Measured from the
rule          internal face of external       external face of
              walls                           external walls

Enclosed/     Consider both enclosed          Consider only
unenclosed    and unenclosed covered          enclosed covered floor
floor area    floor area                      area

Ignored area  Projections beyond the          Projections beyond
              inner face                      the outer face
136 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

8.1.4 Building Area

       Building Area: Definition (Australia)
       `The total enclosed and unenclosed area of the building at all building floor levels measured
       between the normal outside face of any enclosing walls, balustrades and supports.'
       Unit of Measurement: Square Metres (m)

                -- AIQS (2022, p. 3)

There is no such separate definition for building area in the New Zealand context. The difference between
the building area and GFA is that the Building Area is measured over the enclosed external walls, whereas
the GFA is measured from the inner face of external enclosed walls.

   According to the Australian context, the following are the worked examples of the Building Area of
Building A in Levels 1, 2 and 3 (Roof Level) (Example for Building Area from Building A [PDF]). The
building area, is measured as follows, according to the worked example in Figures 8.5a, 8.5b and 8.5c.
Building A Level      Table 8.6: Building areas for Building A
Level 1                                                            Building area
Level 2                                                              2,389 m2
Level 3 (Roof Level)                                                  942 m2
Total                                                                 201 m2
                                                                     3,532 m2
138 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.5a: Building A - Building Area - Level 1
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 139

Figure 8.5b: Building A - Building Area - Level 2
140 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.5c: Building A - Building Area - Level 3

8.1.5 Net Rentable/Tenantable Area

       Net Rentable/Tenantable Area: Definition (New Zealand)
       `This is the area available for occupation less public circulation spaces, plant and service
       areas and the like.'
       Unit of Measurement: Square Metres (m)

                -- NZIQS (2017, p. 4)

According to the New Zealand context, the following are worked examples of the Net Rentable/
Tenantable Area of Building A in Levels 1, 2 and 3 (Roof Level) (Example for Net Rentable from Building
A in New Zealand Context [PDF]).

   The UCA of the building area measures as follows, according to the worked example in Figures 8.6a,
8.6b and 8.6c.
Building A Level      Table 8.7: Net rentable areas for Building A
Level 1                                                               Net Rentable/Tenantable area
Level 2                                                                1,365 m2
Level 3 (Roof Level)                                                     443 m2
Total                                                                    177 m2
                                                                       1,985 m2
142 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.6a: Building A - Rentable area - Level 1
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 143

Figure 8.6b: Building A - Rentable area - Level 2
144 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.6c: Building A - Rentable area - Level 3

8.1.5 Usable Floor Area (UFA)

       Usable Floor Area (UFA): Definition
       `The sum of the floor areas measured at floor level from the general inside face of walls of
       all interior spaces related to the primary function of the building. This will normally be
       computed by calculating the FECA and deducting all of the following areas supplementary
       to the primary function of the building:
       Deductions:

           a. Common Use Areas: All floored areas in the building for Circulation and standard
                facilities provided for the common use of occupiers, tenants and/or the public such as
                lobbies and foyers to entrances, stairways and lifts, stairways, landings and fire
                escapes, verandas and balconies, corridors and passages, toilet and rest room areas,
                cloak and locker areas, cleaner's rooms including stores and cupboards, tea making
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 145

                and similar amenities areas
           b. Service Areas: All areas set aside for building plant supplying services and facilities

                common to the building for the use of occupants, tenants and/or the public, such as
                mechanical plant and equipment rooms, electrical equipment and switchrooms, tank
                rooms, lift motor rooms, meter cupboards, telecommunication switchrooms, refuse
                collection areas, loading bays and all car parks including access ways thereto
           c. Non-habitable Areas: All non-habitable building space such as that occupied by
                internal columns and other structural supports, internal walls and permanent
                partitions, lift shafts, service ducts and the like.'
                -- AIQS (2022, p. 12-13)

Usable Floor Area has a similar definition to Net Rentable/Tenantable Area. However, no such detailed
explanation is provided for inclusions and exclusions of Net Rentable/Tenantable Area.

   According to the Australian context, the following are worked examples of the Usable Floor Area of
Building A in Levels 1, 2 and 3 (Roof level) (Example for Usable Floor Area from Building A in New
Zealand Context [PDF]).

   The Usable Floor Area of the building area measures as follows, according to the worked example
in Figure 8.7a, 8.7b and 8.7c.
Table 8.8: Usable floor areas for Building A

Building A Level      Usable floor area

Level 1               1,365 m2

Level 2               443 m2

Level 3 (Roof level)  177 m2

Total                 1,985 m2
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 147

Figure 8.7a: Building A - Usable Floor Area - Level 1
148 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.7b: Building A - Usable Floor Area - Level 2
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 149

Figure 8.7c: Building A - Usable Floor Area - Level 3

8.1.7 Treated Area (TA)

ACMM defines the treated area when particular engineering services are provided in the drawings.

       Treated Area (TA): Definition
       `The sum of all areas at all building levels to which a particular engineering service is
       provided. The area is computed by measuring from the normal inside face of exterior walls,
       but ignoring any projections such as plinths, columns, piers and the like which project from
       the normal inside face of exterior walls, to the centre line of internal walls, as applicable,
       which enclose the area treated.
       Notes:

           a. A Treated Area may need to be computed separately for each engineering service
           b. The Treated Area for such services as Space Heating (21 SH), Ventilation (22 VE),

                Evaporative Cooling (23 EC) and Air Conditioning (24 AC) as referred in this document
150 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

                should include all areas to which treated air is supplied
           c. The Treated Area for Fire Protection (25 FP) comprises the sum of protected floor

                space, the area of protected ceiling space and the area of protected under floor
                spaces.'
       Unit of Measurement: Square Metres (m2)
                -- AIQS (2022, p. 12)

8.2 Elements

The categorisation of building elements (See Chapter 3.2.4) varies in both countries. Table 8.9 compares
the categorisations of building elements given in the Australian Cost Management Manual 2022,
published by the Australian Institute of Quantity Surveyors (AIQS), and New Zealand context are
extracted from the Elemental Analysis of Costs of Building Projects 2017, published by New Zealand
Institute of Quantity Surveyors (NZIQS).

   Table 8.9: Comparison of categorisations of building elements
                                                      CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 151

Australian Cost Management  Differences in      NZIQS Elemental Analysis 2017
   Manual (ACMM) 2022           NZIQS

                              Elemental               NZIQS                    Difference in
                               Analysis               Elemental                   ACMM
                                                      Analysis
Code Elements        UoM                        Code                  UoM

Preliminaries                                   Structure
PR Preliminaries
                              Categorised       E1 Site Preparation m2         Explained under
                              under `P&G,                                      Section
                              Margins and                                      `Alteration and
                              Contingencies'                                   Site Work' and
                              (E25), E25                                       measure only the
                     N/A expressed as a                                        treated area (XP)
                              percentage
                              value of the
                              sum of
                              elements E1 -
                              E24 inclusive

Substructure                                    E2 Substructure m2             Covers the area
                                                                               below the lowest
SB Substructure               Covers the area   E3 Frame              GFA m2   floor finish (SB)
                     m2 below the lowest floor
                                                                               Covered under
                              level (E2)                                       columns (CL)
                                                                               and Upper floors
Superstructure                                  E4 Structural walls m2         (UF)

                                                                               Covered under
                                                                               `External Walls'
                                                                               (EW)

         Columns              No separate       E5 Upper floors m2             Includes beams
CL (framed                    element is                                       along with other
                              called                                           slab elements
         buildings)  m2 `columns'.                                             (UF)
                              Columns are
UF Upper Floors               covered under     Exterior Fabric
                              Frames (E3)
SC Staircases                                   E6 Roof               m2       Covered under
                              Does not cover                                   `superstructure'
                              Beams. Only                                      (RF)
                     m2 slab elements
                              are covered
                              (E5)

                              Covered under
                     m2 `Internal

                              Finishing' (E9)

                            Covered under             Exterior Walls           Covered under
                                                                               `external walls'
RF Roof              m2 `Exterior               E7 and Exterior m2             (EW)

                            Fabric' (E9)              Finish
152 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

                           Structural walls                Windows and                        Covered
                           are covered                                                        separately under
EW External Walls m2       separately (E4),                E8 Exterior            m2          Windows (WW)
                           non-structural                                                     and External
                           walls are                       Doors.                             Doors (ED)
                           covered
WW Windows         m2      separately (E7)                 Interior Finishing

ED External Doors m2       Covered under                   E9 Stairs and Balustrades GFA m2   Covered under
                           `Windows and                    E10 Interior Walls m2              `superstructure'
NW Internal Walls m2       Exterior Doors'                 E11 Interior Doors. m2             (SC)
                           (E8)                            E12 Floor Finishes. m2
ND Internal Doors m2                                       E13 Wall Finishes. m2              Covered under
         Internal Screens  Covered under                   E14 Ceiling Finishes m2            superstructure
                           `Windows and                    E15 Fittings and Fixtures GFA m2   (NW)
NS and Borrowed m2         Exterior Doors'
         Lights            (E8)                                                               Covered under
                                                                                              superstructure
                           Covered under                                                      (NW)
                           `Interior
                           Finishes' (E10)                                                    Covered under
                                                                                              Finishes (FF)
                           Covered under
                           `Interior                                                          Covered under
                           Finishes' (E10)                                                    Finishes (WF)

                           Covered under                                                      Covered under
                           internal walls                                                     Finishes (CF)
                           (NW)
                                                                                              Covered under
Finishes                                                                                      Fitments (FT)
                                                                                              and Sanitary
WF Wall Finishes            Covered under                                                     Fixtures (SF)
                   m2 `Interior

                            Finishes' (E13)

FF Floor Finishes           Covered under
                   m2 `Interior

                            Finishes' (E12)

                                          Covered under    Services
CF Ceiling Finishes m2 `Interior

                                          Finishes' (E14)

Fittings                                                   E16 Sanitary Plumbing  Enumerated  Covered under
                                                                                              `Sanitary
                                                                    Heating and               Plumbing' (PD)
                                                           E17 Ventilation
FT Fitments                 Covered under                                         Enumerated  Covered under
                   m2 `Fittings and                                 Services                  Ventilation (VE),
                                                                                              Evaporative
                            Fixtures' (E15)                E18 Fire Services                  cooling (EC), Air
                                                                                              Conditioning
                                                                                              (AC)

Services                                                                          GFA m2      Covered under
                                                                                              `Fire Protection'
                                                                                              (FP)
                                                           CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 153

SE Special Equipment             Covered under             E19 Electrical Services  GFA m2  Covered under
                        m2 `Special                                                         `Electric Light
                                                                                            and Power' (LP)
                                 Services' (E21)

                                          Covered under    Vertical and                     Covered under
SF Sanitary Fixtures No `Sanitary Plumbing'                                                 `Transportation'
                                                           E20 Horizontal           GFA m2  (TS)
                                          (E16)
                                                           Transportation

PD Sanitary Plumbing             Covered under             E21 Special Services     GFA m2  Covered under
                        No `Sanitary Plumbing'             E22 Drainage             GFA m2  `Special Services'
                                                                                            (SS), "Special
                                 (E16)                                                      Equipment (SE)

WS Water Supply                  Covered under                                              External
                        m2 `Sanitary Plumbing'                                              Stormwater
                                                                                            Drainage (XK),
                                 (E16)                                                      External Sewer
                                                                                            Drainage (XD)

GS Gas Service                   Covered under             External Works and Sundries
                        m2 `Special

                                 Services' (E21)

SH Space Heating m2 Not covered                            E23 External Works       GFA m2  Covered under
                                                                                            External water
                                                                                            supply (XW),
                                                                                            External Gas
                                                                                            (XG), External
                                                                                            Fire Protection
                                                                                            (XF), External
                                                                                            Electric Light
                                                                                            and Power (XE),
                                                                                            External
                                                                                            Communications
                                                                                            (XC), External
                                                                                            Special Services
                                                                                            (XS)

VE Ventilation                   Covered under             E24 Sundries             GFA m2  Not covered in a
                        m2 `Heating and Ventilation                                         specific section

                                 Services' (E17)

EC Evaporative Cooling           Covered under             P&G, Margins and Contingencies
                        m2 `Heating and Ventilation

                                 Services' (E17)

                                          Covered under    E25 Preliminaries GFA m2         Covered under
AC Air Conditioning m2 `Heating and Ventilation                                             `Preliminaries'
                                                                                            (PR)
                                          Services' (E17)

                                          Covered under    E26 Margins              GFA m2  Not covered in a
FP Fire Protection m2 `Fire Services'                                                       specific section

                                          (E18)
154 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

LP Electric Light and Power           Covered under    E27 Contract contingencies GFA m2  Covered under
                             m2 `Electrical                                               `Risk
                                                                                          Allowanced/
                                      Services' (E19)                                     Contingencies'
                                                                                          (YR)

CM Communication m2          Covered under                      Other                     Covered under
                             `Special                  E28 development GFA m2             `Special
                             Services' (E21)                                              Provisions'
                                                                Cost
                                                                 CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 155

                                       Covered under

TS Transportation `Vertical and None Horizontal
System
                                       Transportation'

                                       (E20)

                                          Covered under
SS Special Services None `Special

                                          Services' (E21)

CE Centralised Energy Systems None Not covered

Alterations and Site Works

AR Alterations and Covered under None `Sundries'
Renovations
                                       (E24)

XP Site Preparation m2 Covered under `Structure'

XR Roads, Footpaths and Paved Area m2  Covered under
                                       External Works
                                       (E23)

Boundary Walls.                        Covered under
                                       External Works
XN Fencing and               m2        (E23)

Gates

XB Outbuilding and Covered Ways m2 Covered under Sundries (E24)

XL Landscape and Improvements m2 Covered under Sundries (E24)

External XX Alterations and None Covered under
                                       Sundries (E24)
Renovation

External Services

         External            None      Covered under
XK Stormwater                          `Drainage'
                                       (E22)
         Drainage

XD External Sewer Drainage   None      Covered under
                                       `Drainage'
                                       (E22)

XW External Water Supply     None      Covered under
                                       `External
                                       Works' (E23)

XG External Gas              None      Covered under
                                       `External
                                       Works' (E23)

XF External Fire Protection  None      Covered under
                                       `External
                                       Works' (E23)
156 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

XE External Electric Covered under None `External
Light and Power
                                      Works' (E23)

XC External                              Covered under
Communications                  None `External

                                      Works' (E23)

XS External Special Covered under None `External
Services
                                      Works' (E23)

Special Provisions

YU Work to utilities off-site None Not covered

                                          Covered under
YF Loose Furniture and Equipment None `Other development

                                          Cost' (E28)

Design and                            Covered under
                                      `Other
YD Documentation None development
Fees Cost' (E28)

YQ Quantity Surveyor Fees       None  Covered under
                                      `Other
                                      development
                                      Cost' (E28)

                                          Covered under
YP Project Delivery Fees None `Other development

                                          Cost' (E28)

         Project                None  Covered under
YM Management                         `Other
                                      development
         Cost                         Cost' (E28)

YS Statutory and Approval Fees  None  Covered under
                                      `Other
                                      development
                                      Cost' (E28)

         Risk                   None  Covered under
YR Allowanced/                        `Contract
                                      contingencies'
         Contingencies                (E27)

YE Escalation                   None  Covered under
                                      `Other
                                      development
                                      Cost' (E28)

YO Other Special Provisions     None  Covered under
                                      `Other
                                      development
                                      Cost' (E28)
                                                         CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 157

Client Costs

                                          Covered under
YC Site Acquisition None `Other development

                                          Cost' (E28)

Administrative,         Covered under
                        `Other
YA Finance, Legal None development
and Marketing
                        Cost' (E28)

Goods and Services Tax

YG GST                  Not covered

The following sections interpret the definitions of a few key elements of the selected building project as per
the Australian Cost Management Manual (AQIS, 2022).
158 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

8.2.1 Substructure

The substructure is the area of the building at the lowest floor level measured over external walls and
includes UCA. Substructure accounts for 2,250 m2 (See Figure 8.8)

Figure 8.8: Building A - Substructure measured as per ACMM (AQIS, 2022)

The area covered under sunscreen blades is considered under the substructure in both figures, even though
it goes beyond the external face of load-bearing external walls.

8.2.2 Upper Floors

Upper floors are any floor structures above the lowest level of the building. According to Figure 8.9, the
total of upper floors is 1,499 m3
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 159

Figure 8.9a: Building A - Upper Floor (Level 1) measured as per ACMM (AQIS, 2022)
160 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.9b: Building A - Upper Floor (Level 2) measured as per ACMM (AQIS, 2022)
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 161

Figure 8.9c: Building A - Upper Floor (Level 3) measured as per ACMM (AQIS, 2022)

Even though the measurement rule in ACMM excludes staircases (SC) under upper floors, the steps
running from the ground floor level to the ceiling at Level 1 in the auditorium should not be considered as
`steps in a staircase'. Therefore, according to Figure 8.9a, the steps in the auditorium are considered as the
only upper floor area in Level 1.

8.2.3. Staircases

The staircase is a structural connection between 2 or more floor levels or to roof, plant rooms and motor
rooms together with associated finishes. According to Figures 8.10a, 8.10b and 8.10c, the total
measurement of the staircases in Building A is 45 m2.
162 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.10a: Building A -Staircase (Level 2) measured as per ACMM (AQIS, 2022)
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 163

Figure 8.10b: Building A -Staircase (Level 3) measured as per ACMM (AQIS, 2022)

Since staircases are measured at each upper floors, there is no measurement taken at Level 1 (0 m2). The
measurement does not include the landings at the same level as it had already been included under the
`upper floors'. However, intermediate landings are part of the staircases.

8.3.4 Roof

A roof is a structurally sound and watertight covering over the building. According to Figures 8.11a and
8.11b, the total measurement of the upper floors in Building A is 2,308 m3.
164 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Figure 8.11a: Building A - Roof (Level 2) measured as per ACMM (AQIS, 2022)

As illustrated in Figure 8.11a, the roof at Level 2 was measured above the sunscreen blades.
                                                                                              CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 165

Figure 8.11b: Building A - Roof (Level 3) measured as per ACMM (AQIS, 2022)

According to Figure 8.11b, the roof at Level 3 consists of parapet walls (part extending above the
Roof Level) and as per the ACMM (AQIS, 2022), the area covered by parapet walls is included in the
measurement.

8.2.4 Column

ACMM (AQIS, 2022) defines columns as the total supported area of upper floors (UF)+Stair Case (SC)+
Roof (RF), indicating the extent of this element rather than just measuring the volume of columns. The
total measurement of the columns for Building A is 3,749 m2

8.2.5 Internal walls, internal doors and internal screen and
borrowed lights

It is important to distinguish between internal walls, internal doors and internal screen and borrowed light.
Table 8.10 discusses the differences between those 3 elements.
166 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Table 8.10: Comparison of internal walls, Internal doors and internal screen and borrowed light

                   Internal Walls (NW)        Internal Screens and          Internal Doors (ND)
                                              borrowed light (NS)

Definition as per  `Permanent division of     `To screen off or             `Passageways through
ACMM               internal spaces into       temporarily divide            internal walls, internal
                   separate rooms or to       internal spaces into          screens and partitions and
                   enclose duct and other     separate compartments         to provide access to service
                   non-usable areas' (AIQS,   and to allow the transfer     cupboards and ducts'
                   2022, p.34)                of light through "Internal    (AIQS, 2022, p.34)
                                              Walls"`(AIQS, 2022, p.34)

Purpose and        Separation of spaces and   It is in an internal wall or  It is in an internal wall and
characteristics    no transfer of light or    similar to one, but transfer  creates a passageway
                   passageway                 of light                      through internal walls

Examples           Full-height soil internal  Part height solid internal
                   walls                      walls and internal glazed
                                              partitions

According to Table 8.10, if the internal spaces are temporarily divided or screened off using a part height
wall without a glazed screen, then it should be considered as an internal screen or borrowed light. Examples
include

   Partitions separating the toilets
   Partitions separating office cubicles
   Glazed walls separating the shower area.

Exercises

According to the definitions and measurement rules in ACMM 2022 and NZIQS Elemental
Analysis 2017, measure the key elements of a cost plan for the given Building A.
Drawings
Building A - Level 1 [PDF]
Building A - Level 2 [PDF]
Building A - Level 3 [PDF]
Answers
The following are the answer files covering measurements of the key elements of a cost plan in
Building A (See Table 8.11):
                                                                             CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 167

          Table 8.11: Measurements of the key elements of a cost plan in Building A

ACMM 2022                                                      NZIQS Elemental Analysis 2017

Element       Measurements of the                              Element       Measurements of the elements
              elements

Substructure Building A - Elemental - SB - Substructure [PDF]  Site          Building A - NZ - elemental - E1.
                                                               Preparation   Site Preparation [PDF]

Columns       Building A - Elemental -                         Substructure  Building A - NZ - elemental - E2.
                                                                             Substructure [PDF]
              CL - Columns

              [PDF]Building A -

              Elemental - CL -

              Columns [PDF]Building
              A - Elemental - CL
              - Columns 3 [PDF]

Upper floors  Building A - Elemental -                         Frame         Building A - NZ - elemental - E3.
              UF - Upper Floor 1 [PDF]                                       Frame - Level 3 [PDF]Building A -
              Building A - Elemental -                                       NZ - elemental - E3. Frame - Level
              UF - Upper Floor 2 [PDF]                                       2 [PDF]Building A - NZ -
              Building A - Elemental -                                       elemental - E3. Frame - Level 1
              UF - Upper Floor 3 [PDF]                                       [PDF]

Staircases    Building A - Elemental -                         Structural    Building A - NZ - elemental - E4.
              SC - Staircases 1 [PDF]                          wall          Structural Wall - level 1 [PDF]
              Building A - Elemental -
              SC - Staircases 2 [PDF]
              Building A - Elemental -
              SC - Staircases 3 [PDF]

Roof          Building A - Elemental -                         Upper floors  Building A - NZ - elemental - E5.
              RF - Roof 3                                                    Upper Floor - Level 3
              [PDF]Building A -                                              [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
              Elemental - RF - Roof 2                                        - E5. Upper Floor - Level 2 [PDF]
              [PDF]Building A -                                              Building A - NZ - elemental - E5.
              Elemental - RF - Roof 1                                        Upper Floor - Level 1 [PDF]
              [PDF]

External      Building A - Elemental -                         Roof          Building A - NZ - elemental - E6.
walls         EW - External Walls 3                                          Roof - Level 1 [PDF]Building A -
              [PDF] Building A -                                             NZ - elemental - E6. Roof - Level
              Elemental - EW -                                               2 [PDF]Building A - NZ -
              External Walls 2 [PDF]                                         elemental - E6. Roof - Level 3
              Building A - Elemental -                                       [PDF]
              EW - External Walls 1
              [PDF]

Internal      Building A - Elemental -                         Exterior      Building A - NZ - elemental - E7.
Walls         NW - Internal Walls 3                            Walls         Exterior walls & F. - L 2
              [PDF] Building A -                                             [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
              Elemental - NW -                                               - E7. Exterior walls & F. - L 1
              Internal Walls 2 [PDF]                                         [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
              Building A - Elemental -                                       - E7. Exterior walls & F. - L 3
              NW - Internal Walls 1                                          [PDF]
              [PDF]
168 | CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY

Floor     Building A - Elemental -        Windows       Building A - NZ - elemental - E8.
Finishes  FF - Floor Finishes 3           and Exterior  Windows and Doors - Level 3
          [PDF] Building A -              Doors         Building A - NZ - elemental - E8.
Ceiling   Elemental - FF - Floor                        Windows and Doors - Level 2
Finishes  Finishes 2 [PDF] Building                     Building A - NZ - elemental - E8.
          A - Elemental - FF -                          Windows and Doors - Level 1
          Floor Finishes 1 [PDF]
                                          Stairs and    Building A - NZ - elemental - E9.2
          Building A - Elemental -        Balustrades   Staircases & bal. - Level 3 [PDF]
          CF - Ceiling Finishes 1                       Building A - NZ - elemental - E9.2
          [PDF] Building A -                            Staircases & Ba. - Level 2 [PDF]
          Elemental - CF - Ceiling
          Finishes 2 [PDF] Building
          A - Elemental - CF -
          Ceiling Finishes 3 [PDF]

                                          Internal      Building A - NZ - elemental - E10.
                                          Walls         Internal walls - Level 3
                                                        [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
                                          Floor         - E10. Internal walls - Level 2
                                          Finishes      [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
                                                        - E10. Internal walls - Level 1
                                          Ceiling       [PDF]
                                          Finishes
                                                        Building A - NZ - elemental - E12.
                                          Floor         Floor Finishes - Level 3
                                          Finishes      [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
                                                        - E12. Floor Finishes - Level 2
                                          Fittings and  [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
                                          Fixtures      - E12. Floor Finishes - Level 1
                                                        [PDF]

                                                        Building A - NZ - elemental - E14.
                                                        Ceiling Finishes - Level 3
                                                        [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
                                                        - E14. Ceiling Finishes - Level 2
                                                        [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
                                                        - E14. Ceiling Finishes - Level 1
                                                        [PDF]

                                                        Building A - NZ - elemental - E12.
                                                        Floor Finishes - Level 3
                                                        [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
                                                        - E12. Floor Finishes - Level 2
                                                        [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
                                                        - E12. Floor Finishes - Level 1
                                                        [PDF]

                                                        Building A - NZ - elemental - E15.
                                                        Fittings and Fix - Level 3
                                                        [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
                                                        - E15. Fittings and Fix - Level 2
                                                        [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
                                                        - E15. Fittings and Fix - Level 1
                                                        [PDF]
               CHAPTER 8: DEFINITIONS/TERMINOLOGY | 169

Sanitary       Building A - NZ - elemental - E16.
Plumbing       Sanitary Plumbing - Level 3
               [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
Fire Services  - E16. Sanitary Plumbing - Level 2
               [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
               - E16. Sanitary Plumbing - Level 1
               [PDF]

               Building A - NZ - elemental - E18.
               Fire Services - Level 3
               [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
               - E18. Fire Services - Level 2
               [PDF]Building A - NZ - elemental
               - E18. Fire Services - Level 1 [PDF]

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
online here:
https://oercollective.caul.edu.au/building-cost-planning/?p=89#h5p-10
170 | APPENDIX

APPENDIX

Figure A.1 Cost Management Activities from The Australian Cost Management Manual (3rd ed., Vol. 1,
2022) by Australian Institute of Quantity Surveyors, used with permission.
                  REVIEW STATEMENT | 171

REVIEW STATEMENT

Building Cost Planning: Best Practices and Insights was produced with support and Open Textbook Grant
funding from the Open Educational Resources Collective, an initiative of the Council of Australian
University Librarians.

   This book has been peer reviewed by a subject expert.
   The review was structured around considerations of the intended audience of the book, and examined
the following:

   Comprehensiveness
   Accuracy
   Relevance/longevity of content
   Clarity
   Consistency
   Modularity
   Organisation/structure/flow
   Diversity and inclusion

The authors wish to thank Dr Gayani Karunasena, Senior Lecturer, Deakin University, for lending their
time expertise to help enhance this book. We recognise that peer reviewing is a generous act of service and
this book would not be the robust, valuable resource that it is were it not for their feedback and input.

   This page is adapted from The Rebus Guide to Publishing Open Textbooks (So Far) by Ashok, Hyde &
Schilling, licensed under a CC BY 4.0 licence.
172 | VERSIONING HISTORY

VERSIONING HISTORY

This page provides a record of changes made to this resource. Each set of edits is acknowledged with a 0.1
increase in the version number. The exported files for this resource reflect the most recent version.

   If you find an error in this resource, please contact us via Ask the Library:
https://ask.library.unisa.edu.au

Version Date Change                                     Details

     10                                                 All chapters complete and published and
                                                        have undergone pre-publication peer
1.1  June, Full resource published.                     review.

     2024                                               Chapters published as part of the CAUL
                                                        OER Collective grant program. Full book
     4 Four chapters of this resource published on the  not yet published.

1.0  May, CAUL OER Collective Pressbooks platform:

     2023 chapters 1, 2, 5, and 6.

This page is adapted from Pressbooks Guide by Lauri M. Aesoph, licensed under a CC BY 4.0 licence.
