Communicating Strategically in the Workplace: A Resource for
                  Engineering and Science Majors
  Communicating Strategically in the
Workplace: A Resource for Engineering

           and Science Majors

KARISHMA CHATTERJEE; DAMLA RICKS; AND DIANE E
                         WARYAS HUGHEY

                                                      MAVS OPEN PRESS
                                                           ARLINGTON
Communicating Strategically in the Workplace: A Resource for Engineering and Science Majors Copyright © 2025
by Karishma Chatterjee, Damla Ricks, and Diane Waryas-Hughey is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Unless otherwise noted, all images in the book are individually licensed. Please see image credits for
additional information.
Contents

About the Publisher                                                              xii

Accessibility Statement                                                          xiv

About This Project                                                               xvi

Acknowledgments                                                                  xviii

Chapter 1 Introduction to Technical and Professional Communication

1.1 Defining Communication                                                       2

1.2 Technical and Professional Communication                                     6

1.3 How "Technical" Writing and "Professional" Writing are Related and How they  8

Differ

1.4 Importance of Audience                                                       11

1.5 Key Takeaways                                                                13

1.6 Discussion                                                                   14

1.7 Non-OER References                                                           15

Chapter 2 Interpersonal and Mediated Aspects of Technical and Professional
Communication

2.1 Interpersonal Communication                                                  17

2.2 Interpersonal Needs in Workplace Relationships                               20

2.3 A Perspective on Leadership                                                  23

2.4 Followership                                                                 26

2.5 Emotional vs. Social Intelligence                                            29

2.6 Effective Interpersonal Communication                                        31
2.7 Channels and Information Richness                         33

2.8 Effectively Using Telephones and Emails in the Workplace  38

2.9 Personal Responsibilities at Work                         41

2.10 Research Spotlight                                       42

2.11 Key Takeaways                                            43

2.12 Discussion                                               44

2.13 Non-OER References                                       45

Chapter 3 Working Effectively in Teams

3.1 How is a Team Different from a Group?                     48

3.2 Phases of Group Development                               50

3.3 Types of Teams                                            51

3.4 Team Member Roles                                         52

3.5 Teamwork: Opportunities to Succeed                        55

3.6 Teamwork: Challenges                                      56

3.7 Application Activity: Group Work Contract                 57

3.8 Research Spotlight                                        61

3.9 Key Takeaways                                             62

3.10 Discussion                                               63

3.11 Non-OER References                                       64

Chapter 4 Influence of Culture on Workplace Communication

4.1 Intercultural Communication                               66

4.2 Co-cultures                                               69

4.3 Microcultures                                             70

4.4 Exercises                                                 72

4.5 Functions of Culture                                      73

4.6 Cultural Characteristics and Communication                75

4.7 Low vs. High Power Distance                               76
4.8 Individualism versus Collectivism                                        78

4.9 Masculinity vs. Femininity                                               80

4.10 Low vs. High Uncertainty Avoidance                                      81

4.11 Long-Term vs. Short-Term Orientation                                    82

4.12 Indulgence vs. Restraint                                                83

4.13 High context vs low context cultures                                    84

4.14 Research Spotlight                                                      87

4.15 Improving Intercultural Communication Skills                            88

4.16 Engaging in Culturally Mindful Interactions                             93

4.17 Key Takeaways                                                           96

4.18 Discussion                                                              97

4.19 Non-OER References                                                      98

Chapter 5 Using Idea mapping and Free Writing in Technical and Professional
Communication

5.1 Using a checklist to generate a topic                                    102

5.2 Freewriting                                                              103

5.3 Idea Mapping                                                             105

5.4 Key Takeaways                                                            107

5.5 Exercises                                                                108

5.6 Discussion                                                               109

Chapter 6 Using Language Strategically

6.1 Language Style                                                           111

6.2 Language: Tone & Voice                                                   113

6.3 Elements of Language Use                                                 115

6.4 Concrete vs. Abstract Language                                           116

6.5 The You Viewpoint and Tone                                               118

6.6 Using "You" Viewpoint Strategically                                      120
6.7 Exercises                                121

6.8 Constructive, Positive Language          122

6.9 Active vs. Passive Voice                 124

6.10 Bias Free Language                      127

6.10.1 Avoiding Gender Bias                  128

6.10.2 Gendered Pronouns                     129

6.10.3 Avoiding Disability Bias              130

6.11 Key Takeaways                           131

6.12 Discussion                              132

6.13 Non-OER References                      133

Chapter 7 Writing Routine Messages

7.1 Structure of Routine Messages            135

7.2 Precise Language Considerations          138

7.3 Writing Emails                           140

7.4 Research Spotlight                       142

7.5 Key Takeaways                            143

7.6 Discussion                               144

7.7 Non-OER References                       145

Chapter 8 Designing and Delivering Bad News

8.1 Bad News Situations                      147

8.2 Approaches to communicating bad news     149

8.3.1 Direct Approach                        150

8.3.2 Indirect Approach                      152

8.4 Research Spotlight                       155

8.5 Key Takeaways                            156

8.6 Discussion                               157

8.7 Resources                                158
8.8 Non-OER References                                       159

Chapter 9 Strategies for Organizing Presentations

9.1 Main Sections of a Presentation                          161

9.2 Basic Organizational Patterns                            163

9.3 Exercises                                                164

9.4 Organizational Strategies for Persuasive Messages        165

9.5 Monroe's Motivated Sequence                              167

9.6 AIDA (Attention--Interest--Desire--Action) Model         169

9.7 Key Takeaways                                            171

9.8 Discussion                                               172

9.9 Non-OER References                                       173

Chapter 10 Types of Presentations

10.1 Introduction to Presentations                           175

10. 2 Types of Presentations                                 176

10.3 Informative Presentations                               177

10.4 Persuasive Presentations                                179

10.4.1 Ethos (Ethical Appeal or Credibility)                 180

10.4.2 Logos (Logical Appeal)                                181

10.4.3 Pathos (Emotional Appeals)                            182

10.4.4 Toulmin's Rhetorical Strategy                         184

10.4.5 Goals of Persuasive Presentations                     185

10.5 Special Occasion Presentations                          187

10.6 Exercises                                               188

10.7 Preparing Presentations: Purposes, Audience, Situation  189

10.8 Key Takeaways                                           192

10.9 Non-OER References                                      193
Chapter 11 Creating Reports and Proposals

11.1 Informational Reports                                                      195

11.2 Parts of an Informational Report                                           196

11.3 Proposals                                                                  199

11.4 Types of Proposals                                                         201

11.5 Common Parts of Proposals                                                  203

11.6 Key Takeaways                                                              206

11.7 Discussion                                                                 207

11.8 Sample Student Work: Trip Report                                           208

11.9 Sample Student Work: Proposal                                              211

Chapter 12 Employment Documents and Interviewing

12.1 Resumes                                                                    220

12.2 Choose from a List of Action Words to Describe your Skills and Experience  223

12.3 Resume Content and Format                                                  224

12.4 Types of Resumes                                                           226

12.5 Cover Letters                                                              228

12.6 Job Search Techniques                                                      230

12.7 Preparing for an Interview                                                 231

12.8 Consider Different Types of Interviews                                     232

12.9 Be Aware of Illegal Interview Questions                                    233

12.10 Prepare for Interview Questions                                           234

12.11 Research Spotlight                                                        235

12.12 Key Takeaways                                                             236

12.13 Discussion                                                                237

12.14 Non-OER References                                                        238
Chapter 13 Citing Sources Appropriately

13.1 What is Plagiarism?                                240

13.2 Three Tips for Avoiding Plagiarism                 242

13.3 Ethical Principles for Choosing and Using Sources  243

13.4 Types of Sources                                   245

13.5 Basics of Using Quotations                         247

13.5.1 Paraphrasing                                     248

13.5.2 Summarizing                                      249

13.5.3 Referencing                                      250

13.6 Integrating Information from Sources               252

13.7 A Quick Guide to APA formatting                    256

13.8 Key Takeaways                                      261

13.9 Discussion                                         262

13.10 Non-OER References                                263

Links by Chapter                                        264

Image Credits                                           289

Derivative Notes                                        292

AI Disclosure                                           312

Accessibility Rubric                                    316

Errata and Versioning History                           320
About the Publisher

If you are an instructor who is using this OER for a course, please let us know by filling out
our OER Adoption Form.

About Mavs Open Press

Creation of this resource was supported by Mavs Open Press, operated by the University
of Texas at Arlington Libraries (UTA Libraries). Mavs Open Press, operated by the Univer-
sity of Texas at Arlington Libraries (UTA Libraries), offers no-cost services for UTA faculty,
staff, and students who wish to openly publish their scholarship. The Libraries' program
provides human and technological resources that empower our communities to create or
adapt open educational resources (OER). Course materials published by Mavs Open Press
are openly licensed using Creative Commons licenses to allow for revision and reuse and
are offered in various digital formats free of charge. Mavs Open Press also supports the
publication of open-access journals authored and edited by UTA faculty, staff, and stu-
dents.

About OER

OER are free teaching and learning materials that are licensed to allow for revision and
reuse. They can be fully self-contained textbooks, videos, quizzes, learning modules, and
more. OER are distinct from public resources in that they permit others to use, copy, dis-
tribute, modify, or reuse the content. The legal permission to modify and customize OER
to meet the specific learning objectives of a particular course make them a useful peda-
gogical tool.

xii | About the Publisher
About Pressbooks

Pressbooks is an open source, web-based authoring tool based on WordPress, and it is the
primary tool that Mavs Open Press uses to create and adapt course materials. Pressbooks
should not be used with Internet Explorer. The following browsers are best to use with
Pressbooks:

  · Firefox
  · Chrome
  · Safari
  · Edge

Contact Us

Information about open education at UTA is available online. Contact us at library-
open@listserv.uta.edu for other inquires related to UTA Libraries publishing services.

                                                                                                                                                        About the Publisher | xiii
Accessibility Statement

UTA Libraries believe education needs to be available to everyone, which means support-
ing the creation of free, open, and accessible educational resources. We are actively com-
mitted to increasing the accessibility and usability of the OER we produce.

Accessibility Features

Mavs Open Press uses Pressbooks to create and distribute OER. In May 2018, Pressbooks
announced their accessibility policy, which outlines efforts and demonstrates commit-
ment to making the software accessible. The web version of this resource has been
designed with accessibility in mind by incorporating the following features.

  · It has been optimized for people who use screen-reader technology.
          all content can be navigated using a keyboard.
          links, headings, tables are formatted to work with screen readers and images
            have alt tags.

  · Information is not conveyed by color alone.
  · Font may be resized from the tab on the top right of the screen.

Other File Formats

In addition to the web version, this book is available in a number of file formats, including
PDF, EPUB (for eReaders), and various editable files. These formats can be retrieved from
the "Download this book" drop-down menu on the book's home page.

xiv | Accessibility Statement
Known Accessibility Issues

The rubric used to evaluate this resource for accessibility is included in the publication's
back matter. While we strive to make our resources as accessible and as usable as possible,
we might not always get it right. Any issues we identify will be listed below. There are cur-
rently no known issues.

                   List of Known Accessibility Issues

Location of issue  Need for     Timeline               Workaround
                   improvement

If you encounter problems accessing this resource, please contact us at library-open@list-
serv.uta.edu to let us know so we can address the issue.

Please include the following information:

  · The location of the problem by providing a web address or page description
  · A description of the problem
  · The computer, software, browser, and any assistive technology you are using that

      can help us diagnose and solve your issue
          e.g., Windows 10, Google Chrome (Version 65.0.3325.181), NVDA screenreader

This statement was last updated on February 24, 2020. It was modified from the BCcampus
Open Education Accessibility Toolkit - 2nd Edition by Amanda Coolidge, Sue Doner, Tara
Robertson, and Josie Gray and is used under a CC BY 4.0 International License.

                                                       Accessibility Statement | xv
About This Project

Overview

We created this book to provide a targeted understanding of the process of commu­
nication to STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) students. We have
included specific and concise information in this book catering to technical and profes­
sional fields. Students will be able to develop their skills in writing, presenting, and inter­
viewing, and improve their interpersonal relationships in the workplace.

Creation Process

We first collaborated to generate a list of topics we wanted to include in the book, gath­
ering insight provided by other faculty members in the Department of Communication at
the University of Texas at Arlington and existing Open Educational Resources (OERs) that
discussed similar topics. Once we had our desired chapter topics, we then began writing
an original text, referencing our sources at the end of each chapter. We pilot tested chap­
ters along the way. All the chapters were pilot tested in Fall 2025. The book has under­
gone several revisions as we polished the content and found some OERs, and sources were
"unpublished" on recent reviews. Diane Waryas Hughey reviewed and edited all the 13
chapters. Damla Ricks and Karishma Chatterjee created PDF chapters for Fall 2025 use. We
ensured the documents were accessible. Damla and Karishma then imported the chapters
into Mavs Open Press, edited for format, and then addressed issues related to accessibil­
ity.

About the Author

Karishma Chatterjee (Ph.D., The Ohio State University) is the course coordinator for
Technical and Professional Communication for Engineering and Science Majors at The

xvi | About This Project
University of Texas at Arlington. She is an Associate Professor of Instruction in the Depart-
ment of Communication. She teaches Persuasive Communication, Group Communication
Theory, Communication Theory, Communication Training and Development, Intercultural
Communication, Communication in Human Relations, and Health Communication. Her
research interests are in interpersonal, instructional, and health communication.
Damla Ricks is a Senior Lecturer who predominantly teaches COMS 2302 Technical and
Professional Communication for Engineering and Science Majors. Damla has 10+ years of
experience in teaching COMS 2302, and she is continuously working towards curriculum
design and development of course content that are applicable to STEM majors. Damla is
actively researching the STEM majors' teamwork experience. She strives to develop real-
life professional application-based assignments. Damla also teaches Fundamentals of Pub-
lic Speaking and Interview Principles courses at the University of Texas at Arlington.
Diane Waryas Hughey (Ph.D., Executive Director of Institutional Effectiveness at Rice
University) is a practitioner of technical and professional communication. Diane draws on
her nearly 30-year experience as postsecondary faculty and administrator to help make
ideas actionable, through innovative practice and elevating excellence. Diane is also a
higher education consultant and trainer who has served as an invited and keynote speaker
at professional conferences, and as a member and chair of regional and national boards.
She served as an accreditation liaison officer and evaluator for WSCUC, accreditation
evaluator for NWCCU and is an evaluator with SACSCOC.

                                                                                                                                                          About This Project | xvii
Acknowledgments

UTA CARES Grant Program

Creation of this OER was funded by the UTA CARES Grant Program, which is sponsored by
UTA Libraries. Under the auspices of UTA's Coalition for Alternative Resources in Educa-
tion for Students (CARES), the grant program supports educators interested in practicing
open education through the adoption of OER and, when no suitable open resource is avail-
able, through the creation of new OER or the adoption of library-licensed or other free
content. Additionally, the program promotes innovation in teaching and learning through
the exploration of open educational practices, such as collaborating with students to pro-
duce educational content of value to a wider community. Information about the grant pro-
gram and funded projects is available online.

Author's Note

Wethank Diane Waryas Hughey for collaborating with us to start this project and for her
expertise in grant writing when we applied for the UTA Cares Grant. We appreciate Robert
Ortiz, Jill James, Abigail "Abby" Warren Dase, and Varaidzo Nyamandifor pilot testing the
book chapters for us. We could not have completed this project without Jessica McClean,
Megan Brittany-Fruia Zara, Daria Monique Mendez, and UTA Library's Open Educational
Resources & Digital Scholarship Department. Their patience, guidance, and support have
been pivotal to the success of this project. Finally, UTA's CRTLE sponsored Professional
Learning Community (PLC) groups about Open Access Resources led by Kimberly "Kim"
H Bruer in conjunction with Megan and Jessica at UTA offered us a space to brainstorm,
discuss, and strategize about this project.

xviii | Acknowledgments
Lead Author/Editor/Project Manager

Karishma Chatterjee, PhD, The University of Texas at Arlington
Damla Ricks, MA & MS, The University of Texas at Arlington

Contributing Authors

Diane Waryas Hughey, PhD, Rice University

Editors

Karishma Chatterjee, PhD, The University of Texas at Arlington
Damla Ricks, MA & MS, The University of Texas at Arlington

Additional Thanks to...

Dr. Markham Shaw, Chair of the Department of Communication, for supporting this
Open Education Resource.

                                                                                                                                                           Acknowledgments | xix
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO
TECHNICAL AND PROFESSIONAL
COMMUNICATION

Chatterjee, Ricks & Waryas Hughey

Learning Objectives

  · Describe the process of communication.
  · Differentiate between technical and professional communication.

1 | Chapter 1 Introduction to Technical and Professional Communication
1.1 Defining Communication

We cannot not communicate in the presence of another person (Watzlawick & Beavin,
1967). This is a well-known idea among scholars and practitioners in the field of commu-
nication. Even if a person decides not to speak, others will interpret or assign meaning to
the act of "not speaking." So, what is communication? There are many definitions of com-
munication. We offer two such definitions because they encompass ideas applicable to
the different contexts in which we communicate. Professors Griffin, Ledbetter, and Sparks
(2015) define communication as "the relational process of creating and interpreting mes-
sages that elicit a response" (p. 6). Professor Rothwell (2019) summarizes communication
as a "transactional process of sharing meaning with others" (p. 12).

Both definitions include concepts such as transactional, messages, relationships, process,
meaning, and response. Let's review each of these terms next.

Communication is transactional means each person is both a sender and receiver simul-
taneously of messages (Rothwell, 2019). As you speak, you receive feedback from other
listeners. You may even adjust how you speak or what you are saying based on the non-
verbal cues listeners send.

Communication is a process, which means it is dynamic or often changing between and
among people. For example, when you first meet someone called Joe at work or in the
classroom, it is common to ask each other questions to get to know each other. However,
you may choose to share information with Joe at first and over time decide not to share
information with Joe.

Communication is often seen as a relational process (Griffin et al., 2015). This is because
human communication takes place between at least two people, and it may affect or
change the nature of the relationship. You thought you were becoming friends with Joe
who begins to snap at you when you approach each other. You then decide to stop trying
to form a friendship with Joe or discontinue an already established friendship.

Messages are a core part of communication. They may be verbal and nonverbal. Verbal
messages include the use of words and nonverbal messages include facial expressions, eye
contact, personal appearance, tone of voice, gestures, touch, posture and the use of space
and time (Rothwell, 2019). The verbal and non-verbal cues are largely symbolic in nature. A

                                                                                                                                                1.1 Defining Communication | 2
symbol represents a referent or thing/object/idea, it is not the thing, object, or idea itself.
How a person interprets the meaning of the symbol will depend on the individual, their
culture, and their understanding of the symbol. For example, the thumbs-up gesture could
have different meanings depending upon the culture. For example, in the United States,
the raised thumb means "way to go" (Martin & Nakayama, 2013) whereas it is seen as an
offensive gesture in Iran (Martin & Nakayama, 2013). The YouTube video below shows how
body language differs across different cultures. It shows how people can convey infor-
mation, emotions and intentions without words. Finally, it offers strategies on improving
intercultural communication.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://uta.pressbooks.pub/professionalandtechnicalcommunication/?p=80#oembed-1

How many non-verbal cues are present in Figure 1.1 that shows two people facing each
other while talking?

Figure 1.1 A Model of Communication

3 | 1.1 Defining Communication
Source: This image was created using AI in Canva on 03/29/2025 by Karishma Chatterjee.

In addition to verbal and non-verbal messages, communication scholars also study texts
(emails, tweets, social media posts etc.), images, audio, and videos as part of the data that
communicates meaning.

Communication has two levels of meaning, content and relational (Watzlawick & Beavin,
1967). Meaning represents an understanding of what is occurring when people interact.
Content level is "what is said," whereas the relational level is "how it is said." If your friend
Sam says, "Will you lend me $50.00?" the content level is the request and the relational
level is how Sam says it including the tone of voice, eye contact, and body language or
the use of emojis if it is a text message. How Sam presents this "ask" depends upon the
relationship you both share, for example the length of your friendship or the closeness of
your friendship. Refer to Figure 1.1, if you had to guess what type of relationship Austin and
Michael have, what would you infer based on the non-verbal cues in the image?

Response is the final piece in the process of communication. A message must elicit any
cognitive, behavioral, or emotional reaction in the intended audience for it to be consid-
ered communication (Griffin et al., 2015). In other words, if a person doesn't hear you even
though you asked them a question, communication may not have occurred. Similarly, if
your friend heard you ask them a favor and felt upset or obliged and then said yes or no,
are all instances of communication having occurred.

Finally, communication occurs via both face-to-face (in person) and mediated channels
(emails, social media etc.) Expectations to respond may change depending on the channel.
Sometimes we send out a message for the purpose of informing someone, thus, not
requiring feedback. For example, an organization may post messages about a new soft-
ware upgrade on a social media channel meant to reach a mass audience. While audience
members may "like" the post, they might not have the option of posting a comment.

One of the major mistakes amateur communicators make is the claim that they are effi-
cient in every type of communication. This is faulty logic considering that the field of com-
munication includes a variety of content that is complex in nature. For example, while a
person may be highly experienced in creative writing and poetry, they may struggle with
writing a one-page rejection letter to a client. Since technical writing tends to be short,
strategic, and to the point, it may require a different set of skills.

While engineering majors have the training and knowledge in technical information, stu-

                                                                                                                                                1.1 Defining Communication | 4
dents are continuing to struggle with communication related concerns as they transition
to the workplace (Ford et al., 2021). We have designed this text to help students learn about
communication and help them develop communication speaking and writing skills.

5 | 1.1 Defining Communication
1.2 Technical and Professional
Communication

Communication occurring in the workplace, through verbal and non-verbal messaging
or writing, via in-person or through mediated channels, are all considered to be pro-
fessional communication. Technical and business communication are often thought to
be part of professional communication (IEEE Professional Communication Society, 2025).
IEEE, considered to be the world's largest technical professional organization (IEEE.org,
2025), established its Professional Communication Society (PRO COMM) in recognition of
the importance of communicating effectively in the workplace. IEEE Professional Com-
munication Society's mission is "understanding and promoting effective communication
in engineering, scientific, and other technical environments."

Technical and professional discourses involve communicating complex information to a
specific audience who will use that information to accomplish some goal or task in a man-
ner that is accurate, useful, and clear. Both technical and professional communication can
be described as:

  · Purposeful (has a specific intent)
  · Goal oriented (in terms of both hard goals like project deadlines and soft goals like

      rapport-building and maintaining)
  · Aimed at audiences of stakeholders with agency and/or relevant credentials
  · Shaped by the discursive conventions of a professional community.

When you write an email to your professor or supervisor, develop a presentation or
report, design a sales flyer, or create a webpage, you are engaging in technical and pro-
fessional communication. Along those lines, "technical" and "professional" are used inter-
changeably throughout this textbook when referring to writers and/or writing produced
by them. In this textbook, the word "document" refers to any of the many forms of tech-
nical writing, whether it is a web page, an instruction manual, a lab report, or a proposal.

This section is adapted from the following sources:

"What is Technical and Professional Communication?" in Howdy or Hello? Technical and

                                                                                                                      1.2 Technical and Professional Communication | 6
Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah
LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt, licensed under a Creative Com-
mons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

7 | 1.2 Technical and Professional Communication
1.3 How "Technical" Writing and
"Professional" Writing are Related and
How they Differ

       Technical writing--is writing about any technical topic. The term "technical" refers to specialized knowledge
       that is held by experts and specialists. Whatever your major is, you are developing an expertise and becom-
       ing a specialist in a particular technical area. And whenever you try to write or say anything about your
       field, you are engaged in technical communication.

Technical writing has six characteristics: Planning, clarity, brevity, simplicity, word choice,
and active voice (Russ, 2015). We next describe each and provide examples for clarifica-
tion.
Planning takes place when the writer first considers the reader (demographics, level of
education, knowledge in the field...etc.) to adapt language to a more particular body of
individuals rather than the general population. Second, the author must also have a clear
understanding of the reasons behind the message along with the acceptable document
format (i.e. progress report, lab report, etc.). Lastly, the content must be well organized,
such that the most important part of the message is presented before additional details
are provided.
Clarity characteristic implies that the writer should use technical jargon based on the
audience because it may be difficult for the lay audience to comprehend. For example, if
the writer uses software names or scientific terminology that the reader does not recog-
nize, they (the readers) may not understand nor retain the information.
Brevity includes using short sentences and omitting unnecessary verbiage to keep the
message concise and easier to read! Writers should remove repetitive sentences.
Simplicity entails removing unnecessary details, which can overwhelm the reader. For

                                                            1.3 How "Technical" Writing and "Professional" Writing are Related and How they Differ | 8
example, recognize the difference between stating that the world population is:
"8,256,016,994" versus "about 8.2 billion".

Word Choice explores the importance of the way the sentence is written to help the
reader grasp the message in a logical order. For example: "When a computer program
freezes, the user should restart the computer." vs. "The users should first try restarting
their devices if they are experiencing a program that is freezing their computer." The sec-
ond sentence in this instance directs the reader to take steps prior to acknowledging the
issue and adds additional important information that the program could be used via dif-
ferent devices.

Active Voice use is suitable in most contexts as it usually requires less wording and is con-
sidered as more direct, thus clear to the reader. Passive voice should be utilized sparingly.
For example, the first sentence is shorter and gets to the point of the message sooner
than the second sentence: "The company will now start using Microsoft Teams to hold
monthly meetings" vs. "Sneha Williams from Human Resources stated that, going forward,
Microsoft Teams must be utilized by all company employees during monthly meetings."

       Professional (or business) writing, on the other hand, covers much of the additional writing you'll be doing in
       your profession. Professional writing includes correspondence through channels such as emails, memos,
       newsletters, business letters, and cover letters, as well as other documents such as resumes, social media
       posts, blogs, and vlogs. While professional writing may convey technical information, it is usually briefer and
       targets an individual or small group of readers who may or may not be experts in the field.

You will get a chance to explore both technical and professional communication in this
course. You will write short memos, presentations, proposals, and reports. Keep in mind
that both professional and technical communication are vital in succeeding as a STEM
Major.

This section is adapted from "What is Technical and Professional Communication?" in
Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt
McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt,

9 | 1.3 How "Technical" Writing and "Professional" Writing are Related and How they Differ
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 Interna-
tional License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                           1.3 How "Technical" Writing and "Professional" Writing are Related and How they Differ | 10
1.4 Importance of Audience

Another key part of the definition of technical and professional communication is the
receiver of the information--the audience. Technical communication is the delivery of
technical information to readers (or listeners or viewers) in a manner that is adapted to
their needs, level of understanding, and background. In fact, this audience element is so
important that it is one of the cornerstones of this course: you are challenged to write
about technical subjects but in a way that a beginner--a non-specialist--could understand.
This ability to "translate" technical information to non-specialists is a key skill to any tech-
nical communicator. Technology companies are constantly struggling to find effective
ways to help customers or potential customers understand the advantages or the opera-
tion of their new products.

In addition, communicating with employees within an organization also requires superior
professional communication skills. Employees prefer detailed information in a timely
manner when there are companywide changes such as layoffs and wage cuts (Sguera et
al., 2021). When companies do not communicate, employees tend to become cynical and
unhappy with their workplace. An individual with excellent communication skills is an
asset to every organization. No matter what career you plan to pursue, learning to express
yourself professionally in speech and in writing will help you get there.

Profiling or analyzing your audience takes skill and consideration. An effective commu-
nicator will need to consider the length of the message and the channel in which the
message is communicated based on the audience's needs. When you sit down to write,
prepare a presentation or communicate with clients or coworkers, ask yourself the fol-
lowing questions:

  · How big is my main audience? Is it one person, two, a few, several, a dozen, dozens,
      hundreds, or an indeterminately large number (the public)?

  · Who might be my secondary or tertiary audiences (e.g., people you can see CC'd or
      people you can't because they could be forwarded your email without you knowing)?

  · What is my professional or personal relationship to them relative to their position/
      seniority in their organization's hierarchy?

  · How much do they already know about the topic of my message?
  · What is their demographic--i.e., their age, gender, cultural background, educational

11 | 1.4 Importance of Audience
      level, and beliefs?
  · How can I best write and deliver (i.e., channel) my message so it is received by my

      audience as I intend for it to be received?
This section is adapted from the following sources:
"What is Technical and Professional Communication" in Howdy or Hello? Technical and
Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah
LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt, licensed under a Creative Com-
mons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.
"Analyzing Your Audience" in Communication at Work Copyright © 2019 by Jordan Smith is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                1.4 Importance of Audience | 12
   1.5 Key Takeaways

         · Communication is a dynamic, relational, and transactional process involving both verbal and nonverbal
             messages that elicit responses.

         · Technical communication conveys specialized information clearly to help audiences complete tasks,
             while professional communication includes broader workplace writing for non-expert audiences.

         · Audience awareness is essential; effective communication must be tailored to the audience's knowledge,
             background, and expectations.

         · Technical and professional writing is purposeful, goal-oriented, and must be clear, concise, and aligned
             with professional conventions.

         · Strong communication skills are vital across all fields, especially the ability to translate technical content
             for diverse audiences.

13 | 1.5 Key Takeaways
1.6 Discussion

    · Discuss how verbal communication impacts your line of work.
    · Examine how written communication will be utilized in your field.
    · What type of communication skills will be necessary to succeed in an engineering or science field? Con-

        sider audience analysis for a moment. You are writing a proposal for a land surveying company for an app
        to speed up their communication process related to projects. The owners of the company are from The
        Boomer and Gen X generation. What would be your audience considerations as you develop your pro-
        posal and upcoming presentation?

                                                                                                                                                             1.6 Discussion | 14
1.7 Non-OER References

Ford, J. D., Paretti, M., Kotys-Schwartz, D., Howe, S., & Ott, R. (2021). New engineers' trans-
   fer of communication activities from school to work. IEEE Transactions on Professional
   Communication, 64(2), 105-120.

Griffin, E., Ledbetter, A., & Sparks, G. (2015). A first look at communication theory (9th Ed.).
   McGraw-Hill.

IEEE. (February, 2025). IEEE at a glance. https://www.ieee/org/about/at-a-glance
IEEE Professional Communication Society (2025). Our Vision and Mission. https://pro-

   comm.ieee.org/our-mission/
Martin, J. N. & Nakayama, T. K. (2018). Intercultural communication in contexts (7th ed.).

   New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rothwell, J. D. (2019). In mixed company: Communicating in small groups and teams (10th

   Ed.). Oxford University Press.
Rus, D. (2015). Developing technical writing skills to engineering students. Procedia Tech­

   nology, 19, 1109-1114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.protcy.2015.02.158
Sguera, F., Patient, D., Diehl, M., & Bobocel, R. (2021). Thank you for the bad news: Reducing

   cynicism in highly identified employees during adverse organizational change. Journal
   of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 95(1), 90-130.
Watzlawick, P., & Beavin, J. (1967). Some formal aspects of communication. The American
   Behavioral Scientist 10(8); 4 - 8.
The Cultural Explorer (2023). The secret language of culture: How body language differs
   across the globe [Video]. YouTube. Retrieved Dec 30, 2025. https://youtu.be/
   YAV4SDgVv-o?si=6bhWYjJQrEjWc9mm

15 | 1.7 Non-OER References
CHAPTER 2 INTERPERSONAL AND
MEDIATED ASPECTS OF TECHNICAL
AND PROFESSIONAL
COMMUNICATION

Ricks & Chatterjee

Learning Objectives

  · Define the six principles of interpersonal communication.
  · Describe the role of interpersonal needs in workplace relationships.
  · Identify types of leadership and followership.
  · Differentiate between social and emotional intelligence.
  · Recognize differences between effective and ineffective interpersonal communica-

      tion.
  · Choose channels to meet message goals.
  · Effectively use phones and emails when communicating at work.
  · Identify personal responsibilities in interpersonal communication.

                                                   Chapter 2 Interpersonal and Mediated Aspects of Technical and Professional Communication | 16
2.1 Interpersonal Communication

Communication occurring between two people whether it is in person or via technology
is interpersonal communication. In other words, the exchange of nonverbal and/or verbal
messages between two people is interpersonal communication (Guerrero et al., 2021, p.
2). Engineering and science students need knowledge and skills in interpersonal commu-
nication considering they are required to consistently communicate with team members,
colleagues, and managers (Ford et al., 2021). This section discusses the six principles of
interpersonal communication offered by professors Guerrero, Anderson, and Afifi, which
will help us understand its importance in the workplace.

The first principle is interpersonal communication includes verbal and non-verbal mes-
sages people exchange via different channels. For example, you might interact with co-
workers in person, or on Slack. You may also email colleagues and clients and have
meetings via Microsoft Teams or Zoom. During these meetings you not only listen to what
co-workers are saying but also pay attention to their facial expressions, tone of voice,
inflection, and clothes they wear.

The second principle is that one cannot not communicate in face-to-face settings. If a
colleague and you notice each other, you will draw meaning based on an action or lack
of action on each other's part. For example, if you both see each other at two ends of a
hallway and you decide not to acknowledge your colleague, but they wave at you, your
colleague might interpret this action as being "ignored."

The third principle is that people use interpersonal communication to fulfill goals.
Although we may not always have an "agenda" when we communicate, people do use com-
munication to manage impressions, build relationships, and accomplish tasks. Managing
impressions is tied to the image we want to convey. Perhaps you want co-workers and
your boss to perceive you as being professional and hard-working. How we communicate
with colleagues affects the type of relationships you want to have with them. For exam-
ple, you may want to be "friendly" but not best friends with colleagues. To meet this goal,
you may occasionally chat with them but not hang out socially with them. Finally, we often
meet task goals by requesting a supervisor to recommend us for a promotion or asking to
be placed alongside a senior colleague on a certain project so you can learn from them.

The fourth principle is that interpersonal communication varies in effectiveness. When

17 | 2.1 Interpersonal Communication
people achieve shared meaning or when they are on the same page, communication is
most effective. However, there is room for attempted communication, miscommunication,
misinterpretation, and accidental communication.

When a person sends a message with intention and the receiver fails to interpret,
attempted communication has occurred. For instance, you email your vacation request
to your supervisor and a week later realize you have been scheduled to meet with a new
client the week you had wanted time off. You may have submitted the vacation request
on time but somehow it got delayed in delivery due to technology, accidental placement
in junk mail or simply not read by the recipient just yet. Delayed communication in this
scenario can make it seem as if your request is too last-minute to your supervisor. In addi-
tion, it may seem as if you are not interested in working with the new client.

When a person sends a message with intention and it is interpreted inaccurately, miscom-
munication has taken place. Outside of the United States, many countries list their dates
by listing the smallest time to a longer time period (dd/mm/yyyy). In the U.S. we most
often list the month first (mm/dd/yyyy). This small difference can cause problems with
contracts, expiration dates, and project extension requests.

Misinterpretation and accidental communication occur when a person sends a message
without intention, and it is interpreted inaccurately and interpreted accurately respec-
tively. If your vehicle has a flat tire because of which you get late to work and perform
poorly during a client pitch, and your co-worker thinks you do not like working with them,
a misinterpretation has occurred. When both you and your friend go up for promotion,
only you earn it, and they see you fist bump another colleague when you did not mean for
them to see your happy reaction, this is an example of accidental communication.

The fifth principle of interpersonal communication is that messages have a content and
relational level of meaning. People often consider how something is being said (the tone of
voice, word choice, eye-contact etc.), and the situation when interpreting "what" is being
said. For example, when working in teams via Zoom or other digital channel, it may be
easier to miss that one of your teammates is currently nervous since you are unable to see
their lower body. Fidgeting or shaking their leg would give you the idea that the person
may be uncomfortable. In person, you may gain a better understanding of an individual's
gestures and presence. In addition, the messaging often reflects the relationship people
have or hope to have with other people. If you have a history with the teammate who gets

                                                                                                                                       2.1 Interpersonal Communication | 18
nervous on Zoom when presenting, you might check in with them on IM to show your
support or say or text "nice presentation," to boost their self-esteem.
The sixth principle is that interpersonal communication can be symmetrical or asymmet-
rical. People use a range of relational messages often depending upon the power a per-
son brings to the interaction. Symmetrical communication often involves people matching
each other's messages, for example, Jessica tells her co-worker Paul "Do proofread the
document by the end of the day," to which Paul replies, "No can do because I am working
on XYZ project." If you are introduced to a new colleague and they extend their hand, if
you shake their hand, it is symmetrical communication.
Asymmetrical communication occurs when there is a mismatch verbally and/or nonver-
bally. If Jessica tells her co-worker Paul "Do proofread the document by the end of the
day," to which Paul responds, " Sure, thing," this exchange would be considered asymmet-
rical because Jessica's dominant message is met with Paul's submissiveness. In addition to
verbal messages, nonverbal asymmetry is also present when people communicate. Han-
nah maintains eye contact when talking, but not Priya who may be from a culture where
people do a lot of face saving and it might be considered rude to stare.

19 | 2.1 Interpersonal Communication
2.2 Interpersonal Needs in Workplace
Relationships

The second principle of interpersonal communication recognizes that people through
their communication meet several needs such as managing impressions, building relation-
ships, and meeting goals. From business lunches to conferences, you may need to repre-
sent your company in a variety of social settings. If you are at such an event, you should
always remember that your manners will be assessed. Though it may not be obvious, peo-
ple will observe whether you use your utensils correctly, chew with your mouth closed,
use your cell phone when others are speaking, or dress appropriately. Why does all this
matter?

You may think all of this has nothing to do with the quality of work; however, your business
etiquette shows the extent to which you developed appropriate habits and are self-aware.
Someone who chews with his/her mouth open, for instance, either lacks self-awareness
or does not care what people think. Either way, that lack of self-awareness can lead to
behaviors that will ruin the reputation of the company you represent.

In addition to managing impressions, our interpersonal communication plays a role in
workplace relationships. Next, we briefly discuss workplace friendships and leadership-
followership relationships. According to Sias and Cahill (1998), workplace friendships are
developed by a series of influencing factors: individual/personal factors, contextual fac-
tors, and communication changes. First, some friendships develop because we are drawn
to the other person. Maybe you're drawn to a person in a meeting because she has a sense
of humor that is like yours, or maybe you find that another coworker's attitude towards
the organization is exactly like yours. Whatever the reason, we are often drawn to peo-
ple that are like us. For this reason, we are often drawn to people who resemble ourselves
demographically (e.g., age, sex, race, religion, etc.).

A second reason we develop relationships in the workplace is because of many different
contextual factors. Maybe your office is right next to someone else's office, so you develop
a friendship because you are next to each other all the time. Perhaps you develop friend-
ships because you are on the same committee or put on the same work project with
another person. In large organizations, we often end up making friends with people simply

                                                                                                             2.2 Interpersonal Needs in Workplace Relationships | 20
because we get to meet them. Depending on the size of your organization, you may end up
meeting and interacting with a tiny percentage of people, so you're not likely to become
friends with everyone in the organization equally. Other organizations provide a culture
where friendships are approved of and valued.

In the realm of workplace friendship research, two important factors have been noticed
concerning contextual factors controlled by the organization: opportunity and prevalence
(Neilson et al., 2000). Friendship opportunity refers to the degree to which an organiza-
tion promotes and enables workers to develop friendships within the organization. Does
your organization have regular social gatherings for employees? Does your organization
promote informal interaction among employees, or does it clamp down on coworker com-
munication? Not surprisingly, individuals who work in organizations that allow for and
help friendships tend to be satisfied, more motivated, and generally more committed to
the organization itself.

Friendship prevalence, on the other hand, is less of an organizational culture and more
the degree to which an individual feels that they have developed or can develop workplace
friendships. You may have an organization that attempts to create an environment where
people can make friends, but if you don't think you can trust your coworkers, you're not
very likely to make workplace friends. Although the opportunity is important when see-
ing how an individual responds to the organization, friendship prevalence is probably the
more important factor of the two. If I am a highly communicative apprehensive employee,
I may not end up making any friends at work, so I may see my workplace place as just a
job without any commitment at all. When an individual isn't committed to the workplace,
they will probably start looking for another job (Neilson et al., 2000).

Lastly, as friendships develop, our communication patterns within those relationships
change. For example, when we move from being just an acquaintance to being a friend
with a coworker, we are more likely to increase the amount of communication about
non-work and personal topics. When we transition from friend to close friend, Sias and
Cahill note that this change is marked by decreased caution and increased intimacy.
Furthermore, this transition in friendship is characterized by an increase in discussing
work-related problems. The final transition from a close friend to "almost best" friend.
According to Sias and Cahill, "Because of the increasing amount of trust developed
between the coworkers, they felt freer to share opinions and feelings, particularly their
feelings about work frustrations. Their discussion about both work and personal issues
became increasingly more detailed and intimate" (Sias & Cahill, 1998).

21 | 2.2 Interpersonal Needs in Workplace Relationships
This section is derived from Interpersonal Relationships at Work in Interpersonal Com­
munication - Simple Book Publishing Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Pun-
yanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where other-
wise noted.

                                                                                                             2.2 Interpersonal Needs in Workplace Relationships | 22
2.3 A Perspective on Leadership

The Situational-Leadership Model

When you hear the word "leader" what immediately comes to your mind? What about
when you hear the word "follower?" The words "leader" and "follower" bring up all kinds of
examples (both good and bad) for most of us. We have all experienced times when we have
followed a fantastic leader, and we have had times when we have worked for a less than
an effective leader. At the same time, are we always the best followers? We will examine
prevailing leadership theory, and then we will end the section discussing the concept of
followership.

                                      One of the most discussed models of lead-

                                      ership is Paul Hersey and Kenneth Blan-

                                      chard's (1969) Situational-Leadership

                                      Model (The Center for Leadership Studies,

                                      n.d.) The model is divided into two dimen-

                                      sions: task (leader directive behavior) and

                                      relational (leader supportive behav-

                                      ior). Hersey and Blanchard's Situational-

                                      Leadership Model starts with the basic

                                      idea that not all employees have the same

                                      needs. Some employees need a lot more

                                      handholding and guidance than other

                                      employees, and some employees need

                                      more relational contact than others. As

                                      such, Hersey and Blanchard defined lead-

Figure 2. 1 Hersey and Blanchard's    ership along two continuums: supportive
Situational-Leadership Theory         and directive. Supportive leadership

                                      behavior occurs when a leader is focused

on providing relational support for their followers; whereas directive support involves

overseeing the day-to-day tasks that a follower accomplishes. As a leader and follower

progress in their relationship, Hersey and Blanchard argue that the nature of their rela-

23 | 2.3 A Perspective on Leadership
tionship often changes. Figure 2.1 contains the basic model proposed by Hersey and Blan-
chard (1969) and is ultimately broken into four leadership styles: directing, coaching, sup-
porting, and delegating (Hersey, Blanchard & Johnson, 2000).

Directing

Hersey and Blanchard's first type of leader is the directing leader. Directing leaders set the
basic roles an individual has and the tasks an individual needs to accomplish. After setting
these roles and tasks, the leader then monitors and oversees these followers closely. From
a communication perspective, these leaders tend to make decisions and then communi-
cate them to their followers. There tends to be little to no dialogue about either roles or
tasks.

Coaching

Hersey and Blanchard's second type of leader is the coaching leader. Coaching leaders still
set the basic roles and tasks that need to be accomplished by specific followers, but they
allow for input from their followers. As such, the communication between coaching lead-
ers and their followers tends to be more interactive instead of one-way. However, the ulti-
mate decisions about roles and tasks are still ultimately the leader's decision.

Supporting

Hersey and Blanchard's third type of leader is the supporting leader. As a leader becomes
more accustomed to a follower's ability to accomplish tasks and take responsibility for
those tasks, a leader may become more supportive. A supporting leader allows followers
to make the day-to-day decisions related to getting tasks accomplished, but determining
what tasks need to be accomplished is a mutually agreed upon decision. In this case, the
leader is more like a facilitator of a follower's work instead of dictating the follower's work.

                                                                                                                                         2.3 A Perspective on Leadership | 24
Delegating

Hersey and Blanchard's final type of leader is the delegating leader. The delegating leader
is one where the follower and leader are mutually involved in the basic decision making
and problem-solving process. Still, the ultimate control for accomplishing tasks is left up
to the follower. Followers ultimately determine when they need a leader's support and
how much support is needed. As you can see from Figure 2.1, these relationships are ones
that are considered highly developed and ultimately involve a level of trust on both sides
of the leader-follower relationship.
This section is derived from Interpersonal Relationships at Work in Interpersonal Com­
munication - Simple Book Publishing Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Pun-
yanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where other-
wise noted.

25 | 2.3 A Perspective on Leadership
2.4 Followership

Followership Styles

Although there is a great deal of leadership about the concepts of leadership, there isn't as
much about people who follow those leaders. Followership is "the act or condition under
which an individual helps or supports a leader in the accomplishment of organizational
goals" (Wrench et al., 2015, p. 209).
Ira Chaleff was one of the first researchers to examine the nature of followership in his
book, The Courageous Follower (Courageous Followership, 2022). Chaleff (2003) believes
that followership is not something that happens naturally for a lot of people, so it is some-
thing in which people must be willing to engage. From this perspective, followership is
not a passive behavior. Ultimately, followership can be broken down into two primary fac-
tors: the courage to support the leader and the courage to challenge the leader's behavior
and policies. The two primary factors lead to four followership styles: resource, individu-
alist, implementer, and partner. Before proceeding to followership styles, you may want to
watch the video Chaleff produced that uses tango to illustrate his basic ideas of follower­
ship below:

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://uta.pressbooks.pub/professionalandtechnicalcommunication/?p=132#oembed-1

Resource

The first follower style discussed by Chaleff is the resource. Resources will not challenge
or support their leader. Chaleff argues that resources generally lack the intellect, imagi-
nation, and courage to do more than what is asked of them. When it comes to resources,
they usually do what is requested of them, but nothing that goes beyond that.

                                                                                                                                                              2.4 Followership | 26
Individualist

The second followership style is the individualist. Individualists tend to do what they think
is best in the organization, not necessarily what they've been asked to do. It's not that indi-
vidualists are inherently bad followers; they have their perspectives on how things should
get accomplished and are more likely to follow their perspectives than those of their lead-
ers. Individualists provide little support for their leaders, and they are the first to speak
out with new ideas that contradict their leader's ideas.

Implementer

The third followership style is the implementer. Implementers are very important for
organizations because they tend to do the bulk of the day-to-day work that needs to be
accomplished. Implementers busy themselves performing tasks and getting things done,
but they do not question or challenge their leaders.

Partner

The final type of followership is the partner. Partners have an inherent need to be seen as
equal to their leaders regarding both intellect and skill levels. Partners take responsibil-
ity for their own and their leader's ideas and behaviors. Partners do support their leaders
but have no problem challenging their leaders. When they do disagree with their leaders,
partners point out specific concerns with their leader's ideas and behaviors.
Figure 2.1 Hersey and Blanchard's Situational-Leadership Theory is derived from Interper­
sonal Relationships at Work in Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publishing
Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 Interna­
tional License, except where otherwise noted.
This section is derived from Interpersonal Relationships at Work in Interpersonal Com­
munication - Simple Book Publishing Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Pun-

27 | 2.4 Followership
yanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where other-
wise noted.

                                                                                                                                                              2.4 Followership | 28
2.5 Emotional vs. Social Intelligence

The fourth principle of interpersonal communication addresses effective from non-effec-
tive communication. Emotional and social intelligence as explained by Smith (2019), in
Communicating at Work, play a role in becoming effective in communication.

People who lack social intelligence, perhaps because they may have missed opportunities
to develop conversational skills in their formative school years, come off as awkward in
face-to-face conversation. They typically fail to interpret correctly nonverbal cues that
say, "Now it's your turn to speak" or "Okay, I'm done with this conversation; let's wrap it
up." It can be difficult to interact in such situations because you may feel like you must do
most of the work to moderate the conversation. Like any other type of intelligence, how-
ever, social intelligence can be developed through an understanding of the principles of
good conversation.

Social Intelligence incorporates unspoken rules to cooperate and get along with others,
especially in conversation. This includes reading nonverbal cues so that you know:

  · How and when to initiate conversation
  · When it is your turn to speak and when to listen to keep a conversation going
  · What to say and what not say
  · How to say what you mean in a manner that will be understood by your audience
  · When and how to use humor effectively and when not to
  · How and when to end conversation gracefully

Emotional intelligence (EI) like Social Intelligence, involves being a good reader of people
in social contexts, being able to distinguish different emotions, and knowing what to do
about them regarding others and yourself. Strong EI means knowing how a person is likely
to react to what you are about to say and adjusting your message accordingly and then
adjusting again according to how they react. Those who lack emotional intelligence can
often be difficult to work with and offensive, often without meaning to be.

This section is adapted from Professionalism, Etiquette, and Ethical Behavior in Commu­
nication at Work - Simple Book Publishing (2nd ed.) Copyright © 2025 by Jordan Smith

29 | 2.5 Emotional vs. Social Intelligence
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                   2.5 Emotional vs. Social Intelligence | 30
2.6 Effective Interpersonal

Communication

Jordan Smith (2025) summarizes a TEDtalk, 10 Ways to Have a Better Conversation by
Celeste Headlee (2016) and offers us concrete ways to promote effective interpersonal
communication.

  · Be Present: Devote your undivided attention to the person you are speaking with and
      do not multitask. You won't have to pretend to pay attention by nodding and making
      eye contact if you're doing that anyway.

  · Be prepared to learn: A conversation is a dialogue, not a monologue where you sim-
      ply unload your opinion on someone and receive nothing in return except for the
      satisfaction of dominating them.

  · Ask open-ended questions: When you want your conversation partner to answer on
      their own terms ask "what" and "how" questions such as "How did the meeting go?"
      "What was the meeting about?" When seeking short answers ask specific questions
      such as "Was that a good meeting?" You will get a shorter answer such as "yes" or
      "no." Try to ask a "what" and "how" questions "How did the meeting go?" "What was
      the meeting about?"

  · Listen without interruption: Respond to your conversation partner's main points
      rather than to some digressive story you were reminded of by one of their minor
      points. When you respond in that way, it reveals that you haven't been listening past
      the part that inspired the barely relevant thing you feel contributes to the conversa-
      tion, though it really does not move the conversation along so much as derail it.

  · Honor the uniqueness of their experience: When the speaker relates something that
      happened to them, resist the urge to make it about you by equating their experience
      with yours. If they are talking about grieving a death in the family, for instance, don't
      dishonor that information share by responding with how you felt when your dog
      died. It is not the same.

  · Stay out of the weeds: Rather than struggle to offer up all the details (the names,
      places, dates, etc.) and digress on minutiae, focus on your main points.

  · Listen: A conversation is a dialogue, not a monologue, and therefore requires that
      you actively pay attention to what the speaker says to understand it rather than to

31 | 2.6 Effective Interpersonal Communication
      merely reply to it
  · Be brief: People are busy, so if your conversation detains them for longer than they

      have time for, you will stretch their patience. Pay attention to the other parties' non-
      verbal communication. If they are starting to step away, look away, or nod fast, this
      may indicate that they are done with the conversation.
  · Ensure you pronounce someone's name correctly: Some take offense at their name
      being mispronounced, and especially with their name being confused with a differ-
      ent but similar name. If someone's name looks unpronounceable on paper, simply
      asking them how they prefer their name to be pronounced is better than confidently
      mispronouncing it.
This section is adapted from Verbal Communication and Conversation in Communication
at Work - Simple Book Publishing (2nd ed.) Copyright © 2025 by Jordan Smith licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.

                                                                                                                         2.6 Effective Interpersonal Communication | 32
2.7 Channels and Information Richness

Information richness refers to the amount of sensory input available during a communica-
tion. Channels vary in their information richness. Information-rich channels convey more
non-verbal information. For example, a face-to-face conversation is richer than a phone
call, but a phone call is richer than an email, since you can't see or hear the individual.
We must consider the speed of the channel, along with the importance of the topic that
we hope to communicate. If the information needs to be delivered urgently, a phone call
may be more appropriate than an email. Verbal communication makes more sense when
the sender is conveying a sensitive or emotional message, needs feedback immediately,
and does not need a permanent record of the conversation. If the information needs to
be clear for every party and should be documented due to ethical and legal reasons, use
written communication.
Every channel has benefits and concerns, depending on how it is utilized by the employee.
The key to effective communication is to match the communication channel with the goal
of the message (Barry & Fulmer, 2004). See Table 2.1 for benefits, concerns, and situations
when a medium should be used.

33 | 2.7 Channels and Information Richness
                     Table 2.1 Benefits and Concerns Related to Media Use

Medium               Benefits            Concerns                          Sample Situations
                                                                           for Use

                               Synchronous

Face-to-Face, loca­  Supports both       Time and location con­            Address sensitive
tion-based           verbal and non-     straints - must gather            issues.
                     verbal communi­     participants in one place         Implement a
                     cation.             at one time.                      change in process
                     Get immediate       No record of the con­             - can immediately
                     feedback.           versation, unless it is           address questions
                     Address questions   taped. Taping may                 and concerns.
                     immediately.        change the nature of the
                     Ability to modu­    conversation.
                     late tone.
                     Scalable from two
                     to many people.
                     Build relation­
                     ships.

Digital Real-time:   Supports both       Time constraints - must           Address sensitive
Skype, Zoom, Google  verbal and non-     gather people at one              issues.
Hangouts, etc.       verbal communi­     time, perhaps over mul­           Implement a
                     cation.             tiple time zones.                 change in process
                     Get immediate       Technical issues.                 - can immediately
                     feedback.           Difficult with large num­         address questions
                     Address questions   bers.                             and concerns.
                     immediately.                                          Communicate with
                     Build relation­                                       a dispersed group.
                     ships.
                     Ability to modu­
                     late tone.
                     Ability to capture
                     and archive the
                     communication.

Verbal Synchronous:  Low-tech, easy to   Time constraints - must           Address sensitive
phone                use.                gather people at one              issues.
                     Get immediate       time.                             Implement a
                     feedback.           Difficult with large num­         change in process
                     Address questions   bers.                             - can immediately
                     immediately.        Difficult to capture and          address questions
                     Build relation­     archive the conversa­             and concerns
                     ships.              tion, unless taped.               Communicate one-
                     Ability modulate                                      to-one.
                     tone.

                                                   2.7 Channels and Information Richness | 34
Medium                Benefits              Concerns                    Sample Situations
                                                                        for Use

                                            Asynchronous

Presentation with     Get information to    Possibility for misinter­   Generate interest
images, text, and/or  many people at        pretation.                  in a topic, as an ini­
voice: PowerPoint,    once.                 Message can be ignored.     tial stage before a
YouTube/ asynchro­    Communication         Needs to be crafted         discussion or
nous video presen­    can be archived       carefully to retain atten­  report.
tation, etc.          and used as refer­    tion.                       Teach a concept or
                      ence.                                             process.
                      Visuals can
                      enhance the
                      meaning of text.

Verbal Asynchro­      Get information to    Possibility for misinter­   Provide routine
nous: audio file,     many people at        pretation.                  information -
voicemail             once.                 Message can be ignored.     announcements,
                      Can manipulate        Message needs to be         reminders.
                      tone.                 crafted carefully;          Teach a concept or
                                            lengthy, unfocused ver­     process briefly.
                                            bal messages disengage      Offer a personal­
                                            the listener.               ized response in a
                                                                        one-to-one com­
                                                                        munication situa­
                                                                        tion.

Website/Blog          Get information to    Possibility for misinter­   Teach a concept or
                      many people at        pretation.                  process.
                      once                  Message can be ignored.     Provide a group or
                      Communication         Needs to be crafted         organization's
                      can be archived       carefully to retain atten­  background, mis­
                      and used as refer­    tion and provide the        sion.
                      ence                  intended message.           Offer opportunities
                      Visuals can           Technology glitches.        for asynchronous
                      enhance the                                       interaction, e.g.,
                      meaning of text.                                  ask questions,
                                                                        request informa­
                                                                        tion or support.

35 | 2.7 Channels and Information Richness
Medium               Benefits            Concerns                    Sample Situations
                                                                     for Use

Email                Get information to  Not secure - can be for­    Provide routine
                     many people at      warded to unintended        information -
                     once.               audiences.                  announcements,
                     Immediacy - can     Possibility for misinter­   meeting reminders.
                     be sent and         pretation.                  Follow-up to solid­
                     received quickly    More difficult to create    ify information
                     and responded to    specific tones.             after a meeting or
                     quickly.            Message can be ignored,     training.
                     Communication       especially if email is
                     can be archived     plentiful within the
                     and used as refer­  group/organization.
                     ence.
                     Low-tech, easy to
                     use.

Written documents:   Get information to  Possibility for misinter­   Record the busi­
reports, proposals,  many people at      pretation.                  ness of the group
memos, correspon­    once.               More difficult to create    or organization.
dence                Communication       specific tones.             Formal communi­
                     can be archived     Message can be ignored.     cation both within
                     and used as refer­  Needs to be crafted         and outside of the
                     ence.               carefully to retain atten­  organization.
                     Low-tech, easy to   tion and provide the
                     use.                intended message.
                     Provides the        Feedback is not immedi­
                     writer with time    ate.
                     to craft, review,
                     and edit the mes­
                     sage.
                     Printed docu­
                     ments not easily
                     changed; there­
                     fore, more secure.
                     Traditional pur­
                     poses and formats
                     that most audi­
                     ence members
                     understand.

This section is adapted from Communication Channel in Professional Communications
by J.R. Dingwall, Chuck Labrie, Trecia McLennon, and Laura Underwood. Copyright © by
Olds College licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
except where otherwise noted.

The table Benefits and Concerns Related to Media Use is derived from Medium in Com­

                                                                                                                               2.7 Channels and Information Richness | 36
munication for Professionals | Simple Book Publishing by Susan Oaks licensed under CC BY-
NC: Attribution-NonCommercial.

37 | 2.7 Channels and Information Richness
2.8 Effectively Using Telephones and
Emails in the Workplace

Workplace Conventions

Telephone Etiquette

Business conversations over the phone are often direct and time sensitive. Just like a let-
ter, memo, or email, you do not want to make a phone call unless there is a reason. Thus,
knowing some general rules around making business calls will ensure you are always pre-
pared for all your telephone conversations.

  · Give each phone call your full attention. Avoid side conversations and avoid emails or
      messaging during your conversation.

  · Plan what you will say. Use your time and their time efficiently.
  · Leave clear messages. If someone is not available, leave a message with your name

      and contact information and the reason for the call.
  · Have manners and do not chew gum while speaking with someone.
  · Use a professional tone. Remember, the receiver cannot see your body language.

      Therefore, non-verbal cues, such as tone of voice, become even more important in
      effectively communicating a message.
  · Excuse yourself when you step away from the phone. If you need to leave your desk,
      inform the receiver.
  · Apply active listening skills. Pay close attention to what the receiver is saying.
  · Make sure to be in a professional setting when you make business phone calls. Tak-
      ing a business call in the car or in a public space with background noise may be dis-
      tracting.

This section is adapted from Business Etiquette in Communication @ Work Copyright ©
2019 by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                               2.8 Effectively Using Telephones and Emails in the Workplace | 38
Email Etiquette

Electronic mail, widely known as "e-mail" or just "email," is by volume the most popular
written communication channel in the history of human civilization. This channel is also
the most utilized way to communicate in business. Its ability to send a message to one
person or as many people as you have addresses for, integrate with calendars for schedul-
ing meetings and events, send document attachments, and send automatic replies makes
it the most versatile communication channel in the workplace.

We offer tips on writing a professional email:

  · If you are writing on your own behalf for any business or job-application purposes, it
      is vital that you have a respectable-looking email address.

  · Because it acts as a title for the email, the subject line should accurately summarize
      its topic in 3-7 words. Avoid using words in your subject line that might make your
      email look like spam.

  · Opening with Dear [Full Name] or Greetings, [Full Name]: strikes an appropriately
      respectful tone when writing to someone for the first time in a professional context.
      When greeting someone you've emailed before, Hello, [First name]: maintains a semi-
      formal tone.

  · If you have a primary recipient in mind but want others to see it, you can include
      them in the CC (carbon copy) line. If confidentiality requires that recipients shouldn't
      see one another's addresses, BCC [blind carbon copy] them instead. Be selective with
      whom you CC, however.

  · Never send an email that you would be embarrassed by if it were read by your boss,
      your family, or a jury.

  · Keep email messages brief by sticking to one topic per email.
  · With brevity being so important in emails, keeping the message body concise, with

      no more information than the recipient needs to do their job, is extremely important
      to the message's success.
  · An email closing usually includes action information such as information on what to
      do with the information in the message above and deadlines for action and response.
      The reader should know "what's next?" at the end of your message.
  · A courteous closing to an email involves a combination of a pleasant sign-off word or
      phrase and your first name.
  · The e-signature that automatically appears at the very bottom of your email is like

39 | 2.8 Effectively Using Telephones and Emails in the Workplace
      the business card you would hand to someone when networking.
  · Ensure to proofread the email before sending to avoid spelling and grammar errors.
This section is adapted from Emailing in Communication @ Work Copyright © 2019 by
Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                               2.8 Effectively Using Telephones and Emails in the Workplace | 40
2.9 Personal Responsibilities at Work

Personal responsibility refers to an individual's willingness to be accountable for what
they feel, think, and behave. Whether we are talking about our attitudes, our thought
processes, or physical/communicative behaviors, personal responsibility is simply realiz-
ing that we are in the driver's seat and not blaming others for our current circumstances.
Sometimes external factors may impede our success. Certain people may have a leg-up
on life because of a privileged background. However, personal responsibility involves dif-
ferentiating between those things we can control and those things that are outside of our
control. For example, I may not be able to control a coworker who decides to yell at me,
but I can control how I think about that coworker, and how I choose to respond to that
coworker. Here are some ways that you can take personal responsibility in the workplace:

  · Acknowledge that you are responsible for your choices in the workplace.
  · Accept that you are responsible for your behavior at work.
  · Use formal language in written language and pay close attention to workplace

      expectations of interpersonal communication with coworkers and supervisors.
  · Treat all coworkers fairly and equally.
  · Avoid engaging in verbally aggressive behaviors such as name-calling, insults, rumor

      mongering and putting people or their ideas down without consideration.
  · Praise coworkers more than you criticize them.
  · When expressing judgment, focus on the ideas rather than the person.

This section is adapted from Interpersonal Relationships at Work in Interpersonal Com­
munication - Simple Book Publishing Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench, Narissra M. Pun-
yanunt-Carter, and Katherine S. Thweatt licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where other-
wise noted.

41 | 2.9 Personal Responsibilities at Work
2.10 Research Spotlight

Love et al. (2021) presented a case study of a highly successful science research project
that involved an interdisciplinary team with over 30 students, scientists, and collaborators
from five universities, federal, state, and local government agencies working in a group
setting, and identified that interpersonal communication significantly improved scientific
productivity (Love et al., 2021). Love and colleagues used social network survey, historical
social network data, retrospective team survey, interviews, and participant observation
to examine scientific productivity, mentoring, connections formed among team members,
and skills development.
The 15 year-long extended nature of the research project helped participants with estab-
lishing cohesion along with reducing uncertainty and improving reliability of their mem-
bers (Love et al.,2021). This information was based on mentoring opportunities in the
group for upcoming scientists, advice giving between members, along with generation
of ideas related to the projects via interpersonal discussions. In addition, members felt
that they achieved vigorous creativity in their research abilities due to their impactful
and effective interpersonal communication skills among 39 universities, 13 agencies and
11 other organizations. Finally, all members mentioned that interpersonal relationships
helped them improve personally and professionally. The team was so successful that they
received 33 awards totaling $5.7 million along with 58- peer reviewed publications.

                                                                                                                                                     2.10 Research Spotlight | 42
   2.11 Key Takeaways

     Type your key takeaways here.
         · Interpersonal communication involves both verbal and non-verbal exchanges and is essential in profes-
             sional settings for building relationships and achieving goals.
         · Effective communication varies in its success and can include miscommunication, misinterpretation, and
             accidental communication, highlighting the importance of clarity and context.
         · Workplace relationships are influenced by interpersonal needs, contextual factors, and communication
             patterns, which evolve as relationships deepen.
         · Leadership and followership styles, such as directing, coaching, supporting, and delegating, play a crucial
             role in organizational communication and effectiveness.
         · Emotional and social intelligence are key to effective interpersonal communication, enabling individuals
             to navigate conversations, interpret cues, and respond appropriately.

43 | 2.11 Key Takeaways
   2.12 Discussion

         · Think of someone who exemplifies everything you aspire to be in terms of their good behavior in the
             workplace. List the qualities and actions that make them such a good, well-liked model for behavior.

         · Think of someone who exemplifies everything you aspire to avoid in terms of their misconduct in the
             workplace. List the qualities and typical misbehavior that make them so unlikable.

         · Discuss a time in which you experienced effective and ineffective interpersonal communication in your
             personal or professional life. Discuss what could have improved the interaction.

         · What are the verbal and nonverbal signs for a professional individual indicating that they do not have
             time, or they have possibly lost interest in the conversation?

         · Introduce yourself to a new coworker via telephone call. What type of professional information would
             you incorporate?

         · Introduce yourself to a supervisor in person. What type of professional information would you incorpo-
             rate?

         · You are introduced to a new hire who will be your partner in multiple projects. You are not sure about
             how to pronounce their name. What will you do to resolve this issue?

The first two exercise items are derived from Communication @ Work Copyright © 2019
by Jordan Smith available licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Interna­
tional License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                                2.12 Discussion | 44
2.13 Non-OER References

Barry, B., & Fulmer, I. S. (2004). The medium and the message: The adaptive use of com-
   munication media in a dyadic influence. The Academy of Management Review, 29(2),
   272-292.

Chaleff, I. (2003). The courageous follower (2nd ed.). Barrett-Koehler.

Chaleff, I. (2011). Leadership and followership: What Tango teaches us about these roles in
   life [Video]. YouTube.

Ford, J. D., Paretti, M., Kotys-Schwartz, D., Howe, S., & Ott, R. (2021). New engineers' trans-
   fer of communication activities from school to work. IEEE Transactions on Professional
   Communication, 64(2), 105-120.

Guerrero, L. K., Anderson, P. A., & Afifi, W. A. (2021). Close encounters: Communication in
   relationships (6th ed.). SAGE Publications Inc.

Hersey, P., & Blanchard, K. H. (1969). Life cycle theory of leadership. Training and Develop­
   ment Journal, 23(5), 26-34.

Hersey, P., Blanchard, K. H., & Johnson, D. E. (2000). Management of organizational behav­
   ior: Leading human resources (8th ed.). Prentice Hall.

Love, H. B., Cross, J. E., Fosdick, B., Crooks, K. R., VandeWoude, S., & Fisher, E. R. (2021).
   Interpersonal relationships drive successful team science: An exemplary case-based
   study. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications, 8(1).

Nielsen, I. K., Jex, S. M., & Adams, G. A. (2000). Development and validation of scores on
   a two-dimensional workplace friendship scale. Educational and Psychological Measure­
   ment, 60(4), 628-643.

Sias, P. M., & Cahill, D. J. (1998). From coworkers to friends: The development of peer
   friendships in the workplace. Western Journal of Communication, 62(3), 273-299.

Ted. (2016, March8). Celeste Headlee: 10 ways to have a better conversation. [Video].
   YouTube.

45 | 2.13 Non-OER References
The Center for Leadership Studies: The Global Home of Situational Leadership (2025).
   What is the Situational Leadership® Model? Situational Leadership® | What Is Situa­
   tional Leadership®

Wrench, J. S., Punyanunt Carter, N., Ward, M., Sr. (2015). Organizational communication:
   Theory, research, and practice. Flat World Knowledge.

                                                                                                                                                 2.13 Non-OER References | 46
CHAPTER 3 WORKING EFFECTIVELY
IN TEAMS

Chatterjee, Ricks & Waryas Hughey

Learning Objectives

  · Differentiate between a group and a team.
  · Identify the phases of group development.
  · Recognize the different roles individuals can play on teams.
  · Describe the differences between teams that function effectively and those that do

      not.
  · Implement strategies for helping to ensure a smooth functioning work team.

47 | Chapter 3 Working Effectively in Teams
3.1 How is a Team Different from a
Group?

Rothwell (2018) notes, "All teams are groups, but not all groups are teams" (p. 150). Let us
begin by defining what is a group and then differentiate between the two. Three or more
people working together toward a common goal is considered to be a group (Rothwell,
2018). A team (or a work team) is a group of people with complementary skills who work
together to achieve a specific goal (Thompson, 2008). Thus, a team is clearly something
more than a mere group of individuals. Members of a group--or, more accurately, a work-
ing group--go about their jobs independently and meet primarily to share information.
Teams, by contrast, are responsible for achieving specific common goals, and they're gen-
erally empowered to make the decisions needed to complete their authorized tasks. Let
us identify key characteristics of work teams (Baker, 2019; Rothwell, 2018):

  1. Teams are accountable for achieving specific common goals. Members are collec-
      tively responsible for achieving team goals, and if they succeed, they are rewarded
      collectively.

 2. Teams function interdependently. Members have high levels of cooperation. They
      cannot achieve goals independently and must rely on each other for information,
      input, and expertise.

 3. Teams are stable. Teams remain intact long enough to finish their assigned tasks, and
      each member remains on board long enough to get to know every other member.
      Teams often require more time and resources than groups to meet their goals.

 4. Teams have authority. Teams possess the decision-making power to pursue their
      goals and to manage the activities through which they complete their assignments.

 5. Teams have members who have complimentary, not identical or similar skill sets.

Hughes and Jones (2011) ask "what makes a team something different from any other group
of people?" Teams, they say, are composed of individuals who share the following defining
characteristics:

  1. A shared collective identity,
 2. Common goals,

                                                                                                                          3.1 How is a Team Different from a Group? | 48
 3. Interdependence in terms of assigned tasks or outcomes,
 4. Distinctive roles within the team (p. 54).
Collaborative learning, according to Barkley, Cross, and Major (2005), can be "carried out
through pairs or small interactive groups"; however, collaborative learning takes place
when students work together to "achieve shared learning goals" (p. 4).
Patrick Lencioni (2002), in his book The Five Dysfunctions of a Team, notes that while
"teams... are made up of imperfect human beings [and so] are inherently dysfunctional" (p.
vii), there are five traits that are hallmarks of a good team:
  1. They trust one another.
 2. They engage in unfiltered conflict around ideas.
 3. They commit to decisions and plans of action.
 4. They hold one another accountable for delivering against those plans.
 5. They focus on the achievement of collective results" (p. 190).
This section is adapted from the following sources:
"What is a Team?" In Teamwork: An Open Access Practical Guide Copyright © 2020 by
Andrew M. Clark; Lolin Martins-Crane; Mengqi Zhan; and Justin Dellinger T. available at
Teamwork: An Open Access Practical Guide , licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.
"The Team and the Organization" in Professional and Technical Writing 2025 by Suzie
Baker, licensed under Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 International.

49 | 3.1 How is a Team Different from a Group?
3.2 Phases of Group Development

Groups may develop in five stages including forming, storming, norming, performing, and
adjourning (Tuckman & Jensen, 1977; Bonebright, 2010). Briefly, forming refers to why peo-
ple join groups. For example, in the classroom students may join groups to learn about
teamwork so they can develop teamwork skills. Another reason you might be drawn to a
group is because you identify with its goals such as a particular student association on
campus.

Storming includes both the initial anxiety caused when a person joins a new group as well
as conflict arising due to perceived lack of productivity due to missed deadlines and/
or when member roles are ill defined (Rothwell, 2018) . During the norming phase, group
members establish and follow the rules of their group. The rules may be explicit or stated
verbally and written down, or implicit or understood (Rothwell, 2018). When groups are
in the performing stage, group members are actively working to complete the task of the
group. Group members fulfil their own roles and support other members' roles (Bone-
bright, 2010). Finally, some groups disband when the specific task is completed. This would
be the adjourning phase. Most groups formed in a classroom setting adjourn when the
semester ends.

Keep in mind groups do not always move through these phases in a linear fashion. For
example, a group could skip the storming phase and go into norming phase where group
members start to establish rules. Similarly, conflict may arise during norming or perform-
ing phases.

This group development model is popular among project teams in the United States, and
it has also been applied to virtual teams. In addition, factors outside the group such as
organizational resources and external stakeholders may impact the stages of development
(Bonebright, 2010).

                                                                                                                                     3.2 Phases of Group Development | 50
3.3 Types of Teams

Companies build teams to achieve organizational objectives and to improve overall work-
flow efficiencies by leveraging talent across individual team members. There are several
different types of teams you may encounter in the workplace:

  1. Manager-led teams: in the manager-led team the manager is the team leader and
      oversees setting team goals, assigning tasks, and monitoring the team's performance.
      The individual team members have relatively little autonomy.

 2. Self-managing teams (a.k.a. self-directed or self-regulating teams): have considerable
      autonomy. They are usually small and often absorb activities that were once per-
      formed by traditional supervisors. A manager or team leader may determine overall
      goals, but the members of the self-managing team control the activities needed to
      achieve the goals, such as planning and scheduling work, sharing tasks, meeting
      quality standards, and handling day-to-day operations.

 3. Cross-functional teams: cross-functional teams cut across an organization's func-
      tional areas (operations, marketing, finance, etc.). Cross-functional teams are
      designed to take advantage of the special expertise of members drawn from different
      functional areas of the company and work together to achieve goals and objectives.

 4. Virtual teams: Virtual teams function across organizational boundaries like func-
      tional areas, departments, and divisions as well as across time and space. Working in
      virtual teams allows geographically dispersed members to interact electronically to
      pursue a common goal. Such technologies as videoconferencing, instant messaging,
      and electronic meetings, allow people to interact simultaneously and in real time,
      and offer several advantages in conducting the business of a virtual team. Among
      other things, members can participate from any location or at any time of day, and
      teams can "meet" for as long as it takes to achieve a goal or solve a problem--a few
      days, a few weeks, or a few months.

The roles members perform are vital to the success of a group or a team. Next, we review
some of the roles necessary for successful teamwork.

This section is adapted from "The Team and the Organization" in Professional and Tech-
nical Writing (2025) by Suzie Baker and is under license Creative Commons Attribution
NonCommercial 4.0 International

51 | 3.3 Types of Teams
3.4 Team Member Roles

Teams work best when the group has taken the time to identify the strengths and weak-
nesses of each group member, determined the best function for each person, and consid-
ered the various roles team members can play. Do you know what role you typically play
in a team dynamic? If not, consider the various task-facilitating roles (those that help get
work done) and relationship-building roles (how people interact with one another) that
you and your team members may fulfill. In addition, it is helpful to recognize that some
roles are positive for meeting the goals of the group and building relationship, while other
roles create obstacles for fulfilling a group's goal and can get in the way of relationship
building. Table 3.1 lists task (T) and relational (R) roles that are positive whereas Table 3.2
lists roles that are negative.

                      Table 3.1 Positive Group Roles

Role                  Actions

Initiator-coordinator (T) Suggests new ideas or new ways of looking at the problem

Elaborator (T)        Builds on ideas and provides examples

Coordinator (T)       Brings ideas, information, and suggestions together

Evaluator-critic (T)  Evaluates ideas and provides constructive criticism

Recorder (T)          Records ideas, examples, suggestions, and critiques

Harmonizer-tension    Uses humor to keep the team happy
reliever (R)          Includes members' viewpoints

Supporter-encourager
(R)

Source: (Beene & Sheats, 1948; McLean, 2005; Rothwell, 2018)

                                                              3.4 Team Member Roles | 52
Role                         Table 3.2 Negative Group Roles
Dominator         Actions
                  Dominates discussion so others cannot take their turn

Recognition seeker Seeks attention by relating the discussion to their actions

Special interest  Relates discussion to special interests or personal agenda
pleader           Blocks attempts at consensus consistently
                  Does little-to-no work, forcing others to pick up the slack
Blocker           Seeks attention through humor and distracting members
Slacker

Joker or clown

Sources: (Beene & Sheats, 1948; McLean, 2005)

To work best, a group will have members who fulfill a variety of roles, and can help
lead, accomplish work, help keep up workflow, keep the group on track, and establish
and meet deadlines. Groups require leaders and sometimes these individuals naturally
emerge, sometimes they are appointed, and sometimes they are determined by a vote or
by default). If your group divides leadership duties, be sure that those duties are clear. You
might consider establishing an individual to lead meetings.

Robert's Rules of Orders or another structure for running meetings, ensuring adequate
discussion, and voting to make decisions can be helpful in keeping the group process mov-
ing along toward task completion. Another technique for ensuring that each person can
contribute to discussions and decisions is to utilize an around the table order for discus-
sion, questions and answers, and decision-making/voting which ensures that all group
members can participate. Such an approach can be especially helpful to encourage more
active engagement of quieter team members who tend to speak less during meetings or
who may be more introverted.

53 | 3.4 Team Member Roles
This section is adapted from the following sources:
This section is adapted from "The Team and the Organization" in Professional and Tech-
nical Writing (2025) by Suzie Baker and is under license Creative Commons Attribution
NonCommercial 4.0 International
"Developing Successful Teams" in Communication @ Work Copyright © 2019 by Jordan
Smith licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                    3.4 Team Member Roles | 54
3.5 Teamwork: Opportunities to
Succeed

Working in teams to achieve a common objective presents unique opportunities and chal-
lenges. We first list ways we can succeed in teams and then provide challenges.
The following characteristics are seen in effective teams (Whetton & Cameron, 2007):

  1. Members depend on each other. When team members rely on each other to get the
      job done, team productivity and efficiency are high.

 2. Members trust one another. Teamwork is more effective when members trust each
      other.

 3. Members work better together than individually. When team members perform bet-
      ter as a group than alone, collective performance exceeds individual performance.

 4. Members become boosters. When each member is encouraged by other team mem-
      bers to do his or her best, collective results improve.

 5. Team members enjoy being on the team. The more that team members derive satis-
      faction from being on the team, the more committed they become.

 6. Leadership rotates. Teams function effectively when leadership responsibility is
      shared over time (p. 497).

This section is adapted from "Why Teamwork Works" in Professional and Technical Writ-
ing by Suzy Baker (2025, June 01), licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution Non-
Commercial 4.0 International.

55 | 3.5 Teamwork: Opportunities to Succeed
3.6 Teamwork: Challenges

It is important to be aware of the way your group interacts--are you bonding and develop-
ing a sense of cohesion? Are individual members maintaining their own sense of identity
in the group? If not, there is a risk of "groupthink" -when members of the group begin to
think alike, agree with little to no discussion, and start making decisions without adequate
exploration--the critical thinking and debate aspect that helps work out potential pitfalls
and challenges is lost. Thus, groupthink is something to avoid and can be a reason groups
are not successful.

Groups also may not be successful when group members fail to cooperate with one
another, are not accountable to their workload, miss deadlines, and when there is poor
leadership in the form of low manager support and failure of leaders to delegate authority.
It is also important that group members hold each other accountable for what they've
committed to do in working toward achieving the group goals. The presence of these fac-
tors can decrease morale of group members, leading to frustration and demotivating the
group members. To help your group succeed, consider the characteristics of successful
teams shown above, as well as your own role in helping your team to be a success! The
following are eight ways to add value to and survive team projects:

        1. Draw up a team charter.
       2. Contribute your ideas.
       3. Never miss a meeting.
       4. Be considerate of each other.
       5. Create a process for resolving conflict.
       6. Use the strengths of each team member.
        7. Don't do all the work yourself.
       8. Set deadlines.

This section is adapted from "Class Team Projects" in Professional and Technical Writing
by Suzy Baker (2025, June 01), licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCom-
mercial 4.0 International.

                                                                                                                                                3.6 Teamwork: Challenges | 56
3.7 Application Activity: Group Work
Contract

You can help promote your team's success by working together to create a Group Work
Contract. This includes group rules and criteria for dismissal. To begin, group members
should discuss their individual strengths and weaknesses with consideration of the work
to be done. Then, work together to discuss and agree upon each of the following guide-
lines for your group's work throughout the duration of the assigned project. Write these
down and share them with your team.

Team Norms/Rules

1. Meeting attendance/participation Policy:

  · What steps/actions will team members agree to take if absent/late (immediate
      actions)?

  · Who will be responsible for taking the action(s)?
  · What is the group's expectation of participation in all aspects of the group project

      related work and what happens if an individual is not fully participating per the
      group's expectations?

2. Work Policy:

  · What expectations do the team members have of each other?
  · Who will be responsible for keeping team members on task?
  · How will a member respond if they are asked about being on task?
  · What happens if a team member is not on task?
  · What happens when a team member does not finish her/his share of the work, or

57 | 3.7 Application Activity: Group Work Contract
      the work is late?
  · How long should the team wait before confronting a member who is not doing his/

      her work on time or at the quality standards of the team?

3. Communication:

  · How will the team communicate to ensure everyone is up to date on progress or
      other project related information?

  · What will happen if a member fails to communicate with the others?
  · Who will work to make sure every member is heard?

4. Decision Making:

  · How will the team make decisions (i.e., process)?
  · What will happen if one or more members seem locked in positions?
  · What steps will your team take to reach consensus?

5. Conflict Management Policy:

  · How will the team handle disagreements between team members?
  · How will the team ensure that conflicts are handled constructively?

6. Adjustments:

  · What recourse do members have if things aren't working well?
  · Can this contract be changed if new issues/concerns arise? If so, what are the

      guidelines for doing so?

                                                                                                                     3.7 Application Activity: Group Work Contract | 58
Team Member Discipline/Dismissal

1. First written warning (to be issued to the member via email with the instructor cc'd)

  · What actions/attitudes, etc. lead to a first warning?
  · What will be the consequences/plan/strategy used to help the team member avoid

      a second warning?

2. Second written warning/strike (to be issued to the member via email with the instruc-
tor cc'd)

  · What leads to a second warning?
  · What will be the consequences/plan/strategy used to help the team member avoid

      a third warning?

3. Dismissal from team

Dismissal is only possible if an individual team member receives a third written warning/
strike. The desire to issue a third strike to a team member should be emailed to the
instructor NOT issued directly to the team member at which time, the instructor should
schedule a meeting time with the team members wishing to issue the strike to discuss
the matter. If agreement is reached that a third strike is warranted, the instructor (not
the team members) will dismiss the individual team member from the team. It will be
the responsibility of the remaining team members to complete all assigned group project
related work without the assistance of the dismissed team member, and by the published
due dates. Upon dismissal, the team member is entitled to team products leading up to
dismissal date, but will receive zero points on future team assignments, except for indi-
vidual assignments, such as evaluation of team members. Individuals dismissed from the
team may not form or join another team.

Other considerations to consider adding into the Team Contract:

  · What if an action/attitude occurs that isn't listed here but hurts the progress or

59 | 3.7 Application Activity: Group Work Contract
   morale of the team?
· How long does a team member have to correct a mistake before a second (or third)

   warning/strike is given?
· Who will contact the instructor in the event of a warning?
· What is the last day that your team can fire a team member (within how many days

   from project due date)?
· What reasonable exceptions will you make for a team member who "violates" 1+

   guidelines outlined in the Team Contract, and how many instances will be allowed?

                                                                                                                3.7 Application Activity: Group Work Contract | 60
3.8 Research Spotlight

In 2012, Google started Project Aristotle to examine the difference between successful
and non-successful teams. Consisting of statisticians, organizational psychologists, soci-
ologists, and engineers, the research team examined 180 teams over multiple years from
across the company (Duhigg, 2016).
The research team did not find any specific personality types, skills, or backgrounds that
made a difference to the success of a team. They found psychological safety, linked to
group norms, to be important for successful teams. Participating in conversations that
establish bonds among members of a team and empathy were behaviors linked to psycho-
logical safety (Duhigg, 2016). "High-quality conversational turn-taking" and "ostentatious
listening" are behaviors allowing people to feel psychologically safe. Watch a short video
by Insider Tech, in which New York Times contributor Charles Duhigg explains these con-
cepts. Psychological safety is understood as the ability of team members to take risks and
express how they feel in interactions with others.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://uta.pressbooks.pub/professionalandtechnicalcommunication/?p=191#oembed-1

In addition, enhanced teams had the following characteristics: clear goals and expecta-
tions; a culture of dependability where members complete quality work on time; sense of
purpose in the work; and members see how their work impacts the organization's overall
goals (Inc., 2018).

61 | 3.8 Research Spotlight
3.9 Key Takeaways

    · Effective teams are characterized by shared goals, interdependence, complementary skills, and collective
        accountability.

    · Teams go through distinct development phases: forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning.
    · Different types of teams include manager-led, self-managing, cross-functional, and virtual teams, each

        with unique structures and dynamics.
    · Successful team roles include both task-facilitating and relationship-building roles.
    · Psychological safety, trust, mutual accountability, and clear communication are essential for team suc-

        cess and avoiding groupthink.

                                                                                                                                                     3.9 Key Takeaways | 62
   3.10 Discussion

         · Imagine that you are in a group developing a new pacemaker. Some team members dominate conversa-
             tions while others do not speak up as much. Some speakers go off on tangents. Explain the steps you'd
             take to deal with each of the challenges listed to make your group productive.

         · Discuss your past experiences working in teams. What worked? What did not work? What have you
             learned from these experiences?

         · What type of a team member do you tend to be? Discuss your weaknesses and strengths when working in
             teams.

         · What are your plans to avoid groupthink as a team?
         · Refer to group roles listed in the chapter. What roles are challenging for you to play? What roles are eas-

             ier for you to play?

63 | 3.10 Discussion
3.11 Non-OER References

Beene, K., & Sheats, P. (1948). Functional roles of group members. Journal of Social Issues,
   37, 41-49.

Bonebright, D. A. (2010). 40 years of storming: A historical review of Tuckman's model of
   small group development. Human Resource Development International, 13(1), 111-120.

Duhigg, C. (2016, February 25). What Google learned from Its quest to build the perfect
   team. The New York Times.

Inc. (2018, September 10). Google spent years studying great teams. These 5 qualities con-
   tributed the most to Its success. Inc.

Insider Tech. (2016). How Google builds the perfect team [Video]. YouTube.
Lencioni, P. (2002). The five dysfunctions of a team: A leadership fable. San Francisco, CA:

   Jossey-Bass.
Lencioni, P. (2005). Overcoming the five dysfunctions of a team: A field guide for leaders,

   managers, and facilitators. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
McLean, S. (2005). The basics of interpersonal communication. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Rothwell, J. D. (2018). In mixed company: Communicating in small groups and teams (10th

   ed.). Oxford University Press.
Tuckman, B. W., & Jensen, M. A. C. (1977). Stages of small-group development revisited.

   Group & Organization Studies, 2(4), 419 - 427.
Whetten, D. A., and Cameron, K.S. (2007). Developing Management Skills (7th ed). Pearson.

                                                                                                                                                  3.11 Non-OER References | 64
CHAPTER 4 INFLUENCE OF
CULTURE ON WORKPLACE
COMMUNICATION

Chatterjee & Ricks

Learning Objectives

  · Define intercultural communication in the context of professional interactions.
  · Describe Hofstede's eight cultural dimensions.
  · Identify the four factors of cultural intelligence.
  · Engage in mindful intercultural interactions.

65 | Chapter 4 Influence of Culture on Workplace Communication
4.1 Intercultural Communication

All communication is intercultural. The term "intercultural communication" may conjure
in your mind a picture of two people from different continents speaking or writing to
one another. Considering the vast size of the United States and wide variety of cultures
from the west coast to the east coast, or from northern borders to the southern borders,
or from Indigenous peoples to first-generation immigrants, much of the communication
in the U.S. is intercultural. You can hear it in the diverse accents across the states and
even within a state from urban to suburban to rural cultures. Every culture you've ever
participated in has left its mark on you with a set of perspectives and values that shape
your worldview and behavior.

Similar to Professors Wrench, Punyanunt-Carter and Thweatt in Interpersonal Communi­
cation: A mindful approach to Communication , we consider culture as "a group of people
who through a process of learning are able to share perceptions of the world which influ-
ences their beliefs, values, norms, and rules, which eventually affect behavior" (Wrench,
2001, p. 12). Let's break this definition down. First, when we talk about "culture," we start
off with a group of people. One of the biggest misunderstandings for new people studying
culture is that an individual can have their own personalized culture. Culture is something
that is formed by the groups that we grow up in and are involved with throughout our life-
times.

Second, we learn about our culture. In fact, culture becomes such an ingrained part of
who we are that we often do not even recognize our own culture and how our own culture
affects us daily. Just like language, everyone is hardwired to learn culture. What culture
we pick up is ultimately a matter of the group(s) we are born into and raised in. Just like
a baby born to an English-speaking family isn't going to magically start speaking French,
neither will a person from one culture adopt another culture accidentally. Applied to the
workplace, people learn about their organization's culture through many interactions they
have with their colleagues.

Third, what we learn ultimately leads to a shared perception of the world. All cultures have
stories that are taught to children that impact how they view the world. Similarly, as an
employee you may hear stories that help promote cultural norms and demonstrate orga-
nizational leadership. For example, if you are an Uber employee, you may hear about how

                                                                                                                                       4.1 Intercultural Communication | 66
when Dara Khosrowshahi became the CEO of Uber in 2017, at one of the first town hall
meetings, instead of presenting himself as the savior sent to change the toxic culture of
the company (Swisher, 2017), he pledged to "retain the edge that made Uber a force of
nature" as reported by Frei and Morriss (2023) in Harvard Business Review ("Storytelling
That Drives Bold Change," 2023).

Fourth, the culture we are raised in will teach us our beliefs, values, norms, and
rules. Beliefs are assumptions and convictions held by an individual, group, or culture
about the truth or existence of something. An excerpt from Uber's mission statement gives
us an idea into its beliefs: "We are a tech company that connects the physical and digital
worlds to help make movement happen at the tap of a button since we believe in a world
where movement should be accessible...Regardless of your gender, race, religion, abilities,
or sexual orientation, we champion your right to move and earn freely and without fear"
(Uber.com, 2024).

Next, we have values, or important and lasting principles or standards held by a culture
about desirable and appropriate courses of action or outcomes. Integrity, concern for cus-
tomers, respect for all, teamwork, and respect for employees are the top five mentioned
values by 150 multinational corporations (Notre Dame Deloitte Center for Ethical Leader-
ship, 2024). Leaders often shape values. Travis Kalanick, ousted CEO from Uber, allegedly
fostered a culture where employees stepped on each other's toes resulting in a culture
of aggression and growth (Swisher, 2017). Khosrowshahi addressed the need to shift this
value given the perceived negative employee feedback. "Toe-stepping" was established
under Kalanick to encourage employees to share their ideas regardless of their power
level or position in the company, but too often it was used as an excuse for being rude and
difficult (Swisher, 2017).

In addition, within the definition of culture are the concepts of norms and
rules. Norms are informal guidelines about what is acceptable or proper social behavior
within a specific culture. Rules, on the other hand, are the explicit guidelines (generally
written down) that govern acceptable or proper social behavior within a specific culture.
With rules, we have clearly concrete and explicitly communicated ways of behaving,
whereas norms are generally not concrete, nor are they explicitly communicated. We gen-
erally know if a norm exists within a given culture unless we violate the norm or watch
someone else violating the norm. The final part of the definition of culture is that these
beliefs, values, norms, and rules will govern how people behave. Many organizations have

67 | 4.1 Intercultural Communication
their rules written in handbooks of operating procedures, employee code of conduct, or
employee manuals to ensure employees follow policies and procedures.
This section is adapted from the following sources:
"Intercultural Communication" in Communication @ Work Seneca Edition Copyright ©
2019 by Jordan Smith, licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.
"What is Culture?" in Interpersonal Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench;
Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt, licensed under a Creative Com­
mons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                        4.1 Intercultural Communication | 68
4.2 Co-cultures

In addition to a dominant culture, most societies have various co-cultures--regional, eco-
nomic, social, religious, ethnic, and other cultural groups that exert influence in soci-
ety. Other co-cultures develop among people who share specific beliefs, ideologies, or life
experiences. For example, within the United States we commonly refer to a wide variety
of different cultures: Amish culture, African American culture, Buddhist Culture, and les-
bian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersexed, and asexual (LGBTQIA+) culture. Just
because individuals belong to a cultural group, that does not mean that they are all iden-
tical. For example, African Americans in New York City are culturally distinct from those
living in Birmingham, Alabama, because they also belong to different geographical co-cul-
tures.
Every business or organization has a culture, and within what may be considered a global
culture, there are many co-cultures. For example, consider the difference between the
sales and accounting departments in a corporation. We can quickly see two distinct
groups with their own symbols, vocabulary, and values.
This section is adapted from"Intercultural Communication" in Communication @ Work
Seneca Edition Copyright © 2019 by Jordan Smith, licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

69 | 4.2 Co-cultures
4.3 Microcultures

A microculture, sometimes called a local culture, refers to cultural patterns of behavior
influenced by cultural beliefs, values, norms, and rules based on a specific locality or
within an organization. "Members of a microculture will usually share much of what they
know with everyone in the greater society but will possess a special cultural knowledge
that is unique to the subgroup" (Spradley & McCurdy, 2008, p3.). If you are a college stu-
dent and you've lived in a dorm, you may have experienced what we mean by a micro-
culture. It is not uncommon for different dorms on campus to develop their own unique
cultural identities that are distinct from other dorms. They may have their own exclusive
stories, histories, mascots, and specializations. Maybe you live in a dorm that specializes
in honor's students or pairs U.S. students with international students. Perhaps you live in
a dorm that is allegedly haunted. Maybe you live in a dorm that values competition against
other dorms on campus, or one that doesn't care about the competition at all.

We often refer to microcultures as "local cultures" because they do tend to exist among
a small segment of people within a specific geographical location. An increase in hybrid
or remote work since the pandemic has resulted in increasing workplace microcultures
(Forsythe et al., 2024). Microcultures are perceived to allow smaller teams to thrive and
meet their client specific needs while supporting the core values of an organization.

In an October 2024 podcast with hosts of Deloitte Consulting, Trace Arnish, Vice Pres-
ident, Head of HR, Google Cloud explained the microculture of Google Cloud and the
larger culture at Google (Mallon, 2024). Arnish mentioned the core value of Google, com-
monly called "three respects," includes respecting the user, respecting the opportunity,
and respecting each other. When employees uphold these values, it is called "Googley-
ness." While these core values are prevalent across the organization, Google Cloud is dif-
ferent. Google has consumer products such as search, YouTube, and Maps and it serves
millions of people who use these products. Google Cloud serves enterprise customers-
large businesses- whose needs are different from individual customers. Based on the
feedback received from the employee sentiment survey and senior leaders, Arnish shared
in addition to the core values (the three respects), humility, unity, speed, and ownership
were identified as key behaviors of Google Cloud's microculture. According to Arnish, "...by
hyper focusing on those behaviors, we're able to co-create a vibrant and thriving culture
within Google Cloud that's centered around delighting our customers".

                                                                                                                                                            4.3 Microcultures | 70
This section is adapted from What is Culture? in Interpersonal Communication Copyright
© by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available
at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

71 | 4.3 Microcultures
4.4 Exercises

    · Think about your own dominant culture. What does it mean to be a member of your national culture?
        What is the established language, religion, behavior, values, rituals, and social customs within your soci-
        ety?

    · Make a list of five co-cultural groups to whom you currently belong. How does each of these different co-
        cultural groups influence who you are as a person?

    · Many organizations are known for creating, or attempting to create, very specific microcultures. Think-
        ing about your college, university, or workplace, how would you explain your microculture to someone
        unfamiliar with your culture?

                                                                                                                                                              4.4 Exercises | 72
4.5 Functions of Culture

Ethnocentrism is the tendency to view other cultures as inferior to one's own (Martin &
Nakayama, 2018). Having pride in your culture can be healthy, but history has taught us
that having a predisposition to discount other cultures simply because they are different
can be hurtful, damaging, and dangerous. Ethnocentrism makes us far less likely to be able
to bridge the gap with others and often increases intolerance of difference. Business and
industry are no longer regional, and in your career, you will necessarily cross borders, lan-
guages, and cultures. You will need tolerance, understanding, patience, and openness to
difference. A skilled business communicator knows that the process of learning is never
complete, and being open to new ideas is a key strategy for success.

Stereotypes are "a set of beliefs about the personal attributes of a social group" (Ashmore
& Del Boca, 1981, p. 21). Many people immediately hear the word "stereotype" and cringe
because it is often filled with negative connotations. Stereotypes can be positive or nega-
tive. We may learn stereotypes from our families, peers, media and personal experiences
(Martin & Nakayama, 2018, pp. 208-210). Let's look at a real stereotype that plays out.
When people hear the words "flight attendant," they generally associate women with the
term. In fact, in the 1980s only 19% of flight attendants were male, and today 26% of flight
attendants are male (Saenz & Evans, 2009). Are all flight attendants' female? Obviously,
not; however, most flight attendants are female. We call these types of jobs sex-segre-
gated because the jobs are held overwhelmingly by one biological sex or the other when
there is no real reason why either sex cannot be effective within the job. However, many
also hold the stereotype that flight attendants are all young. Although this was historically
true, the ages of flight attendants have changed. Most flight attendants are 35 years of age
or older and almost half of flight attendants today are over 45 years of age (Saenz & Evans,
2009). In this case, the stereotype of the young flight attendant simply doesn't meet up
with reality.

When we ask our students to nominate examples of stereotypes they have encountered
about various groups of people, one stereotype that students have mentioned is "Asian
people are good in math." Another stereotype students have mentioned is "Hispanic peo-
ple are hard working." When we use blanket stereotypes to make a priori (before the fact)
judgments about someone, we distance ourselves from making accurate, informed deci-
sions about that person (and their cultural group). Stereotypes prejudice us to look at all

73 | 4.5 Functions of Culture
members of a group as similar and to ignore the unique differences among individuals.
Additionally, many stereotypes are based on ignorance about another person's culture. As
mentioned previously, stereotypes can be positive or negative and, in both cases, it may
result in unrealistic expectations for individuals (Martin & Nakayama, 2018, p. 208). For
example, if we assume that Asian American employees are good in math, we may allocate
them projects in which they lack quantitative skills and/or overlook their other skills.
There are key differences among cultures that may affect intercultural interactions: low
vs. high power distance; individualism vs. collectivism; masculine vs. feminine; uncertainty
accepting vs. uncertainty rejecting; long-term vs. short-term time orientation; indulgence
vs. restraint; and high context vs. low context communication.
This section is adapted from the following sources:
"Intercultural Communication" in Communication @ Work Seneca Edition Copyright ©
2019 by Jordan Smith, licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.
"The Function of Culture" in Interpersonal Communication Copyright © by Jason S.
Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt, licensed under a Cre­
ative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                    4.5 Functions of Culture | 74
4.6 Cultural Characteristics and
Communication

An important researcher in culture is Geert Hofstede. Starting in the 1970s, Geert became
interested in how people from different cultures approach work. His interests ultimately
culminated in his 1980 publication Culture's Consequences: International Differences in
Work-Related Values where he explained some basic cultural differences. Over the years,
Geert has fine-tuned his theory of culture, and the most recent update to his theory
occurred in 2010. In Geert's research examining thousands of workers from around the
globe, he has noticed a series of six cultural differences: low vs. high power distance, indi-
vidualism vs. collectivism, long-term vs. short-term time orientation, low vs. high uncer-
tainty avoidance, masculinity vs. femininity, and indulgence vs. restraint. In addition, we
also examine low-context versus high-context communication.
It is important to note these differences, also referred to as "values" exist on a continuum
and are "all present, to a greater or lesser extent, in all societies" (Martin & Nakayama,
2018, p. 106). In other words, these values are present on a spectrum rather than being just
one or the other.
This section is adapted from Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal
Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and
Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publish­
ing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

75 | 4.6 Cultural Characteristics and Communication
4.7 Low vs. High Power Distance

The first of Geert Hofstede's original dimensions of national cultures was power distance,
or the degree to which those people and organizations with less power within a culture
accept and expect that power is unequally distributed within their culture. To determine
power differences within a culture, Hofstede originally was able to examine cultural value
survey data that had been collected by IBM. Over the years, Hofstede and his fellow
researchers have regularly collected additional data from around the world to make his
conceptualization of six cultural differences one of the most widely studied concepts of
culture. When it comes to power distances, these differences often manifest themselves
in many ways within a singular culture: class, education, occupations, and health care.
With class, many cultures have three clear segments low, middle, and upper (See Note).

However, income is just one indicatory of power distance within a culture. Others are who
gets educated and what type of education they receive, who gets health care and what
type, and what types of occupations do those with power have versus those who do not
have power. According to Hofstede's most recent data, the five countries with the high-
est power distances are: Malaysia, Slovakia, Guatemala, Panama, and the Philippines (Hof-
stede et al., 2010). The five countries with the lowest power distances are Austria, Israel,
Denmark, New Zealand, and Switzerland (German-speaking part). According to Hofstede's
data, the U.S. is 16th from the bottom of power distance, so we are in the bottom third
with regards to power distance.

We highlight some differences between workplaces in small and large power distance
societies as it relates to the structure of organizations, and the roles of managers and
employees (Hofstede et al., p. 76). Small power distance organizations tend to be decen-
tralized with fewer supervisory personnel. Centralization is popular in larger power dis-
tance organizations with more supervisory personnel present. In large-power-distance
countries managers rely on their own experiences and on subordinates because subordi-
nates expect to be consulted. In large-power-distance countries, managers rely on supe-
riors and on formal rules, and subordinates expect to be told what to do.

                                                                                                                                        4.7 Low vs. High Power Distance | 76
Note

However, the concepts of what is low, middle, and upper can have very large differences.
For example, the median income for the average U.S. household is $74,580 in 2022 (Cen-
sus.gov, 2023). According to a 2023 report from the U.S. Census department (using income
data from 2022), here is how income inequality in the U.S. looks: Households in the lowest
quintile had incomes of $30,000 or less in 2022. Households in the second quintile had
incomes between $31,001 and $58,020, those in the third quintile had incomes between
$58,021 and $94,000, and those in the fourth quintile had incomes between $94,001 and
$153,000. Households in the highest quintile had incomes of $153,001 or more. The top 5
percent had incomes of $295,000 or more.
This section is adapted from Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal
Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and
Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publish­
ing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

77 | 4.7 Low vs. High Power Distance
4.8 Individualism versus Collectivism

The United States is number one on individualism (Hofstede et al., 2010). In other words,
we think of ourselves as individuals rather than a collective group. Most Asian countries
are considered collectivistic cultures because these cultures tend to be group focused.
Collectivistic cultures tend to think about actions that might affect the entire group rather
than specific members of the group.

In an individualistic culture, there is a belief that you can do what you want and follow
your passions. In an individualistic culture, if someone asked what you do for a living, they
would answer by saying their profession or occupation. However, in collectivistic cultures,
a person would answer in terms of the group, organization, and/or corporation that they
serve. Moreover, in a collectivistic culture, there is a belief that you should do what bene-
fits the group. In other words, collectivistic cultures focus on how the group can grow and
be productive.

In the workplace in individualistic societies, employer and employee relationships are
often seen as a business transaction or a relationship of buying and selling in the labor
market. This is different from the workplace in collectivistic societies, in which employer
and employee relationships seem akin to family relationships where the employer feels
obligated to protect the financial well-being of employees and in turn is offered loyalty
by the employee (Hofstede et al., 2010, p. 120). Organizations in both societies can deviate
from workplace norms and gain a competitive edge (Hofstede et al., 2010, p. 121).

A recent study by Xavier et al. (2025) examining perceptions of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
in the workplace found a link between cultural orientation and job autonomy (indepen-
dence and freedom in doing one's job) and creative self-efficacy (ability to come up with
innovative ideas). Findings showed no significant differences between individualistic and
collectivistic cultures regarding job autonomy. However, collectivistic participants (from
Mexico) were more open to AI integration than participants from individualistic orien-
tation (from United Kingdom). Specifically, collectivist participants had increased cre-
ative self-efficacy with AI integration. The authors explain in collectivistic cultures, group
collaboration and interdependence are valued, therefore, AI may be seen as tool that
enhances collective creativity.

This section is adapted from Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal

                                                                                                                                  4.8 Individualism versus Collectivism | 78
Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and
Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publish­
ing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

79 | 4.8 Individualism versus Collectivism
4.9 Masculinity vs. Femininity

The notion of masculinity and femininity are often misconstrued to be tied to their biolog-
ical sex counterparts, female and male. For understanding culture, Hofstede et al. (2010)
acknowledge that this distinction ultimately has a lot to do with work goals. On the mas-
culine end of the spectrum, individuals tend to be focused on items like earnings, recogni-
tion, advancement, and challenges. Femininity, on the other hand, involves characteristics
like having a good working relationship with one's manager and coworkers, cooperating
with people at work, and security (both job and familial). Hofstede et al. refer to this as
being more relationally oriented. We can define both types of cultures in the following way
(Hofstede et al., p. 140):
A society is called masculine when emotional gender roles are clearly distinct: men are sup­
posed to be assertive, tough, and focused on material success, whereas women are supposed
to be more modest, tender, and concerned with quality of life.
A society is called feminine when emotional gender roles overlap: both men and women are
supposed to be modest, tender, and concerned with quality of life [emphasis in original].
The top five most masculine countries are Slovakia, Japan, Hungary, Austria, and
Venezuela (the U.S. is number 19 out of 76); whereas feminine countries are represented
by Sweden, Norway, Latvia, Netherlands, and Denmark.
This section is adapted from Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal
Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and
Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publish­
ing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                           4.9 Masculinity vs. Femininity | 80
4.10 Low vs. High Uncertainty
Avoidance

Life is full of uncertainty, and we cannot escape it; however, some people are more prone
to becoming fearful in situations that are ambiguous or unknown. Uncertainty avoidance
then involves the extent to which cultures are fearful of ambiguous and unknown situa-
tions. People in cultures with high uncertainty avoidance can view this ambiguity and lack
of knowledge as threatening, which is one reason why people in these cultures tend to
have higher levels of anxiety.

Cultures at the high end of uncertainty avoidance include Greece, Portugal, Guatemala,
Uruguay, and Belgium Flemish, whereas cultures at the low end of uncertainty avoidance
include Singapore, Jamaica, Denmark, Sweden, and Hong Kong. The United States ranks
64th out of 76 countries analyzed (Singapore was number 76). From an interpersonal per-
spective, people from high uncertainty avoidant cultures are going to have a lot more anx-
iety associated with interactions involving people from other cultures. Furthermore, there
tend to be higher levels of prejudice and higher levels of ideological, political, and religious
fundamentalism, which does not allow for any kind of debate.

To understand the differences between the high-end uncertainty avoidance and low end
of uncertainty avoidance, we look at length of employment, work ethic, managerial focus,
and motivation drivers. Hofstede et al. (2010, p. 217) report in low end uncertainty avoid-
ance, employees change jobs frequently, the ethic of "work hard only when needed"
is prevalent, high-level managers focus on strategy, and employees are motivated by
achievement and belonging. This is different from high end uncertainty avoidance, where
employees tend to be in service with an employer longer, the ethic of working hard and
the appearance of being busy is prevalent, high-level managers focus on daily operations,
and employees are motivated by security and belonging.

This section is adapted from Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal
Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and
Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publish­
ing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

81 | 4.10 Low vs. High Uncertainty Avoidance
4.11 Long-Term vs. Short-Term
Orientation

Long-term orientation focuses on the future and not the present or the past. As such,
there is a focus on both persistence and thrift. The emphasis on endurance is vital because
being persistent today will help you in the future. The goal is to work hard now, so you can
have the payoff later. The same is true of thrift. We want to conserve our resources and
under-spend to build that financial cushion for the future. Short-term oriented cultures,
on the other hand, tend to focus on both the past and the present. In these cultures, there
tends to be high respect for the past and the various traditions that have made that cul-
ture great. Additionally, there is a strong emphasis on "saving face," (or a person's public
image), fulfilling one's obligations today, and enjoying one's leisure time.

At the long-term end of the spectrum are countries like China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and
Japan, whereas countries like Pakistan, Czech Republic, Nigeria, Spain, and the Philippines
are examples of short-term. The United States ranked 31 out of 39, with Pakistan being
number 39.

The values prevalent in business and the focus of business are different in long-term
and short-term orientation. Hofstede et al. (2010) report the values of freedom, rights,
achievement, and thinking for oneself are important in short-term orientation. In long-
term orientation, the values of learning, honesty, adaptiveness, accountability, and self-
discipline are key. While a business' "bottom line" with a focus on "this year's profits" is
important for short-term orientation, the focus is on the market position and importance
of profits ten years from now for long-term orientation (Hofstede et al., p.251).

This section is adapted from Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal
Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and
Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publish­
ing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                         4.11 Long-Term vs. Short-Term Orientation | 82
4.12 Indulgence vs. Restraint

The final cultural characteristic is called indulgence vs. restraint, which examines issues
of happiness and wellbeing. According to Hofstede et al. (2010) "Indulgence stands for a
tendency to allow relatively free gratification of basic and natural human desires related
to enjoying life and having fun. Its opposite pole, restraint, reflects a conviction that such
gratification needs to be curbed and regulated by strict social norms" (p. 281). The top
five on the Indulgence end are Venezuela, Mexico, Puerto Rico, El Salvador, and Nigeria,
whereas those on the restraint end are Pakistan, Egypt, Latvia, Ukraine, and Albania. The
U.S. is towards the indulgence end of the spectrum and ranks at #15 along with Canada
and the Netherlands.
Some interesting findings associated with indulgence include experiencing higher levels
of positive emotions and remembering those emotions for more extended periods. Indi-
viduals from more indulgent cultures tend to be more optimistic, while their restrained
counterparts tend to be more cynical. Individuals from indulgent cultures tend to be more
extraverted and outgoing as compared to individuals from restrained cultures. In addi-
tion, people from indulgent countries are more open to other cultures, more satisfied with
their lives, and are more likely to communicate with friends and family members via the
Internet while interacting with more people from other cultures via the Internet as well.
This section is adapted from Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal
Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and
Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publish­
ing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

83 | 4.12 Indulgence vs. Restraint
4.13 High context vs low context
cultures

Edward Hall coined the terms "low-context culture" (LCC) and "high-context culture"
(HCC) to describe how communication styles differ across cultures. In essence, "in LCC,
meaning is expressed through explicit verbal messages, both written and oral. In HCC,
on the other hand, intention or meaning can best be conveyed through implicit contexts,
including gestures, social customs, silence, nuance, or tone of voice" (Nam, 2015, p. 378).
Table 4.1 explores the differences between low-context and high-context cultures across
three general categories: communication, cultural orientation, and business. Figure 4.1
below illustrates some of the low and high context cultures (Rosch & Segler, 1987).

                                                                                                                    Figure 4.1
                                                                                                                    Low-Context vs.
                                                                                                                    High-Context
                                                                                                                    Cultures

                                                                                                                           4.13 High context vs low context cultures | 84
            Table 4.1 Differences between Low-Content and High-Context Cultures

Categories            Low-Context                           High-Context

Communication

Type of Communica- tion Explicit Communication              Implicit Communication

Communication Focus Focus on Verbal Communication           Focus on Nonverbal Communica-
                                                            tion

Context of Message Less Meaningful                          Very Meaningful

Politeness            Not Important                         Very Important

Approach to People Direct and Confrontational               Indirect and Polite

Cultural Orientation

Emotions              No Room for Emotions                  Emotions Have Importance

Approach to Time      Monochromatic                         Polychromatic

Time Orientation      Present-Future                        Past

In/Out-Groups         Flexible and Transient Grouping Pat-  Strong Distinctions Between In
                      terns                                 and Out-Groups

Identity              Based on Individual                   Based on Social System

Values                Independence and Freedom              Tradition and Social Rules/
                                                            Norms

Business

Work Style            Individualistic                       Team-Oriented

Work Approach         Task-Oriented                         Relationship-Oriented

Business Approach Competitive                               Cooperative

Learning              Knowledge is Transferable             Knowledge is Situational

Sales Orientation     Hard Sell                             Soft Sell

View of Change        Change over Tradition                 Tradition over Change

Figure 4.1 is derived from Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal
Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and

85 | 4.13 High context vs low context cultures
Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publish­
ing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.
Table 4.1 is adapted from Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal
Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and
Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publish­
ing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.
This section is adapted from Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal
Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and
Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publish­
ing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                           4.13 High context vs low context cultures | 86
4.14 Research Spotlight

An interesting application of intercultural communication is in the ways people handle
conflict. Croucher and colleagues (2012) tested the idea that culture influences conflict
styles. Previous research shows conflict styles vary by culture. Stella Ting-Toomey et al.
(1991) found European Americans (low-context culture) tend to use integrating, compro-
mising, and emotionally expressive styles, whereas Asian Americans (high-context cul-
ture) tend to use avoiding conflict styles. Previously, research indicated individuals from
the United States (low-context culture) used solution-oriented conflict resolution styles
as compared to individuals from Mexico (high-context culture) who avoided confrontation
(Chau & Gudykunst, 1987).
Data was gathered from participants in India (n = 657), Ireland (n = 311), Thailand (n = 232),
and the United States (n = 592), totaling 1,792 participants. Participants provided demo-
graphic information and filled out a 38-item conflict style instrument designed by Oetzel
(1998). Surveys were translated from English to Hindi and Thai.
Results suggested individuals from high-context cultures such as India and Thailand are
more likely to use indirect conflict strategies such as avoiding and obliging. On the other
hand, individuals from low-context cultures such as the United States and Ireland pre-
ferred the direct strategy of a dominating style of conflict management.

87 | 4.14 Research Spotlight
4.15 Improving Intercultural
Communication Skills

Become Culturally Intelligent

"Cultural intelligence" was initially introduced to the scholarly community in 2003 by
P. Christopher Earley and Soon Ang. In the past decade, a wealth of research has been
conducted examining the importance of cultural intelligence during interpersonal inter-
actions with people from other cultures. Cultural intelligence (CQ) is defined as an "indi-
vidual's capability to function effectively in situations characterized by cultural diversity"
(Sharpe as cited in Ang & Van Dyne, 2008, p. xv).

Four Factors of Cultural Intelligence

In their original study on the topic, Earley and Ang argued that cultural intelligence
is based on four distinct factors: cognitive, motivational, metacognitive, and behavioral
dimensions.
Before continuing, take a minute and complete the Cultural Intelligence Questionnaire.
Cultural Intelligence Questionnaire
Instructions: Read the following questions and select the answer that corresponds with
your perception. Do not be concerned if some of the items appear similar. Please use the
scale below to rate the degree to which each statement applies to you.

                                                                                                               4.15 Improving Intercultural Communication Skills | 88
   Exercises

     1: Strongly Disagree
     2: Disagree
     3: Neutral
     4: Agree
     5: Strongly Agree
     _____1. When I'm interacting with someone from a differing culture, I know when I use my knowledge of that
     person's culture during my interactions.
     _____2. When I interact with someone from a culture, I know nothing about, I have no problem adjusting my
     perspective of their culture while we talk.
     _____3. During intercultural interactions, I am well aware of the cultural knowledge I utilize.
     _____4. I always check my knowledge of someone from another culture to ensure that my understanding of
     their culture is accurate.
     _____5. During my intercultural interactions, I try to be mindful of how my perceptions of someone's culture
     are either consistent with or differ from reality.
     _____6. I pride myself on knowing a lot about other people's cultures.
     _____7. I understand the social, economic, and political systems of other cultures.
     _____8. I know about other cultures' religious beliefs and values.
     _____9. I understand how daily life is enacted in other cultures.
     _____10. I know the importance of paintings, literature, and other forms of art in other cultures.
     _____11. I enjoy reaching out and engaging in intercultural encounters.
     _____12. I would have no problem socializing with people from a new culture.
     _____13. Although intercultural encounters often involve stress, I don't mind the stress because meeting peo-
     ple from new cultures makes it worth it.
     _____14. I would have no problems accustoming myself to the routines of another culture.
     _____15. I enjoy being with people from other cultures and getting to know them.
     _____16. I know how to interact verbally with people from different cultures.
     _____17. I know how to interact nonverbally with people from different cultures.
     _____18. I can vary my rate of speech if an intercultural encounter requires it.
     _____19. I can easily alter my behaviors to suit the needs of an intercultural encounter.
     _____20. I can alter my facial expressions if an intercultural encounter requires it.

89 | 4.15 Improving Intercultural Communication Skills
     Scoring:
     Add items 1-5 (Intercultural Understanding)
     Add items 6-10 (Intercultural Knowledge)
     Add items 11-15 (Intercultural Motivation)
     Add items 16-20 (Intercultural Behavior)
     Interpreting Your Scores:
     Scores for each of the four factors (intercultural understanding, intercultural knowledge, intercultural motiva-
     tion, and intercultural behavior) can be added together to get a composite score. Each of the four factors exists
     on a continuum from 5 (not culturally intelligent) to 25 (highly culturally intelligent). An average person would
     score between 12-18.
     Based on:
     Van Dyne, L., Ang, S., & Koh, C. (2008). Development and validation of the CQS: The Cultural Intelligence Scale.
     In S. Ang & L. Van Dyne (Eds.), Handbook of cultural intelligence: Theory, measurement, and application (pp.
     16-38). Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.

First, cognitive CQ involves knowing about different cultures (intercultural knowledge).
Many types of knowledge about a culture can be relevant during an intercultural interac­
tion: rules and norms, economic and legal systems, cultural values and beliefs, the impor­
tance of art within a society, etc. All these different areas of knowledge involve facts
that can help you understand people from different cultures. For example, in most of the
United States, when you are talking to someone, eye contact is very important. You may
have even been told by someone to "look at me when I'm talking to you" if you've ever
gotten in trouble. However, this isn't consistent across different cultures at all. Hispanic,
Asian, Middle Eastern, and Native American cultures often view direct contact when talk­
ing to someone superior as a sign of disrespect. Knowing how eye contact functions
across cultures can help you know more about how to interact with people from various
cultures. A useful book you can read to know more about how to communicate in another
culture is Terri Morrison and Wayne A. Conaway's (2006) book Kiss, Bow, or Shake Hands:
The Bestselling Guide to Doing Business in More than 60 Countries.

Motivational CQ

Second, we have motivational CQ, or the degree to which an individual desires to engage

                                                                                                              4.15 Improving Intercultural Communication Skills | 90
in intercultural interactions and can easily adapt to different cultural environments. Moti-
vation is the key to effective intercultural interactions. You can have all the knowledge in
the world, but if you are not motivated to have successful intercultural interactions, you
will not have them.

Metacognitive CQ

Third, metacognitive CQ involves being consciously aware of your intercultural interac-
tions in a manner that helps you have more effective interpersonal experiences with peo-
ple from differing cultures (intercultural understanding). All the knowledge about cultural
differences in the world will not be beneficial if you cannot use that information to under-
stand and adapt your behavior during an interpersonal interaction with someone from a
differing culture. As such, we must always be learning about cultures but also be ready to
adjust our knowledge about people and their cultures through our interactions with them.

Behavioral CQ

Lastly, behavioral CQ is the next step following metacognitive CQ, which is behaving in
a manner that is consistent with what you know about other cultures (Ang & Van Dyne,
2008. pp. 3-55). Rather than expecting others to adjust to us culturally, culturally intel-
ligent people realize that it is best to adapt our behaviors (verbally and nonverbally) to
bridge the gap between people culturally. When we go out of our way to be culturally
intelligent, we will encourage others to do so as well.

As you can see, becoming a truly culturally intelligent person involves a lot of work. As
such, it is important to spend time and build your cultural intelligence if you are going to
be an effective communicator in today's world.

Cultural Intelligence Questionnaire is derived from Improving Intercultural Communica­
tion Skills in Interpersonal Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M.
Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Communication
- Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommer­
cial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

91 | 4.15 Improving Intercultural Communication Skills
This section is adapted from Improving Intercultural Communication Skills in Interper-
sonal Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter;
and Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Pub­
lishing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                               4.15 Improving Intercultural Communication Skills | 92
4.16 Engaging in Culturally Mindful
Interactions

Admittedly, being culturally competent takes a lot of work and a lot of practice. Even if
you're not completely culturally competent, you can engage with people from other cul-
tures in a mindful way. Shapiro and Carlson (2017) introduce us to the three-component
model of mindfulness: attention, intention, and attitude.

First, when it comes to engaging with people from other cultures, we need to be fully in
the moment and not think about previous interactions with people from a culture or pos-
sible future interactions with people from a culture. Instead, it is essential to focus on the
person you are interacting with. You also need to be aware of the stereotypes and prej-
udices that you may have of people from a different culture. Do not try to find evidence
to support or negate these stereotypes or prejudices. If you focus on evidence-finding,
you are just trying to satisfy your thoughts and feelings and not mindfully engaging with
this other person. Also, if you find that your mind is shifting, recognize the shift and allow
yourself to re-center your interaction with the other person.

Second, go into an intercultural interaction knowing your intention. If your goal is to learn
more about that person's culture, that is a great intention. However, that may not be the
only intention we have when interacting with someone from another culture. For exam-
ple, you may be interacting with someone from another culture because you are trying to
sell them a product you represent. If your main intention is sales, then be aware of your
intention and do not try to deceive yourself into thinking it is something more altruistic.

Lastly, go into all intercultural interactions with the right attitude. Remember, the goal of
being mindful is to be open, kind, and curious. Although we often discuss mindful in terms
of how we can be open, kind, and curious with ourselves, it is also important to extend
that same framework when we are interacting with people from other cultures. So much
of mindful relationships is embodying the right attitude during our interactions with oth-
ers.

Overall, the goal of mindful intercultural interactions is to be present in the moment in
a nonjudgmental way. When you face judgments, recognize them, and ask yourself where
they have come from. Interrogate those judgments. At the same time, do not judge your-

93 | 4.16 Engaging in Culturally Mindful Interactions
self for having these ideas. If we have stereotypes about another specific culture, it is
important to recognize those stereotypes, call them out, understand where they came
from in the first place, and examine them for factualness.

For example, imagine you are talking to someone from the Republic of Kiribati. Chances
are, you have probably never heard of the Republic of Kiribati, but it is a real country
in Oceania. But let's say all you know about the people from the Republic of Kiribati is
that they like European-style football. During your interaction, you say, "So, what's your
favorite football team?" In this moment, you have taken the one stereotype you had and
used it to help engage in an interaction. However, if the person comes back and says, "I
really don't care. Sports just aren't my thing." How do you respond?

First, recognize that you attempted to use a stereotype that you had and call it out for
what it was. That does not make you a bad person, but we must learn from these encoun-
ters and broaden our world views. Second, call out the stereotype in your mind. Before
that moment, you may not have even realized that you had a stereotype of people from the
Republic of Kiribati. Labeling our stereotypes of other people is important because it helps
us recognize them faster, the more we engage in this type of mindful behavior. Third, fig-
ure out where that stereotype came from. Maybe you had been in New Zealand and saw a
match on the television and saw the Kiribati national football team. In that one moment,
you learned a tiny bit about an entire country and pocketed it away for future use. Some-
times it is easy to figure out where our stereotypes evolved from, but sometimes these
stereotypes are so ingrained in us through our own culture that it is hard to really figure
out their origin. Lastly, it is time to realize that your stereotype may not be that factual. At
the same time, you may have found the one resident of the Republic of Kiribati who does
not like football. We can often make these determinations by talking to the other person.

At the same time, it is important also to be mindfully open to the other person's stereo-
types of people within your own culture. For example, someone from the Republic of
Kiribati may have a stereotype that Americans know nothing about football (other than
American football). If you are a fan of what we in the U.S. call soccer, then you correct
that stereotype or at least provide that person a more nuanced understanding of your own
culture. Sure, American football still is the king of sports in the U.S., but media trends for
watching football (soccer) are growing, and more and more Americans are becoming fans.

This section is adapted from Improving Intercultural Communication Skills in Interper-
sonal Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter;

                                                                                                                  4.16 Engaging in Culturally Mindful Interactions | 94
and Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Pub­
lishing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

95 | 4.16 Engaging in Culturally Mindful Interactions
4. 17 Key Takeaways

    · Culture Shapes Communication: All communication is intercultural, even within a single country. Culture
        influences how individuals perceive the world, communicate, and behave in professional settings.

    · Hofstede's Cultural Dimensions: Hofstede identified six dimensions that explain cultural differences in
        workplace behavior--such as power distance, individualism vs. collectivism, uncertainty avoidance, and
        indulgence vs. restraint.

    · Co-cultures and Microcultures Matter: Organizations contain multiple co-cultures (e.g., departments,
        regional teams) and microcultures (e.g., dorms, remote teams) that influence communication styles, val-
        ues, and norms.

    · Cultural Intelligence (CQ): Effective intercultural communication requires developing CQ across four
        areas--cognitive (knowledge), motivational (desire), metacognitive (awareness), and behavioral (adaptabil-
        ity).

    · Mindful Interactions Reduce Bias: Engaging mindfully in intercultural interactions--through attention,
        intention, and attitude--helps individuals recognize and challenge stereotypes and prejudices.

    · Context Influences Communication Style: High-context cultures rely on implicit, nonverbal cues, while
        low-context cultures prioritize direct, explicit verbal communication. Understanding this distinction is
        crucial for effective workplace interactions.

                                                                                                                                                     4.17 Key Takeaways | 96
   Discussion

         · According to the principle of the golden mean, one should treat others based on how we want to be
             treated. However, in intercultural interactions, we must treat others based on how they want to be
             treated. Discuss a time when you had to adjust your communication style to fit someone else's needs.

         · To test the principle of the golden mean, try answering the following questions:
                   In a conversation with your instructor or your supervisor at work, should you maintain direct eye
                      contact?
                   If you were to travel outside of the country, how would you prepare for the trip?
                   If a coworker offered you food that is traditional to their culture, would you try it? If you do not
                      wish to try it, how would you state this respectfully? If you chose to try it and did not like it, how
                      would you handle the situation respectfully?

         · Identify a country you would like to visit. Research the country and find one interesting business fact and
             share it with the class.

         · Write a summary about a city, region, state, or country you have visited that is not like where you live.
             Share and compare with classmates.

         · Consider a culture that is different than yours. Compare and contrast two cultures and what they add to
             the American culture.

97 | 4.18 Discussion
4.19 Non-OER References

Ang, S., Van Dyne, L. (Eds.). (2008). Preface and Acknowledgements. In Handbook of cul­
   tural intelligence: Theory, measurement, and applications (pp. xv-xviii). M. E. Sharpe; pg.
   xv. Routledge.

Ashmore, R. D., & Del Boca, F. K. (1981). Conceptual approaches to stereotypes and stereo-
   typing. In D. L. Hamilton (Ed.), Cognitive processes in stereotyping and intergroup behav­
   ior (pp. 1-35). Erlbaum.

Chau, E. G., & Gudykunst, W. B. (1987). Conflict resolution styles in low- and high-context
   cultures. Communication Research Reports, 4, 32-37.

Croucher, S. M., Bruno, A., McGrath, P., Adams, C., McGahan, C., Suits, A., & Huckins,
   A. (2012). Conflict Styles and High-Low Context Cultures: A Cross-Cultural Exten-
   sion. Communication Research Reports, 29(1), 64-73.

Dodd, C. (1998). Dynamics of intercultural communication (5th ed.). Harper & Row.

Earley, P. C., & Ang, S. (2003). Cultural intelligence: Individual interactions across cultures.
   Stanford University Press.

Forsythe, J., Duda, J., Cantrell, S., Scoble-Williams, N., & Marcotte, M. (2024). One size does
   not fit all: How microcultures help workers and organizations thrive. Deloitte Insights.
   Retrieved October 23, 2024.

Frei, F. X., & Morriss, A. (2023, November-December). Storytelling That Drives Bold
   Change. Harvard Business Review. Retrieved October 23, 2024.

Guzman, G., & Kollar, M. (2023, September 12). United States Census Bureau. Income in
   the United States: 2022. Retrieved December 12, 2024.

Hall, E. T. (1963). Proxemics: The study of man's spatial relations and boundaries. In Man's
   image in medicine and anthropology. International Universities Press.

Hall, M. R., & Hall, E. T. (1987). Hidden differences: Doing business with the Japanese. Dou-
   bleday.

                                                                                                                                                 4.19 Non-OER References | 98
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture's consequences: International differences in work-related values
   (Cross-cultural research and methodology). Sage.

Hofstede, G. (1982). Culture's consequences (2nd ed.). Sage.

Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture's consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions, and
   organizations across nations (2nd ed.). Sage.

Hofstede, G. (2005). Cultures and organizations: Software of the mind (2nd ed.). McGraw-
   Hill.

Hofstede, G., Hofstede, G. J., & Minkov, M. (2010). Cultures and organizations: Software of
   the mind (3rd ed.). McGraw-Hill.

Lee, Y. T., Jussim, L. J., & McCauley, C. R. (Eds.). (1995). Stereotype accuracy: Toward appre­
   ciating group differences. American Psychological Association.

Leeming, D. A., & Lemming, M. A. (2009). A dictionary of creation myths. Oxford University
   Press.

Mallon, D. (Host). (October 2024). CAPITAL H by Deloitte. [YouTube Audio podcast].

Martin, J., & Nakayama, T. (2018). Intercultural Communication in Contexts (7th edition).
   McGraw Hill.

Morrison, T., & Conaway, W. A. (2006). Kiss, bow, or shake hands: The bestselling guide to
   doing business in more than 60 countries. Adams Media.

Nam, K. A. (2015). High-context and low-context communication. In J. M. Bennett (Ed.),
   The SAGE encyclopedia of intercultural competence (pp. 377-381). Sage.

Notre Dame Deloitte Center for Ethical Leadership. University of Notre Dame (2024). Do
   Corporate Values Make a Difference? Retrieved October 23, 2024.

Oetzel, J. (1998). The effects of self-construals and ethnicity on self-reported conflict
   styles. Communication Reports, 11, 133-144. doi:10.1080=08934219809367695

Saenz, R., & Evans, L. (2009, June 3). The changing demography of U.S. flight attendants.
   Population Reference Bureau. Retrieved June 29, 2025.

Shapiro, S. L., & Carlson, L. E. (2017). The art and science of mindfulness: Integrating mind­

99 | 4.19 Non-OER References
   fulness into psychology and the helping professions (2nd ed.). American Psychological
   Association.
Spradley, J. P., & McCurdy, D. W. (2008). Conformity and conflict: Readings in cultural
   anthropology. Pearson.
Swisher, K. (2017, November 7). Here's one of Uber CEO Dara Khosrowshahi's new rules of
   the road: `We do the right thing. Period.' Vox. Retrieved June 29, 2025.
Ting-Toomey, S., Gao, G., Trubisky, P., Yang, Z., Kim, H. S., Lin, S. L., & Nishida, T. (1991).
   Culture, face maintenance, and styles of handling interpersonal conflict: A study in five
   cultures. International Journal of Conflict Management, 2, 275-296.
Uber (2024). About Us. We reimagine the way the world moves for the better. Retrieved
   October 22, 2024.
Xavier, D. F., Korunka, C., & Reiter-Palmon, R. (2025). AI integration and workforce devel-
   opment: Exploring job autonomy and creative self-efficacy in a global context. PLoS
   ONE, 20(6), e0319556.

                                                                                                                                                4.19 Non-OER References | 100
CHAPTER 5 USING IDEA MAPPING
AND FREE WRITING IN TECHNICAL
AND PROFESSIONAL
COMMUNICATION

Ricks & Chatterjee

Learning Objectives

  · Use a checklist to narrow the topic of writing.
  · Identify the technique of freewriting.
  · Recognize the idea mapping technique.
  · Select a topic and brainstorm via freewriting and idea mapping.

101 | Chapter 5 Using Idea mapping and Free Writing in Technical and Professional Communication
5.1 Using a checklist to generate a topic

Using Checklists for Classroom Assignments

In this chapter we offer techniques students can use for classroom assignments. These
techniques may also be used in the workplace. The first step is to use a checklist like the
one we provide below to help you decide if your topic is specific and an appropriate choice
for your assignment.

Questions to ask yourself

  · Am I interested in this topic?
  · Do I want to learn more about this topic?
  · Would my audience be interested in this topic?
  · Would the topic be an appropriate choice for this audience?
  · Is this topic specific enough for the length of the assignment?
  · Is the topic narrow enough for the length of the assignment?
  · How much do I know about the topic?
  · Will I need to do additional research?

                                                                                                                             5.1 Using a checklist to generate a topic | 102
5.2 Freewriting

Freewriting is the second step, in which you write freely about any topic for a set amount
of time (usually five to ten minutes). During the time limit, you may write down any
thoughts that come to your mind. Try not to worry about grammar, spelling, or punctu-
ation. Instead, write as quickly as you can without stopping. If you get stuck, just copy
the same word or phrase over and over until you come up with a new thought. Writing
often comes easier when you have a personal connection with the topic you have chosen.
Remember, to generate ideas in your freewriting, you may also think about readings that
you have enjoyed or that have challenged your thinking. Doing this may lead your thoughts
in interesting directions. Quickly recording your thoughts on paper will help you discover
what you have to say about a topic. When writing quickly, try not to doubt or question
your ideas. Allow yourself to write freely and unselfconsciously. Once you start writing
with few limitations, you may find you have more to say than you first realized. Your flow
of thoughts can lead you to discover even more ideas about the topic. Freewriting may
even lead you to discover another topic that excites you even more.

Often technical topics tend to be complex and detailed compared to nontechnical topics.
Senders need to develop a topic based on the timeframe of a presentation, needs of
receivers, and modality in which the messages will be delivered. For example, in a
10-minute presentation, it may be impossible to talk about how to build a computer with
technical details. The speaker may need to narrow the topic down to the three most
important parts of the computer in their presentation. Topics such as Artificial Intel-
ligence, Cyber Security, Cardiovascular Disorders, Robotics, Airplanes, 3D Printing, and
Bridges are too broad for a short presentation. Speakers will need to narrow their topic
down to select one part of the topic to fit the timeframe available. See an example shown
in Figure 5.1 to make your topic precise. In the example, three labeled boxes display key
features of the Falcon 9 rocket, a 4-stroke engine, and tissue-engineered blood vessels,
each with bullet points highlighting technical aspects, components, and functions.

103 | 5.2 Freewriting
                     Figure 5.1 An Example of Freewriting (Example and image created via
                     Microsoft PowerPoint by Damla Ricks)

This section is adapted from "Prewriting" in Provincial English - Simple Book Publishing
Copyright © 2022 by Allison Kilgannon licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                               5.2 Freewriting | 104
5.3 Idea Mapping

As an alternative to free writing, you can even draw diagrams to help you connect your
thoughts. Idea mapping allows you to visualize your ideas on paper using circles, lines, and
arrows. This technique is also known as clustering because ideas are broken down and
clustered or grouped together. Many writers like this method because the shapes show
how the ideas relate or connect, and writers can find a focused topic from the connec-
tions mapped. Using idea mapping, you might discover interesting connections between
topics that you had not thought of before. To create an idea map, start with your general
topic in a circle in the center of a blank sheet of paper. Then write specific ideas around
it and use lines or arrows to connect them together. Add and cluster as many ideas as you
can think of. See Figure 5.2 for an example of idea mapping.

                                                                                                                    Figure 5.2 An
                                                                                                                    Example of Idea
                                                                                                                    Mapping
                                                                                                                    (Example and
                                                                                                                    image created via
                                                                                                                    Microsoft
                                                                                                                    PowerPoint by
                                                                                                                    Damla Ricks)

This section is adapted from Prewriting in Provincial English Copyright © 2022 by Allison

105 | 5.3 Idea Mapping
Kilgannon licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                            5.3 Idea Mapping | 106
   5.4 Key Takeaways

         · Freewriting is a valuable technique for generating ideas quickly and without self-censorship. It encour-
             ages writers to explore their thoughts freely, which can lead to discovering new and exciting topics.

         · Idea mapping, also known as clustering, helps visualize and organize thoughts by connecting related
             ideas through diagrams. This technique is useful for identifying focused topics and understanding rela-
             tionships between concepts.

         · Narrowing down broad technical topics is essential for effective communication, especially in time-con-
             strained presentations. Using checklists and brainstorming techniques like freewriting and idea mapping
             can help refine topics to suit specific audiences and formats.

107 | 5.4 Key Takeaways
5.5 Exercises

    · Create a freewriting sample based on one of your topic interests. Remember that your topic choice needs
        to be related to your technical degree.

    · Develop an idea map by drawing a diagram based on a topic of your choice. Try to make your topic more
        specific by identifying subcategories. Consider a short presentation time frame for your chosen topic.

                                                                                                                                                            5.5 Exercises | 108
   5.6 Discussion

         · Discuss how freewriting and idea mapping concepts are helpful when developing your topics.
         · Think of the ways you may narrow down the topic "Artificial Intelligence." What type of subcategories will

             make the topic precise?

109 | 5.6 Discussion
CHAPTER 6 USING LANGUAGE
STRATEGICALLY

Ricks & Chatterjee

Learning Objectives

  · Recognize language styles.
  · Use tone and voice to match language styles.
  · Utilize concrete versus abstract language tactfully.
  · Identify when to use active versus passive voice.
  · Deploy "you" and constructive use of language.
  · Adopt bias free language.

                                                                                                                             Chapter 6 Using Language Strategically | 110
6.1 Language Style

Types of Styles

Formal / Informal Styles

Style is what sets a communicator apart. Style is the way you dress writing up or down to
fit the specific context, purpose, content, and audience. Your level of formality, tone and
voice, and word choice all contribute to your style in communication. How you choose
words and structure sentences to achieve a certain effect creates a certain style in the
writing. For example, compare the following two sentences in terms of style:

   Examples

     "It has been concluded, then, from individual and collective consultation with all departments, that XYZ corpo-
     ration would benefit from outsourcing staff training in communications."
     "All departments agree that outsourcing staff training in communications is cost- and time-effective."

Note the level of formality of your words. The first example above is more formal, using
"concluded" and "consultation" instead of just saying "agreed." Most business communica-
tions in the U.S. use a relatively informal style. This does not mean that you can use slang
or embellishments or write as you would speak to a friend. Informal professional style does
mean that you use clear language precisely, without extra words or embellishments, to
offer your point directly.
There was a time when many business documents were written in third person to give
them the impression of objectivity. This formal style was often passive and wordy. Today
it has given way to active, clear, concise writing, sometimes known as "Plain Language"

111 | 6.1 Language Style
(Schriver, 2017). As business and industry increasingly trade across borders and languages,
writing techniques that obscure meaning or impede understanding can cause serious
problems. Efficient, relatively informal professional writing styles have become the norm.
To determine if you have a successful style, ask the question: is it professional? If a doc-
ument is too emphatic, it may seem like an attempt at manipulation. If it uses too much
jargon or technical language, it may be appropriate for people with technical expertise but
may limit access to information from a nontechnical audience. If the document appears
too simplistic, it may seem to be "talking down" to the audience, if your audience has very
limited professional knowledge and/or capacity for that knowledge. Does your document
represent you and your organization in a professional manner? Will you be proud of the
work a year from now? Does it accomplish its mission and stated objectives, and does it
fulfill the audience's needs and expectations? Business writing is not expository, wordy,
or decorative, and the presence of these traits may obscure meaning. Business writing is
professional, respectful, and clear, communicating a message with precision.
This section is adapted from Style: Formality, Tone & Voice, Word Choice in Communi-
cations for Professionals by Susan Oaks licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCom­
mercial

                                                                                                                                                           6.1 Language Style | 112
6.2 Language: Tone & Voice

Tone deals with your overall attitude toward the information you communicate. For most
business communications, strive for a professional, engaged, serious tone. Note that seri-
ous does not mean ponderous - it simply means that you should use neutral language
that's clear and direct. Purdue University has an informative section about Tone in Busi-
ness Writing, which includes explanations and examples.

Voice reveals your personality. Your voice can be impersonal or personal, authoritative
or reflective, objective or passionate, serious, or funny. As you consider style when you
revise, identify an adjective that you think best describes your voice, and ask yourself if
this is appropriate for your writing context, purpose, and audience.

Word choice also helps to create style. Most communicators strive to be concise. precise,
and plain, weeding out unnecessary and overly embellished words and choosing the exact
words to convey meaning. Precise words--active verbs, concrete nouns, specific adjec-
tives--help your readers understand your sentences. No matter what style is appropri-
ate, formal or informal, serious or humorous, clarity, precision, and plainness are goals
to strive for in terms of style for professional communications, especially in Western cul-
tures.

   Exercises

     Which statement is easier to understand?
         · Your order has been received and will ship shortly.
         · Your order, number 1234, was received on August 1st and ships on August 5th. You should receive it by
             August 8th.
         · I have the skill to greet many customers while attending a multi-line phone.
         · I greet on average 25 customers an hour, while managing incoming phone lines for six district managers.

When you consider word choice, ask yourself if your words convey your main ideas clearly,
and if you are using language that can be understood by your audience. Word selection

113 | 6.2 Language: Tone & Voice
and phrasing lead to successfully transferring meaning from the sender to the receiver.
Doing this well enhances your reputation as a communicator.
This section is adapted from "Style: Formality, Tone & Voice, Word Choice" in Communi-
cations for Professionals by Susan Oaks licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCom-
mercial 4.0 International, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                              6.2 Language: Tone & Voice | 114
6.3 Elements of Language Use

Four Elements of Language Use

We offer four critical elements of language use. These include using concrete versus
abstract language, constructive or positive versus negative language, active versus passive
voice, and ways to reduce language bias (Figure 6.1). We discuss each element in detail,
next.

                                                                                                       Figure 6.1 Four
                                                                                                       Elements of
                                                                                                       Language Use

This section is adapted from "Effective Language Use" in Communications for Professionals
by Susan Oaks, licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International,
except where otherwise noted.

115 | 6.3 Elements of Language Use
6.4 Concrete vs. Abstract Language

Concrete words refer to tangible items that the individual can most often see, touch, hear,
and smell. Concrete language entails the use of descriptive words whereas abstract lan-
guage includes generalizations. Abstract language is open to interpretation whereas con-
crete language limits interpretation. Often abstract language refers to intangible ideas or
qualities such as motivation or productivity that could be measured differently. For exam-
ple, specifying whether a model is a 2D versus a 3D print, responding by the end of the
day vs. responding by 3 pm, and wearing your protective gear versus wearing your goggles
and gloves are examples of abstract and concrete language.

In professional communication, your goal is to be as concrete as possible, so that your
readers, listeners, or viewers understand and interpret your message as accurately as pos-
sible, in the way you intended. Concrete language moves you toward that goal.

When NOT to be concrete, precise, and specific

The concepts of concrete, precise, and specific language blend together into one main
idea: offer appropriate, real-world examples and explanations using accurate, sensory,
detailed language so that your audience can visualize, relate to, and understand your
information as accurately as possible. Realize, however, that there may be times when you
consciously decide not to be precise. For example, if you need to offer negative informa-
tion and do not want to assign blame to a particular person or office, you may opt to state
that "mistakes were made" instead of noting who made what mistakes. Vagueness in this
instance allows you to focus more fully on the general problem and solution instead of the
people who made the mistakes.

In another case, you may want to offer an approximate number or amount if your purpose
is to show overall comparison to an audience without specific background in the area
you are discussing. Although the general rule for professional communication is to use
concrete, precise, and specific language, your situational analysis always overrides any
general rules. Use situational analysis in your planning, creating, and editing stages to
determine the best type of language for your purpose, audience, and context.

                                                                                                                                   6.4 Concrete vs. Abstract Language | 116
This section is adapted from "Concrete, Precise, Specific Language" in Communications
for Professionals by Susan Oaks, licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial
4.0 International, except where otherwise noted.

117 | 6.4 Concrete vs. Abstract Language
6.5 The You Viewpoint and Tone

The You Viewpoint or You Attitude

The you viewpoint or you attitude is a way of writing so that the reader's interest and per-
spective and foremost. The you viewpoint is based on the principle that most readers are
naturally more concerned about their own needs than they are about those of a writer or
of a business.
The you viewpoint often, but not always, means using the words of you and your rather
than we, I, or mine. Below is an example that illustrates why using the you viewpoint is
important.

     Example

         1. We must receive your signed approval before we can process your refund.
        2. So you can receive your refund promptly, please send your signed approval

Note how in sentence 2 the benefit to the reader is stressed, so the reader is more likely
to act on behalf of the writer.

Considerations for Writing in the You Viewpoint or You Attitude

  1. Talk about the reader, not about yourself. Consider your audience needs first when
      writing.

 2. Refer to the reader's request first and specifically in a document
 3. Don't talk about feelings, except to congratulate or offer sympathy. In most profes-

      sional settings, your personal feelings are irrelevant.
 4. Use you (second person point of view) more often than I (first person point of view)

                                                                                                                                       6.5 The You Viewpoint and Tone | 118
      in positive situations. Doing this helps to emphasize the good news to the reader or
      audience.
 5. Avoid the word you in delivering bad news, as it can be interpreted as accusatory or
      come across as overly negative. For example, it is easier to say the proposal was
      missing the budget section instead of saying the writer did not include a budget.

Tone

One important thing to remember when communicating in professional contexts is to
maintain a professional, positive tone. Keeping a positive tone will help you to maintain
goodwill with all parties. In order to engage in a positive tone, you may want to avoid using
pronouns entirely and so with this the you viewpoint may not be useful. If you use the you
viewpoint in some situations, you may sound accusatory to your reader. The sample sen-
tences below give an illustration of this accusatory tone.

     Example

         1. Accusatory tone: Your budget makes no allowance for consulting costs
        2. Constructive tone: The budget should include an allowance for consulting costs to meet all the client's

             concerns.

You can see how sentence 2 better achieves the purposes of communicating with your
audience as the sentence does not blame the audience, but instead simply states in neutral
terms what a budget should include.
This section is reused from The You Viewpoint and Tone in Introduction to Technical
Communication, 2nd Edition [Pre-publication] Copyright © by Jessica Jorgenson Borchert
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License,
except where otherwise noted.

119 | 6.5 The You Viewpoint and Tone
6.6 Using "You" Viewpoint Strategically

Sometimes using "I" or "We" pronouns can seem as the writer is in control or in the power
position. When the writers use "You" to start the sentence, readers are in control of their
choices, thus attaining autonomy in the action.

   Example

         · We must receive your signed approval before we process your refund.
         · You can receive your refund in the next 48 hours if you send your signed approval by 5 pm today.

While the first example takes power away from the reader, focusing on the writer of the
message, second sentence provides full autonomy to the reader, thus giving them more
say in the outcome.
To engage in a constructive tone, one may want to avoid using pronouns entirely, and so
with this the "you" viewpoint may not be useful. If the writer uses the "you" viewpoint in
some situations, it may sound accusatory to the reader. The example below give an illus-
tration of this accusatory tone.

   Example

         · Accusatory tone: Your application has been denied/ We are denying your application.
         · Constructive tone: At this time, the application has been denied.

                                                                                                                             6.6 Using "You" Viewpoint Strategically | 120
   6.6 Exercises

     Change the following sentences to shift the accusatory tone and make the message either neutral or positive.
     Feel free to add details to make the message clear.

         · Because of your inconsistent input, we are unable to meet our timeline to complete the project.
         · You must complete the rest of the work by tomorrow.
         · The night shift manager lost your shipment.

121 | 6.7 Exercises
6.8 Constructive, Positive Language

Unless there is a specific reason not to, always use constructive, positive language wher-
ever you can. It is important to consider how you want your reader to feel, and what may
make your reader feel that way. Your goal is to write constructively, which means to use
beneficial or helpful phrasing to convey your message to your reader. Positive language
benefits your writing by creating an encouraging tone which is likely to be well-received.
The following examples offer negatively worded sentences which are then edited into
more constructive, positive language. As the audience for these messages, how would you
react upon reading each one?

   Examples

     Negative: Your car will not be ready for pickup until Friday.
     Positive: The car will be ready for pickup on Friday.

     Negative: Your holiday time is not approved until your manager clears it.
     Positive: The holiday time will be approved when your manager clears it.

     Negative: A decision will not be made unless all board members agree.
     Positive: A decision will be made when all board members agree.

     Negative: The event cannot be scheduled without a venue.
     Positive: The event will be scheduled when the venue booking is finalized on Friday.

Note that the last two sets of examples use multiple negatives in one sentence, which you
should try to avoid. When readers encounter more than one negative in a sentence, their
brains have to do more cognitive work to decipher the meaning (Maldonado & Culbertson,
2021).

                                                                                                                                  6.8 Constructive, Positive Language | 122
Writing constructively requires an awareness of potential audience reaction; it does not
require a lot of additional vocabulary. In most of the examples presented above, just a few
words were changed to create a positive tone.

In general, you should strive for that positive tone in professional writing. However,
sometimes you'll need to communicate information that is unpleasant, such as delivering
bad news or rejecting a request. Communicating constructively is possible and arguably
needed in these situations. Regardless of the message, how can you ensure you are com-
municating constructively?

Adopt an adult-to-adult approach: that is to say, avoid talking to your reader in a patron-
izing tone, and likewise avoid sounding unwilling to take responsibility. Aim to communi-
cate respectfully, responsibly, confidently, and cooperatively -- as one responsible adult to
another. For example, the way the writer uses the word "we" can mean cohesion between
the members of the business, but it can also become patronizing and shift power from the
reader to the writer's perspective. This may sound like the control is in the sender rather
than the receiver. For example, if a company has three software products and they state
"We offer three products" the focus becomes the company's capability rather than the
choice of the buyers. If the sender states "You have options to choose from three prod-
ucts" the focus becomes the choice of the receiver.

Be courteous: focus on the reader as much as possible. Use "you" unless it results in blam-
ing (one effective use of passive verbs is to avoid assigning blame: "mistakes were made").
Use traditionally accepted forms of courtesy and politeness.

Focus on the positive: emphasize what you can do rather than what you can't. Try to avoid
negative wording and phrasing (no, not, never, none, isn't, can't, don't, etc.). Focus on what
can be improved.

Be genuine: apologize only if you have made a mistake. Take responsibility and promise
to do better. Be authentic in your expression. Avoid relying on cliches or standard phrases
not common to your own way of speaking or writing. Make reasonable claims that can be
backed up with evidence. Keep in mind that over apologizing habitually may result in a
decrease in perceptions of competence.

This section is adapted from "You" Approach and Constructive Language' in Communi-
cations for Professionals by Susan Oaks, licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCom-
mercial 4.0 International, except where otherwise noted.

123 | 6.8 Constructive, Positive Language
6.9 Active vs. Passive Voice

Let's differentiate between active and passive voice. In addition, we will list the benefits of
each and discuss when to use passive voice. See Table 6.1 in which arrows and words are
used to differentiate between active and passive voice.

Active   Table 6.1 Difference between Active and Passive Voice
                                                       Passive

S  V  O                                       S  V  O 

Subject  actively performs the action of the  Subject  passively receives the action
verb  to the object of the sentence           of the verb  from the object
Subject  acts  on object
                                              Subject  is acted upon  by the
                                              object

Benefits of Active Voice

Clear / Direct / Easy to Understand

Active voice sentences are clear. There's no mistaking who is performing the action, and
what the action is. Clarity is one of the characteristics of effective professional writing,
and an active voice contributes to that clarity. See examples below:

                                                                6.9 Active vs. Passive Voice | 124
   Examples

         · The marketing group implemented the new marketing strategy at the beginning of the month.
         · The department manager scheduled a meeting for Friday, July 19 at 10:00 a.m.
         · Iris Smith developed the customer service training manual.

Fewer Words

Active voice sentences often use fewer words than passive voice sentences, thus con-
tributing to the conciseness for which professional communications strive. Passive voice
requires two verbs, a form of the verb "to be" (e.g., is, was) plus another verb called a past
participle (a verb that ends in -ed and sometimes in -en). Active voice sentences eliminate
the need for a two-word verb and often eliminate the need for extra explanatory words.
See examples below:

   Examples

         · Passive voice: In-person consultations with a case worker are preferred by 70% of our clients, in contrast
             to phone calls or virtual meetings.

         · Active voice: 70% of our clients prefer in-person consultations with a case worker to phone calls or vir-
             tual meetings.

125 | 6.9 Active vs. Passive Voice
Uses for Passive Voice

Most communicators choose active voice; however, there are some legitimate uses for
passive voice in professional communications. See Table 6.2 for when passive voice is a
good choice in professional communication.

                         Table 6.2 Situations when Passive Voice Should be Used

Types of Situations                      Examples of Passive Voice

When you do not know who or what is      The office supply cabinet lock was picked
responsible for the action               when the key was lost.
When you don't want to assign blame or
responsibility                           The potential sales in North Dakota were
                                         lost.

When the person or thing that performed  A mistake was made in the investigation that
the action is not important              resulted in the wrong person being fired.

                                         The basement of the office building was
                                         flooded all week.

When being too direct would make you     A raise cannot be given at this time.
sound too insensitive
                                         If the password is forgotten by the user, a
When you want to avoid using a gendered  security question will be asked.
construction, and pluralizing is not an
option

This section is adapted from "Active and Passive Voice" in Communications for Profession­
als by Susan Oaks, licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 Interna-
tional, except where otherwise noted.

                                         6.9 Active vs. Passive Voice | 126
6.10 Bias Free Language

Communicators should try to be clear and direct in meaning, and drawing attention to
details about race, age, country of origin, disability, gender, or politics in the workplace
might cause conscious or unconscious bias. When crafting your communication, think
about who will be affected by what you say and how you say it.

A simple rule for using bias-free language is to consider whether personal details need to
be included to get the point across. We discuss ways to avoid using personal details as well
as gender and disability bias in this section. See Table 6.3 for alternative ways to express
oneself without using unnecessary personal details.

       Table 6.3 Examples of How to Write Sentences Without Personal Details

Avoid                                                    Try

Franklin is the new African American accountant.         Franklin is the new
                                                         accountant.

For someone nearing retirement, she learned new          She learned that new
software quickly.                                        software quickly.

Abdul has some of the highest call center ratings, even  Abdul has some of the highest
though his Saudi accent is strong.                       call center ratings.

John is one of our most active employees, even though    John is one of our most active
he must use a wheelchair.                                employees.

Did the cleaning woman bring new trash bags?             Did the cleaner bring new
                                                         trash bags?

Do we have enough manpower to finish this project?       Do we have enough staff to
                                                         finish this project?

This section is adapted from "Eliminating Bias in Language" in Communication for Profes­
sionals by Susan Oaks, licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 Inter-
national, except where otherwise noted.

127 | 6.10 Bias Free Language
6.10.1 Avoiding Gender Bias

Communicating in a non-sexist way requires the ability to recognize sexism in the first
place. The next hurdle is to figure out a way to eliminate any inherent sexism without dis-
rupting the flow of the communication. Here are a few options to help avoid bias.

Gendered Nouns

Use gender-neutral words when referring to individuals in various positions (see Table
6.4):

       Table 6.4 Examples of Gender- Neutral Words in the Workplace

Avoid                       Try

businessman, businesswoman  business executive

chairman, chairwoman        chairperson
the common man              the average person
salesman, saleswoman        salesperson, salesclerk, marketer

This section is adapted from "Eliminating Bias in Language" in Communication for Profes-
sionals by Susan Oaks, licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 Inter-
national, except where otherwise noted.

                                                6.10.1 Avoiding Gender Bias | 128
6.10.2 Gendered Pronouns

Consider how you use gendered pronouns. Using he as a generic pronoun shows a strong
bias towards male individuals. Instead, you can use "he or she" ("his or her") as the pronoun
for a generic noun. It is now acceptable to use the plural pronoun "they" as a singu-
lar pronoun, to be inclusive and to avoid awkwardness by using too many "he/she" con-
structions. You can also eliminate singular nouns and use plural nouns and pronouns as
appropriate.

For example, traditional rules of English grammar call for a singular pronoun to agree
with a singular subject: "Someone will call you to further discuss the issue. He or she will
call between 9:00 and 10:00 tomorrow morning." Contemporary usage of English allows
a plural pronoun in this case to avoid gender bias: "Someone will call you to further dis-
cuss the issue. They will call between 9:00 and 10:00 tomorrow morning." Or, in this sit-
uation, you may want to omit the pronoun: "Someone will call you to further discuss the
issue. You can expect the call between 9:00 and 10:00 tomorrow morning." See a few more
examples in Table 6.5.

           Table 6.5 Modifying Sentences When Gendered Pronouns Are Not Relevant

Avoid                                     Try

Every employee should file his report by  Every employee should file their report by
the end of the day.                       the end of the day.

                                          All employees should file their reports by
                                          the end of the day.

When filing the report, each employee     When filing the report, each employee
should make sure he includes yesterday's  should make sure they include yesterday's
data.                                     data.

                                          When filing the report, employees should
                                          make sure they include yesterday's data.

This section is adapted from "Eliminating Bias in Language" in Communication for Profes­
sionals by Susan Oaks, licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 Inter-
national, except where otherwise noted.

129 | 6.10.2 Gendered Pronouns
6.10.3 Avoiding Disability Bias

Avoid using labeled nouns when talking about people with disabilities. Try to use emotion-
ally neutral expressions rather than ones that assign a role, such as victim as can be seen
in Table 6.6

Avoid           Table 6.6 Examples of Emotionally Neutral Expressions
                                         Try

the disabled people      Individual with disabilities / people who are
                         differently abled

the schizophrenic        the person diagnosed with schizophrenia

an AIDS victim           a person with AIDS

a person suffering from  a person with epilepsy
epilepsy

handicapped parking      accessible parking

normal / healthy         people without disabilities

This section is adapted from "Eliminating Bias in Language" in Communication for Profes­
sionals by Susan Oaks, licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 Inter-
national, except where otherwise noted.

                                                      6.10.3 Avoiding Disability Bias | 130
   6.10 Key Takeaways

         · An effective communication style involves choosing appropriate tone, voice, and word choice to suit the
             context, purpose, and audience.

         · Concrete language enhances clarity and understanding, while abstract language may be used strategi-
             cally to avoid assigning blame or to generalize.

         · The "you" viewpoint and constructive language help maintain a professional tone and encourage positive
             audience engagement.

         · Active voice is preferred for clarity and conciseness, though passive voice can be useful in specific con-
             texts such as avoiding blame.

         · Bias-free language promotes inclusivity and professionalism by avoiding unnecessary personal details
             and gender or disability bias.

131 | 6.11 Key Takeaways
6.12 Discussion

    · Discuss the reasons behind considering passive versus active language in technical and professional com-
        munication.

    · What could cause problems with using abstract language versus concrete language?
    · Provide your own example to a possible miscommunication experience related to the use of abstract lan-

        guage in technical and professional communication.

                                                                                                                                                         6.12 Discussion | 132
6.13 Non-OER References

Maldonado, M., & Culbertson, J. (2021). Nobody doesn't like negative concord. Journal of
   Psycholinguistic Research, 50(6), 1401-1416.

Schriver, K. A. (2017). Plain language in the US gains momentum: 1940-2015. IEEE Trans­
   actions on Professional Communication, 60(4), 343-383.

133 | 6.13 Non-OER References
CHAPTER 7 WRITING ROUTINE
MESSAGES

Ricks & Chatterjee

Learning Objectives

  · Identify structure of routine messages.
  · Use precise language in routine messages.
  · Recognize when to write emails.

                                                                                                                                 Chapter 7 Writing Routine Messages | 134
7.1 Structure of Routine Messages

Perhaps the simplest and most common routine message type is where the sender offers
up information that helps the receiver. These may not be official memos, but they follow
the same structure: opening, body, and closing.
Managers, clients, and coworkers alike send and receive requests for information and
action all day. Because these provide the recipient with direction on what to do, the infor-
mation that comes back or action that results from such requests can only be as good as
the instructions given. Such messages must therefore be well organized and clear about
expectations, opening directly with a clearly stated general request unless you anticipate
resistance to the request and proceeding with background and more detailed instruction,
if necessary (see example below for parts of routine messages).

Opening

Describe the reason for the message. Main point should be included from the beginning
of the message.

   Example

     Hello Mohammed: I hope you are having a wonderful week. Could you help update the website by adding the
     new hires to the Personnel page?

135 | 7.1 Structure of Routine Messages
Body

Include the details of the message in an organized matter.

   Example

     We have hired three new associates in the past few weeks. With the content of the attached folder that con-
     tains their bios and hi-res pics, please do the following

         · Proof of bios using Track Changes and send them to me.
         · Post the proofed bios on the site. I would like to quickly read them and suggest further edits over the

             phone, if necessary, since time is of the essence here.
         · Downsize the pics to 72dpi and crop them so that they are the same dimensions as the other portraits on

             that page before posting them along with the bios.

Close

Provide action and next steps related to the content.

   Example

     Could we have this update all wrapped up by Monday January 23rd, 2026? We're meeting with some investors
     early next week and we'd like the site to be fully up to date by then. Much appreciate your time

This section is adapted from Information Shares, Action Requests, and Replies in Com-

                                                                                                                                     7.1 Structure of Routine Messages | 136
munication@Work Copyright © 2019 by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

137 | 7.1 Structure of Routine Messages
7.2 Precise Language Considerations

Effective organization and style are critical in requests for action that contain detailed
instructions. Whether you're explaining how to operate equipment, apply for funding,
renew a membership, or submit a payment, the recipient's success depends on the quality
of the instruction. Vagueness and a lack of detail can result in confusion, mistakes, and
requests for clarification. Too much detail can result in frustration, skimming, and possi-
bly missing key information. Profiling the audience and gauging their level of knowledge is
key to providing the appropriate level of detail for the desired results. See examples below
for ways to use precise in place of vague language.

                                                                                                                                 7.2 Precise Language Considerations | 138
Examples

Precise Use of Language

Vague                  Precise

many, a lot            ten, sixteen, one thousand, etc.

cool (referring to     50 degrees Fahrenheit, 35 degrees Celsius, etc.
temperature)

most                   90%, 94%, etc.

later / very soon      4:00 p.m., 10:00 p.m., etc. / in ten minutes, tomorrow morning at 8:00
                       a.m., etc.

staff                  supervisors, accountants, Nurse Practitioners, etc.

We are making good     In the two weeks since inception, our four-member team has achieved
progress on the        three of the six objectives we identified for project completion; we are on
project.               track to complete the project in another four weeks, by Friday, November
                       19.

For the same amount    We examined several proposals in the $10,000 range, and they all offer
spent, we expected     more features than what we see in the $12,500 system ABC Corp. is
more value added.      offering.

Officers were called   Responding to a 911 call, State Police Officers Arellano and Chavez sped to
to the scene.          the intersection of County Route 53 and State Highway 21.

Several different      The silk jacquard fabric is available in ivory, moss, cinnamon, and topaz.
colors are available.

This smartphone has    At last count, the Apple iPhone had more than 500 applications, many
more applications      costing 99 cents or less; users can get real-time sports scores, upload
than customers can     videos, browse commuter train schedules, edit e-mails, and find
imagine.               recipes--but so far, it doesn't do the cooking for you.

This section is adapted from Concrete, Precise, Specific Language in Communication for
Professionals | Simple Book Publishing by Susan Oaks licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommericial 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

139 | 7.2 Precise Language Considerations
7.3 Writing Emails

Electronic mail, or email, is among the most versatile and routine genres of business writ-
ing. It is used to communicate issues ranging from serious to trivial, and its formality level
varies greatly based on context and rhetorical situation. It may be used like text, or syn-
chronous chat, and recipients often choose to access email messages on a cell phone.
When composing an email, a sender must account for the time constraints readers may
face due to high email volume. Recipients, on the other hand, should plan to answer a
business email within 24 hours, or the general time frame that they would respond to a
text. Strong subject lines, clear formatting, and concise writing are all characteristics of a
well-written email. Emails may also present ethical challenges as the forwarding and car-
bon copy functions enable communications to be shared with additional recipients.

Many businesses use automated emails to acknowledge communications from the public,
or to remind associates that periodic reports or payments are due. The form email is also
common; in this case, a recipient chooses from a menu of sentences to make the wording
suitable for a specific transaction. Email may be informal in personal contexts, but busi-
ness communication requires attention to detail, awareness that an email reflects both
you and your company, and a professional tone. Although an email may have an informal
feel, remember that it needs to convey professionalism and respect. Never write or send
anything that you would not want to share publicly, or in front of your company president.

Email is a good way to communicate when:

  · You need to contact a person who is difficult to reach via telephone, does not come
      to campus regularly, or is in another part of the country or world (for instance,
      someone who lives in a different time zone).

  · The information you want to share is not time- sensitive. Email is instantaneous, but
      it does not guarantee an instantaneous response. For many people, keeping up with
      their email correspondence is a part of their job, and they only do it during regular
      business hours. Unless readers have promised otherwise, assume that it may take a
      few days for them to respond.

  · You need to send someone an electronic file, such as a document for a course, a
      spreadsheet full of data, or a rough draft of your paper.

  · You need to distribute information quickly to many people (for example, a memo that

                                                                                                                                                           7.3 Writing Emails | 140
      needs to be sent to the entire office staff).
  · You need a record of the communication. Saving important emails can be helpful if

      you need to recall what someone said in an earlier message, provide proof (for exam-
      ple, as receipt for a service or product), or review the content of an important meet-
      ing or deadline.
  · You are unable to ask a direct question or make a request in person. In this case,
      frame your question/request politely, being careful to avoid a demanding tone or the
      underlying assumption that your request will be granted.

    Email is not an effective means of communication when:

  · Your message is long, complicated, or requires additional face-to-face discussion.
      For example, if you want feedback from your supervisor, or if you are asking your
      professor a question that requires more than a yes/no answer, you should schedule
      a meeting instead.

  · Information is highly confidential. Email is never private! Keep in mind that your
      message could be forwarded to other people without your knowledge. A backup
      copy of your email is always stored on a server where it can be retrieved, even when
      you have deleted the message and think it is gone forever.

  · The tone of the message could be misconstrued. If you would hesitate to say some-
      thing to someone's face, do not write it in an email.

  · The information itself is emotionally charged. For example, if you must communicate
      bad news to someone, it is better to deliver it in person.

This section is derived from When (and When Not!) to Email in Technical and Professional
Writing Genres - Simple Book Publishing Copyright © 2019 by Michael Beilfuss, Staci
Bettes, and Katrina Peterson licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCom­
mercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

141 | 7.3 Writing Emails
7.4 Research Spotlight

Depending on the line of work and the deadline of a project, Forbes.com indicates employ-
ees should check their emails in 45-minute intervals (Morad, 2018). The discussion around
how often an individual should check their emails is still debated considering, frequency
expectations could be seen as too rigid and interfere with the employees' personal lives. In
addition, if the expectations are too rigid, employees have the possibility of experiencing
burnout and low productivity. Paulise (2024) from Forbes.com mentions research suggest-
ing employees should check emails 2-3 times and not more to reduce stress and improve
employee well-being.

Even if the individual cannot reply to the email at the time of receiving it, they should reply
by acknowledging its receipt and indicate an appropriate time to respond to the email.
This approach is essential if the reader may reply with an emotional response. Asking for
ample time helps both parties to be on the same page and provides time for the reader to
respond in a less reactive way.

A recent meta-analysis of 25 years of research on email use in the workplace published in
Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology (Russell et al., 2024) suggests four
actions to facilitate optimal work-email activity while supporting employee wellbeing (p.
96):

  · Communicate and adhere to boundaries for work-email access (for example, use
      automatic replies when out of office and delay sending after hours).

  · Regularly triage work-email (for example, regularly check and organize email by fil-
      ing, responding, or deleting messages).

  · Send email with high relevance/criticality to work (for example, use evidence-based
      information and utilize work email for professional use only).

  · Use civil or considerate actions towards others when sending work-email (for exam-
      ple, keeping messages to the point, following organizational guidelines on the use of
      `cc', and when to use other communication modalities to reduce uncertainty).

                                                                                                                                                     7.4 Research Spotlight | 142
   7.5 Key Takeaways

         · Routine business messages should follow a direct approach with a clear structure: opening, body, and
             closing, especially when conveying positive or neutral information.

         · Using precise and appropriately detailed language is essential in routine messages to avoid confusion and
             ensure the recipient can act effectively on the information provided.

         · Emails are a versatile form of business communication, but their effectiveness depends on context; they
             should be professional, concise, and used appropriately based on the nature and sensitivity of the mes-
             sage.

143 | 7.5 Key Takeaways
7.6 Discussion

    · What do you think is a reasonable expectation to how often we check emails each day?
    · What type of work-related information should be provided in person rather than communicated in an

        email?
    · Discuss a time in which you read an email that was vague or difficult to understand. Make suggestions

        about how to make emails more effective.

                                                                                                                                                           7.6 Discussion | 144
7.7 Non-OER References

Morad, R. (2018, March 31). How often should you check your work email? Etiquette experts
   weigh in. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/reneemorad/2018/03/31/how-
   often-should-you-check-your-work-email-etiquette-experts-weigh-in/

Paulise, L. (2024, June 26). 3 Tips to checking email less frequently and reducing stress.
   Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/lucianapaulise/2024/06/26/tips-to-check­
   ing-email-less-frequently-and-reducing-stress/

Russell, E., Jackson, T. W., Fullman, M., & Chamakiotis, P. (2024). Getting on top of work-
   email: A systematic review of 25 years of research to understand effective work-email
   activity. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 97(1), 74-103.
   https://doi.org/10.1111/joop.12462

145 | 7.7 Non-OER References
CHAPTER 8 DESIGNING AND
DELIVERING BAD NEWS

Ricks & Chatterjee

Learning Objectives

  · Identify considerations when writing bad news.
  · Differentiate between indirect and direct approaches of communicating bad news.
  · Organize bad news messages using a four-part structure.

                                                                                                                   Chapter 8 Designing and Delivering Bad News | 146
8.1 Bad News Situations

Delivering bad news is never easy, but professionals need to deliver bad news in different
situations, both internal and external to the organization. Bad news delivery is defined
as a "dynamic and socially constructed situation in which the information being shared
between at least two parties (a sender and a recipient) is perceived to have negative
valence by at least one party" (Kitz et al., 2023). This means both the sender and the
receiver dynamically influence each other and adapt to each other's reactions as the inter-
action unfolds (Kitz et al., 2023).

Learning how to effectively communicate bad news is vital because a poor message and
delivery can impact the image of an organization, morale of the recipients, and negatively
impact the relationship between an organization and its stakeholders (Kelly, 2022 as cited
in Kitz et al., 2023, p.1). Consider the following circumstances in which you may have to
give bad news to both your internal and external audience members.

Situations when bad news must be delivered

  · Poor review of job performance
  · Elimination of position
  · Termination of employment
  · Applicant did not secure the advertised position
  · Lack of funding for a program
  · Delays in customer order
  · Unable to complete a project
  · Change of a contact person
  · Technical concerns that may interrupt services
  · Declining contractors due to lack of necessary credentials
  · Denying a request related to a service or a product

When giving bad news, we want our intention behind the message to be clear. However,
we also want to write in a way that is respectful to the reader and does not harm the rela-
tionship with them.

147 | 8.1 Bad News Situations
Here are some considerations for writing negative messages:
        1. Clearly state appropriate amount of information to avoid further communication
            if not necessary.
       2. Establish future correspondence related to possible upcoming projects by help-
            ing the reader move forward at the end of the letter.
       3. Help the receiver understand and accept the reasons behind the bad news,
            before declining directly if the news will be shocking, displeasing, or difficult for
            the reader.
       4. Use appropriate language that communicates clearly without over focusing on
            the negative parts of the message.
       5. Utilize "you" and "we" appropriately to avoid making the message sound overly
            authoritative.
       6. Try not to overuse apology or insincere remarks that may sound as you are pity-
            ing the reader related to the decision.

This section is adapted from "Bad News" in Communication for Professionals by Susan
Oaks, licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International, unless
otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                   8.1 Bad News Situations | 148
8.2 Approaches to communicating bad
news

Indirect vs. Direct Approach

There are two ways to approach communicating bad news, depending on the situation,
audience, your role, and all the other communication variables: a direct approach and an
indirect approach. In the figure below the two arrows represent the two approaches. The
arrow pointing to the left is the indirect approach, while the arrow facing the right is
labeled "direct" approach. We discuss each one in the following pages.

                                                                                                                    Figure 8.1 Two
                                                                                                                    Approaches of
                                                                                                                    Communicating
                                                                                                                    Bad News

Figure 8.1 is derived from "Bad News" available at Communication for Professionals by
Susan Oaks, licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International,
unless otherwise noted.
This section is adapted from "Bad News" available at Communication for Professionals
by Susan Oaks, licensed under CC BYNC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International,
unless otherwise noted.

149 | 8.2 Approaches to communicating bad news
8.3.1 Direct Approach

A direct approach offers the bad news immediately. You may want to use a direct approach
if you feel it is the clearest way to communicate bad news to a large audience, and to cut
down on possible misinterpretations.
You may want to use a direct approach if

  · as a supervisor, you need to correct an employee's behavior.
  · you know that your audience is prepared for it and expecting the communication.
  · the situation is minor and routine.
  · you need to curtail communication with a particular audience.

   Examples

         · Effective immediately, you may no longer make personal, non-work-related copies on office copy
             machines. Since paper costs have risen 25% in the last year, and we have been ordering 30% more paper,
             the company is consciously trying to reduce costs of unneeded copying to sustain current operations. We
             appreciate your compliance in supporting the good of all in this company

         · Mr. Smith, you have been consistently over a half hour late to work for the last month. You are now under
             probation for the next month. If this situation persists, the next steps are salary reduction and then ter-
             mination. If you have any questions or want to speak directly to inform me of extenuating circumstances,
             please feel free to connect.

         · As you have heard, we will be losing the publications division and outsourcing our marketing publications
             as of April 15. Therefore, publications will not accept new projects after March 15.

         · Darren, I will no longer be able to respond to your repeated suggestions for a change in process since, as
             you know, I have broached the subject multiple times and have been told that our processes are not
             slated to change soon.

Choosing a direct approach does not mean that you can simply say what you need to say
without considering your language, tone, and overall effect on your audience. When you
use a direct approach to giving bad news, you need to pay special attention to your lan-

                                                                                                                                                      8.3.1 Direct Approach | 150
guage to get your audience to accept and understand the bad news without offending
them.
This section is adapted from "Bad News" available at Communication for Professionals
by Susan Oaks, licensed under CC BYNC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International,
unless otherwise noted.

151 | 8.3.1 Direct Approach
8.3.2 Indirect Approach

If we are brash in creating and delivering bad news, we run the risk of being rejected by
our audience. They may be angry or sad and not inclined to rationally process the expla-
nation or instructions for what to do about the bad news. A doctor would not generally
deliver a serious diagnosis by coming right out and stating that somebody has a termi-
nal illness. Instead, the doctor would ease into the conversation by discussing test results
then giving the diagnosis and proposing treatment options, and only then come around to
telling the patient the bad news. At that point, being clear about the bad news ensures that
the receiver understands the gravity of the situation and is therefore motivated to follow
through on the therapeutic recommendations given earlier.
You may want to use an indirect approach if

  · The information will be shocking and unpleasant.
  · The situation is serious and life changing.
  · You are not sure about the receiver's reaction.
The key to avoiding misunderstandings when delivering bad news, then, is the following
four-part organization shown in Table 8.1.

                                                                                                                                                   8.3.2 Indirect Approach | 152
                               Table 8.1 Sections of Bad News Delivery

Section                        Explanation                    Example
Buffer
                               Buffer: Stay formal but        As a business, we pride ourselves
                               approachable. Build a com-     in creating organized databases
                               mon ground and explain rea-    from business files that may
                               son behind the letter          improve the quality of work and
                               (acknowledge the request).     efficiency.
                               Personalize by using "we."
                                                              Thank you for continuously
                                                              selecting

                                                              Lab USA over the years.

                                                              We have received your request
                                                              for a team for ATC badging at
                                                              the DFW Airport.

Reason/Standard proce-         Reason: Share details of what  The U.S. Department of Trans-
dures                          lead to the upcoming deci-     portation states that to be qual-
                               sion. Do not over personalize  ified as a DBE the firm must be a
                               here- only share overall       small business as defined by SBA
                               information about the regu-    standards. This means that the
                               lations, guidelines, policies  firm must not have annual gross
                               in place etc. Explain expec-   receipts over $22,410,000 in the
                               tations in general without     previous three fiscal years and
                               pointing fingers at the        be 51% owned by a socially and
                               reader or oversharing infor-   economically disadvantaged
                               mation.                        individual.

Clear statement of Bad         Clearly state the bad news in  Due to the information listed
News                           an indirect way. Avoid pity-   above, at this time the request to
                               ing or ingenuine apology to    expand highway 161 has been
Positive close                 the reader.                    denied.

                               Use third person if appropri-
                               ate.

                               Close in a positive manner:    We will continue to update you
                               End with positive informa-     via email each week. Thank you
                               tion and a hopeful future. Do  for being a valuable customer.
                               not restate the negative
                               news. Focus on helping the     We look forward to doing busi-
                               reader move forward and        ness with you in the upcoming
                               establish goodwill for your    months.
                               company.

153 | 8.3.2 Indirect Approach
   Examples

     Here is an example of an indirect bad-news letter:
     Thank you for your interest in the Lab Director position. We were happy to meet you in person, and we appre-
     ciated your time and dedication towards the Lab industry.
     During that phase, we interviewed twelve people, from the overall application pool of 295 for this position,
     many of whom had both an appropriate education and multiple years of experience in similar positions. Each
     applicant went through three levels of interviews that involved an interview panel of six employees.
     At this time, another applicant was hired for the position due to their extensive experience in the field.
     However, we were impressed with your skills, and we encourage you to apply again for appropriate openings
     which will be advertised within the next two months. Thank you again for your interest in LabWorks company.

Offering details about just how far this applicant proceeded in the search helps the appli-
cant prepare for the bad news coming in the third paragraph, since it lets the applicant
know that she progressed relatively far in the process. This message ends on a positive
note. The communicator in this case is genuinely encouraging the applicant. It is impor-
tant to know, though, that you should not be inaccurate and provide false information, if
it is not really the case, as that is a breach of ethics. An appropriate alternative ending if
there is no genuine interest in the applicant would be to replace the last two sentences
with a polite "Thank you for considering XYZ company. We wish you well in your future
endeavors."
This section is derived from the following sources:
"Negative Messages" in Communication@Work Copyright © 2019 by Jordan Smith, licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.
"Bad News" available at Communication for Professionals by Susan Oaks, licensed under
CC BYNC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International, unless otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                   8.3.2 Indirect Approach | 154
8.4 Research Spotlight

Even if professionals have prior experience providing bad news to others, most endure
stress while creating and delivering the news itself. Once the individuals become aware of
the need to communicate bad news, they must acclimate to the circumstances and find
coping strategies to manage their thoughts and feelings prior to the creation and deliv-
ery of their message. Delcourt et al. (2025) examined 192 bad news disclosures via in-
depth interviews with 114 front line employees (FLEs) working in multiple service-sectors
and continents. Through thematic analysis, the researchers identified four coping strate-
gies FLEs enact to deal with their own emotions before delivering bad news: emotion
focused coping, problem focused coping, avoidance focused coping, and combined coping
response. See Figure 8.2 for descriptions of each type of coping strategy.
Emotion focused coping transpire when the sender vents to others to gain support and
feedback from others related to the problem. This type of coping is especially utilized
when the recipient is not employe by the same organization.
Problem focused coping occurs when the sender refers to past experiences delivering bad
news to produce the appropriate action. Sender may also attempt to put themselves in the
place of the receiver to determine possible outcomes before deciding on how to proceed.
Avoidance focused coping incorporates a strategy in which the sender withdraws or
ignores sending the message due to fearing the recipients' reaction.
Combined coping responses integrates all three coping skills depending on addressing
the senders or the receivers' needs regarding the bad news.

155 | 8.4 Research Spotlight
8.5 Key Takeaways

    · Effective bad news communication requires clarity, respect, and consideration of the recipient's emo-
        tional response to maintain relationships and organizational image.

    · Choosing between direct and indirect approaches depends on the situation, anticipated audience reac-
        tion, and severity of the news.

    · A structured four-part organization and appropriate language help ensure the message is understood
        and accepted, while minimizing negative impact and fostering future correspondence.

                                                                                                                                                    8.5 Key Takeaways | 156
   8.6 Discussion

         · What are the differences between direct and indirect bad-news letters?
         · When would an indirect bad-news letter be more appropriate at work?
         · Reword the following sentences to change the information to make the content more appropriate and

             less negative.
                   "Due to your lack of attention to detail, we have a virus in our new program"
                   "Night manager lost your shipment"
                   "Jessica dropped the ball on ordering supplies for the lab"

         · Identify your personal coping strategy to giving bad news to others in formal circumstances. Why do you
             prefer this method of coping?

157 | 8.6 Discussion
8.7 Resources

For additional tips for delivering bad news to employees and examples of delivering
bad news to employees look up "Delivering Bad News To Employees in a Good Way |
Indeed.com".

                                                                                                                                                                 8.7 Resources | 158
8.8 Non-OER References

Delcourt, C., D. Gremler, D., & Greer, D. A. (2025). Breaking bad news: How frontline
   employees cope with bad news disclosure to customers. Journal of the Academy of Mar­
   keting Science.

Indeed Editorial Team (July 24, 2025). Delivering bad news to employees in a good way.
   indeed Career Guide.

Kelly, J. (2022, August 9). Better.com CEO who fired employees during a one-way Zoom
   call says he squandered $200 million. Forbes.Com. Retrieved May 11, 2025.

Kitz, C. C., Barclay, L. J., & Breitsohl, H. (2023). The delivery of bad news: An integrative
   review and path forward. Human Resource Management Review, 33(3), 100971.

159 | 8.8 Non-OER References
CHAPTER 9 STRATEGIES FOR
ORGANIZING PRESENTATIONS

Waryas Hughey, Chatterjee & Ricks

Learning Objectives

  · Identify sections on an outline.
  · Define and provide an example of each of the basic organizational patterns.
  · Develop a persuasive outline by using AIDA or Monroe's Motivated Sequence.

                                                                                                             Chapter 9 Strategies for Organizing Presentations | 160
9.1 Main Sections of a Presentation

To organize a presentation, a simple recipe includes an introduction, a body section, and a
conclusion. Presentations that are given to explain something (informative) or to convince
others of a position and to somehow act in agreement with your position or to physi-
cally act (persuasion) are typically longer in length and include three parts: an introduc-
tion section, a clear thesis statement; and a preview of main points in the presentation.

The introduction includes an attention getter because it is designed to get your audi-
ence's attention initially and might be something like using a strong statistic, asking a
question to get the audience involved, sharing a catchy quote, perhaps providing a short
story, or showing an image to get them interested. The introduction is followed by the
main body, which is generally three sections, each of which covers a different set of ideas
in the presentation and uses its own organizational pattern (more on that below). There
are usually three main body sections in a typical informative or persuasive presentation.

The presentation ends with a conclusion consisting of a summary of main points you have
covered and a final thought which ties up and impacts your ideas and leaves the audience
with something to think about or perhaps next steps to take in the case of a persuasive
speech. If you are counting along, there are then five main sections of a typical presenta-
tion as seen below.

Five Main Sections of a Typical Presentation

I. Introduction

Attention Getter

Thesis Statement

Preview Statement

Transition Statement

II. Main Body Section 1

161 | 9.1 Main Sections of a Presentation
Content
Content
Content
Transition Statement
III. Main Body Section 2
Content
Content
Content
Transition Statement
IV. Main Body Section 3
Content
Content
Content
Transition Statement
V. Conclusion
Summary
Final Phrase
Considering the structure above, each of the main body sections will use one of the fol-
lowing basic organizational patterns to structure and present speech content. We orga-
nize the content to ensure the audience can clearly follow the presentation.

                                                                                                                                   9.1 Main Sections of a Presentation | 162
9.2 Basic Organizational Patterns

Basic organizational patterns provide a simple structure to develop the main body sec-
tions of a speech. You can use these in any presentation, depending on the goals.

Chronological: ideas are presented based on their occurrence over time. For example,
major events in EV technology history would be presented according to the years of
occurrence and often oldest to most current.

Logical (cause-effect/effect-cause, problem-solution): ideas are presented to provide a
logical sequence and establish a relationship between the ideas presented. For example, in
a presentation explaining the failure of a piece of technology, the speaker might describe
what happened (effect) and then discuss the reasons the failure occurred (cause).

Spatial: ideas are presented based on their physical relationship with one another. For
example, to explain how an engine works, a speaker might show an image of an engine
with major parts involved in its function, then describe how the engine works by referring
to the various parts and how they work together in a sequence to make the engine
operate. Similarly, while organizing content about a speech on the digestive system, the
speaker might describe how food travels through the digestive system beginning from
when it is swallowed and through the digestive process, describing the various organs and
processes in the order of digestion.

Topical: ideas are presented that are most important/priorities for the audience to know
about the subject based on the overall goals of the presentation. For example, to explain
the impact of AI on an industry, a speaker would identify the top three ways AI is currently
impacting the industry and present those in the main body section of the speech.

This section is adapted from Organizing and Outlining Your Speech in Exploring Public
Speaking: The open educational resource college public speaking textbook (Edition 4.2)
copyright © 2019 by Barbara Tucker, Kristin Barton, Amy Burger, Jerry Drye, Cathy Hun-
sicker, Amy Mendes, and Matthew LeHew, licensed under Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International, except where otherwise noted.

163 | 9.2 Basic Organizational Patterns
Exercises

Imagine you are assigned to present an informative speech on a topic of your choosing. Select and narrow a
topic and using the structure and patterns above, brainstorm a rough outline of the subpoints in your speech
structure. In the right or left margin, make notes about the type of organizational pattern you choose to use in
a section (e.g., chronological? Spatial?) Be sure that each main body section has at least two subsections (i.e., at
least an "A" and a "B") and ensure that you cover your topic sufficiently enough to help increase the audience's
knowledge, understanding and awareness of your informative topic. Afterward, exchange your draft with a
classmate so you can review each other's work and offer suggestions for improvement.
Keep in mind the visual content's impact on the audience! Visual aids or visual support materials sometimes
shown on a PowerPoint slide or prop can enhance your message significantly. Consider your draft outline from
the activity above-- where do you think you could include some kind of visual support (a photo, a demonstra-
tion, a diagram, or other visual image) to help further reinforce or clarify your message? Visual support also can
reinforce the emotional appeals of a message, so it is important to consider and include where they are useful
and appropriate for the message and audience. Also, some images may not be appropriate for certain audi-
ences. For example: Unless you are giving a speech to medical students, showing a video or a picture of open-
heart surgery may make your audience members squeamish and uncomfortable.

                                                                                                                                                            9.3 Exercises | 164
9.4 Organizational Strategies for
Persuasive Messages

Persuasive presentations are unique messages. In a persuasive presentation the goal is to
take and defend a position on a topic and convince others on something related to your
topic (convincing them to consider your position, or to agree with your position, or per-
haps to go out and act in some way related to the position/topic). The organization strat-
egy you choose for the persuasive speech should support your persuasive objective (i.e.,
convincing them to consider, to agree with you, to act). Structures are generally logical
in nature, and often use the appropriate organizational patterns presented above (cause-
effect/effect-cause, problem-solution) and these are sometimes presented using what is
called "parallel structure." Discussion of a specific cause is followed by an explanation of
a specific effect, or a specific problem followed by an evaluation of a specific solution.

Another strategy to use in building a persuasive message is to argue why your position
and point of advocacy presents a comparative advantage over the status quo (current
state of affairs) or over other possible solutions or actions. A speaker might use compar-
ative advantage when a variety of solutions have been presented/are available, none of
which is perfect, but perhaps yours offers distinct benefits (or advantages) that the others
do not. This means your point of advocacy, when compared to others, is advantageous,
and thus the best one to pursue. You can use a comparative advantage approach with a
simple problem-solution structure for a persuasive message.

Persuasive messages use motivation to get audiences to act. These motivational appeals
are highly developed in Monroe's Motivated Sequence organizational pattern and the
AIDA persuasive speech organizational pattern.

This section is adapted from the following sources:

Organizing Persuasive Speeches in Elements of Public Speaking by Marty Ennes Copyright
© by Lumen Learning licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License

Persuasive Speaking in Exploring Public Speaking: The open educational resource college
public speaking textbook (Edition 4.2) copyright © 2019 by Barbara Tucker, Kristin Barton,

165 | 9.4 Organizational Strategies for Persuasive Messages
Amy Burger, Jerry Drye, Cathy Hunsicker, Amy Mendes, and Matthew LeHew licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.

                                                                                                        9.4 Organizational Strategies for Persuasive Messages | 166
9.5 Monroe's Motivated Sequence

Ennes (2022) explains how Monroe's Motivated Sequence creates a persuasive, motiva-
tional speech. Monroe's Motivated Sequence is a five-part motivational process, which
includes the five following steps of attention, need, satisfaction, visualization, and action
(Monroe, 1935):

Attention: Get the audience's attention by presenting an attention getter, then clearly
stating the subject/persuasive goal, and finally, why the audience should listen and care
about the topic. An attention getter is a hook designed to quickly draw the audience's
attention to you and get interested in learning about your topic through the use of a
famous quote, statistics, or a short story.

Need: there are four specific parts of the need: statement, illustration, ramification, and
pointing.

  1. First, a speaker needs to give a clear and concise statement of the problem.
 2. Second, the speaker needs to provide one or more examples to illustrate the need.

      The illustration is an attempt to make the problem concrete for the audience.
 3. Next, a speaker must provide evidence (e.g., statistics, examples, testimony) showing

      the ramifications or consequences of the problem.
 4. Last, a speaker needs to point to the audience and show exactly how the problem

      relates to them personally.

Satisfaction: the speaker attempts to satisfy the need or solve the problem using the fol­
lowing four steps:

  1. State the attitude, value, belief, or action you want your audience to accept which
      tells them your goal.

 2. Explain why they should accept the attitude, value, belief, or action you proposed, by
      presenting a solid argument for why they should act. Demonstrate how the pro-
      posed solution would solve the problem.

 3. Refer to practical experience by showing the audience how the theoretical solution
      you have presented has worked in other real instances by presenting actual cases,
      research, testimony, etc.

167 | 9.5 Monroe's Motivated Sequence
 4. Identify and answer possible objections to your position. Refute possible reasons
      people might disagree with you or not be convinced by your message.

Visualization: Help the audience "imagine" your proposed solution for achieving the
desired outcome. Speakers can do this by providing descriptive explanations, evidence as
proof, and compare the outcome achieved by adopting your proposed solution to what
would happen if it were not adopted.
Action: a request by the speaker to have the audience approve of the proposed solution
which should result in action. These are separate steps, and the action step is when the
speaker presents specific actions the audience is asked to take to achieve the desired out-
come and equips the audience with the knowledge to act following the presentation.
This section is adapted from Organizing Persuasive Speeches in Elements of Public
Speaking by Marty Ennes Copyright © by Lumen Learning licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

                                                                                                                                     9.5 Monroe's Motivated Sequence | 168
9.6 AIDA
(Attention--Interest--Desire--Action)
Model

In the AIDA (Attention--Interest--Desire--Action) Model, the speaker structures the pre-
sentation based on the stages an audience member experiences when receiving and con-
sidering a persuasive message. The AIDA model proposed by Edward Kellogg Strong in
1925 originated in the advertising and marketing field (van der Plight & Vliek, 2017, p. 9)
and has become more widely used for a variety of persuasive messaging purposes. AIDA
steps are simply described as follows:

Attention: gain the attention of the audience by learning more about your subject partic-
ularly given its impact on them personally or in some way that impacts them personally
(i.e., financially, an issue that is important to them, etc.). You can do this using various
attention getting devices such as statistics, quotes, images, stories, etc., and clearly state
persuasive intent to connect the subject to the audience.

Interest: Gain the audience's interest in learning more about the persuasive topic and
how it relates to them through developing the problem-related aspects of the subject.

Desire: Create a desire or need in the audience for a solution to the problem previously
outlined and use motivational techniques to begin inspiring the audience to do something
to address the issues described in the presentation.

Action: Provide the audience with a specific and clear call to action which provides steps
for the audience to take. The actions will depend on the focus of the presentation. For a
speech describing the impact of a type of cancer, which includes a discussion of a hope-
ful new treatment being researched, a call to action could be for the audience to support
through voting or donate to help support expanded research and testing of the new treat-
ment. Please keep in mind that the action section would also incorporate steps of how to
act and what to do next by providing the audience with a phone number to call, event to
attend, or a QR quote to donate.

This model can be used for a variety of persuasive messages since it builds interest and

169 | 9.6 AIDA (Attention--Interest--Desire--Action) Model
motivation throughout the presentation. The elements in the basic organizational pat-
terns for persuasive messages (such as including an attention getter or clearly stating the
persuasive objective of the presentation) are present in AIDA and in Monroe's Motivated
Sequence, and the logical elements of persuading are present as well. The goal is to use
these techniques and strategies to develop a strong persuasive message that is appropri-
ate to your topic, the occasion, and your audience.

                                                                                                         9.6 AIDA (Attention--Interest--Desire--Action) Model | 170
   9.7 Key Takeaways

         · A typical presentation includes five main sections: Introduction, three body sections, and conclusion.
         · Organizational patterns include chronological, logical, spatial, and topical.
         · Use one of the following persuasive strategies:

                   Monroe's motivated sequence [Attention  Need  Satisfaction  Visualization  Action]
                   AIDA model [Attention  Interest  Desire  Action].
                   Visual aids (images, diagrams, props) enhance clarity and engagement.
                   Emotional elements (stories, quotes) help connect with the audience.

171 | 9.7 Key Takeaways
9.8 Discussion

    · Select a persuasive speech topical area, what you will attempt to persuade your audience of, and then use
        one of the two organizational patterns above (AIDA or Monroe's Motivated Sequence) to create a draft
        outline. In the right margin, identify the component of the organizational strategy you are fulfilling (e.g.,
        Attention, Need, and so forth). Also make notes about the types of visual support you might use and
        where you will use them.

    · Emotion and logic are very important for persuasive messages. Consider the outline of your persuasive
        speech you have created and make notes about the points that you feel you need to support with
        researched evidence from credible sources. Also indicate where you can include some emotional devices
        such as stories or other situational devices to help the audience connect to the message. Exchange your
        draft with a peer in the class and offer feedback to each other about opportunities to improve each
        other's message.

                                                                                                                                                           9.8 Discussion | 172
9.9 Non-OER References

Monroe, A. H. (1935). Principles and types of speech. Chicago, IL: Scott Foresman.
van der Pligt, J., & Vliek, M. (2017). The psychology of influence: Theory, research and

   practice [eBook edition]. Routledge.

173 | 9.9 Non-OER References
CHAPTER 10 TYPES OF
PRESENTATIONS

Chatterjee, Waryas Hughey & Ricks

Learning Objectives

  · Identify three common types of presentations.
  · Describe the different types of informative speeches.
  · List the four goals of persuasive speeches.
  · Explain ethos, pathos, and logos.
  · Describe Toulmin's rhetorical strategy.
  · Recognize the four types of audiences.
  · Design presentations keeping in mind the goal, types of audiences, and the context.

                                                                                                                                    Chapter 10 Types of Presentations | 174
10.1 Introduction to Presentations

At some point in your career, you will be asked to prepare and deliver a presentation in
a professional setting. When you are asked to deliver a presentation, it is important to
determine the following because it will help you plan and deliver the presentation:

  · What are the purposes (general and specific) of the presentation?
  · Who will you present to (your audiences--target and general, and number of peo-

      ple)?
  · What does the presentation setting look like (in person? Virtual?)
  · What logistical considerations do you have for the presentation (e.g., length of time

      to speak)?
It is also helpful to think about the task of presenting and how that makes you feel. Does
speaking in front of an audience--live or virtual--make you nervous or invigorated? For
many people, just the idea of speaking in public stirs up anxiety. Approximately "40 million
people in the U.S. aged 18 or older suffer from different forms of anxiety when it comes
to public speaking" (Zauderer, 2023). Having the tools to create your presentation such
as outlines, using organizational patterns, and practicing are ways you will feel confident
delivering presentations. In this chapter we focus on the three common types of presen-
tations and how one can prepare for them.

175 | 10.1 Introduction to Presentations
10. 2 Types of Presentations

There are three main types of presentations included in this chapter: presentations to
inform, presentations to persuade, and special occasion presentations.
Informative presentations focus on increasing your audience's knowledge, awareness, and
understanding of the specific topic on which you present. Informative speakers often
describe, define, and demonstrate to help improve the audience's knowledge.
In persuasive presentations, the speaker takes a position on a topic and attempts to con-
vince the audience to act in some way. The action could be a physical action, or it could
be attempting to convince the audience to change the attitude they hold. The proposed
actions could be large or small in magnitude, depending on a variety of factors. The
topic and the audience's position on the topic prior to the presentation will influence the
speaker's message and what the speaker can reasonably attempt to achieve because of the
presentation.
We also include special occasion presentations, which are generally celebratory designed
to honor the subject, which could be a person, an organization, an event, or occasion.
Sometimes these are commemorative and generally include background or information
about the subject of focus. If you have heard a celebratory speech at a graduation (com-
mencement address), a presentation memorializing an individual who has passed away
(eulogy), or a short speech at a wedding honoring the newly married couple (toast), you
have heard a special occasion presentation!
Next, let us discuss informative, persuasive, and special occasion presentations.

                                                                                                                                             10. 2 Types of Presentations | 176
10.3 Informative Presentations

Sometimes informative speaking is done as the sole purpose of the presentation and
sometimes information is conveyed at the beginning of a persuasive speech to clarify or
"scope" a topic for the audience, and to prepare an audience for the subsequent persuasive
message. Information also plays a role in many types of special occasion speeches where
the background and experience of an individual, organization or occurrence is relevant in
helping the audience understand.

Speaking to inform may fall into one of several categories. The presentation to inform may
be an explanation, a report, a description, or a demonstration. Each type of informative
presentation is described below.

Explanation: Presentations that clarify a topic (process, a thing, an event, etc.) are
explanatory in nature. Explanation uses precise terms and detailed description, some-
times with images for clarification, to help the audience create a mental image of the con-
tent. Giving details of how an electric vehicle engine operates would be an example of an
explanation. Figures of speech such as the use of metaphor, simile, analogy, etc. may also
be used.

Report: In your career, you may be called upon to give an informative report where you
communicate status, trends, or relationships that pertain to a specific topic. The informa-
tive report is a speech where you organize your information around key events, discov-
eries, or technical data and provide context and illustration for your audience. They may
naturally wonder, "Why are sales up (or down)?" or "What is the product leader in your
lineup?" and you need to anticipate their perspective and present the key information that
relates to your topic.

Description: Have you ever listened to a coworker tell you about their recent work trip
and found the details of the event fascinating? Describing information requires an empha-
sis on language that is vivid, captures attention, and excites the imagination. Your audi-
ence will be drawn to your effective use of color, descriptive language, and visual aids. An
informative speech that focuses on the description will be visual in many ways. Use your
imagination to understand your audience members' perspective: how would you like to
have someone describe the topic to you?

177 | 10.3 Informative Presentations
Demonstration: A demonstration speech focuses on clearly showing a process and telling
the audience important details about each step so that they can imitate, repeat, or do
the action themselves. Consider the visual aids or supplies you will need. Think of ways
you can incorporate physical demonstrations into your presentation. For instance, if the
speech is about how liquid nitrogen can be used to freeze in the process of making ice
cream, include an experiment showing this process in your speech.
Considering each step of your presentation and focusing on how to simplify it, you can
understand how the audience might grasp the new information and how you can best help
them. Be mindful of the desired outcome; for example, will your listeners be able to do
the task themselves? Finally, account for anticipated audience response, and budget addi-
tional time for repetition and clarification.
This section is adapted from Informative and Persuasive Presentations by Jordan Smith
available at Communication@Work - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                          10.3 Informative Presentations | 178
10.4 Persuasive Presentations

In speeches to persuade, the speaker takes a position on a topic and attempts to convince
the audience of some degree of change related to the topic which could be attitudinal or
behavioral. In some way, the speaker is convincing the audience to act. Persuasion is an
act or process of presenting arguments to move, motivate, or change the mind of your
audience. Persuasion can be implicit or explicit and can have both positive and negative
effects. Motivation is different from persuasion in that it involves the force, stimulus, or
influence to bring about change. Persuasion is the process, and motivation is the com-
pelling stimulus that encourages your audience to change their beliefs or behavior, to
adopt your position, or to consider your arguments.
The classical approach to persuasion, established by Aristotle (384-322 BCE) in the Art of
Rhetoric, involves three appeals to readers and listeners: logos, pathos, and ethos (Robert,
n.d.). A combination of the three appeals is used in creating persuasive presentations.
Ethos refers to source credibility, logos include nature of arguments and structure of the
message, and pathos relates to the use of emotional appeals (Frymier, 2021). First, we will
review ethos, followed by logos, and then pathos.

179 | 10.4 Persuasive Presentations
10.4.1 Ethos (Ethical Appeal or
Credibility)

Aristotle in ancient Greece argued ethos consisted of three dimensions: good character,
goodwill, and intelligence. A good character is related to a source or speaker's nature
- whether the audience sees one as an honest person. Goodwill refers to the intention
the speaker has toward the audience. Intelligence is connected to a speaker's expertise
(Frymier, 2021, p. 65).
When you present qualifications, experience, expertise, and wisdom (whether yours or
others') in an attempt to build readers' confidence in you and your document, you are
using ethical appeals. Part of what will convince readers to "listen" to you is if they know
who you are and what makes you an authority on a subject. Another aspect of ethos is the
credibility and "trustworthiness" of your sources of information. The appropriate devel-
opment of ethos will build readers' confidence in you.
You may also have encountered the "stylistic" appeal: the use of language and visual effects
to increase the persuasive impact. For example, a glossy, fancy design for a resume can
have a positive impact just as much as the content. This is yet another facet of ethos as it
is an appeal that lends to how you are perceived by your audience.

                                                                                                                          10.4.1 Ethos (Ethical Appeal or Credibility) | 180
10.4.2 Logos (Logical Appeal)

When you use reasons and arguments, backed up by facts and logic, to make your case,
you are using logical appeals. Most writers easily understand the importance of reliable
evidence in a persuasive document, but logical appeals extend to the structure of one's
argument. How you explain your evidence and its relationships to other claims and evi-
dence is just as important a logical appeal as the information itself. In academic and tech-
nical communication, logos is the preferred method of persuasion.

Depending on the characteristics of the audience, including the audience's predisposition
to the topic and the persuasive objective of the speech, the message will use either an
inductive or deductive strategy. Inductive reasoning presents facts or observations as the
basis for making generalized statements. In deductive reasoning, we start with two or
more factual statements and then draw a conclusion. Inductive reasoning may be under-
stood as specific to general, whereas deductive reasoning is understood as general to spe-
cific. For example, in inductive reasoning, if you have had three bosses from a different
generation that often struggled with technology, you now conclude that all members of
that generation have challenges with technology. In deductive reasoning, a boss knows
that a certain college program trains students to be proficient in a type of software. The
boss might, therefore, hire a graduate of that program thinking that the graduate must
also be proficient in that software.

This section is adapted from Informative and Persuasive Presentations by Jordan Smith
available at Communication@Work - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Resources

Inductive & Deductive Reasoning. Khan Academy. https://www.khanacademy.org/math/
algebra-home/alg-series-and-induction/alg-deductive-and-inductive-reasoning/v/
deductive-reasoning-1 . The video is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribu­
tion-NonCommercial ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

181 | 10.4.2 Logos (Logical Appeal)
10.4.3 Pathos (Emotional Appeals)

When you attempt to rouse people's anger or sympathies in a persuasive effort, you are
using emotional appeals. Such direct emotional appeals, however, are less effective in
technical or business writing, since these styles attempt to be more measured or objec-
tive. Effective pathos in this situation would instead appeal to common motivations, goals,
and values. Arguing that a certain course of action would save the company money, for
instance, would appeal to what the audience wants. For another example, picture a com-
pany that really values long-term sustainability. Arguing that a certain course of action
would reduce a company's carbon footprint would appeal to the company's values, and
therefore, probably to the values of their clients.

Appealing to emotion is also important in persuasive speaking. Emotions are psychological
and physical reactions, such as fear or anger, to stimuli that we experience as a feeling.
Our feelings or emotions directly impact our own point of view and readiness to commu-
nicate, but also influence how, why, and when we say things. Emotions influence how you
say what you say, how you hear, and what you hear. Emotions can move your audience to
change or act in certain ways.

Humor, guilt, and fear are the three common emotional appeals (Frymier, 2021). Be cau-
tious of overusing emotional appeals or manipulating emotions in presentations--it is
unethical, and you may encounter emotional resistance from your audience. Emotional
resistance involves getting tired, often to the point of rejection, of hearing messages that
attempt to elicit an emotional response. Emotional appeals can reduce the audience's abil-
ity to receive messages.

Professor Frymier in Persuasion: Integrating theory, research, and practice (2021) summa-
rizes research regarding the three common emotional appeals. When using humor in per-
suasive messages, we must remember three things: not to offend our audience; the humor
should be relevant and help audience process the message rather than get distracted by
it; and elements of logos and ethos should be used along with humor (p. 93).

If we use guilt appeals, moderate levels are more persuasive than high levels. In addition,
because guilt appeals make people feel bad, we must consider the ethics of using such
appeals (Frymier, 2021, p. 94). Finally, if we include fear appeals that typically tell audience
how vulnerable they are to a threat (susceptibility) and the negative consequences of not

                                                                                                                                     10.4.3 Pathos (Emotional Appeals) | 182
following our recommendation (severity), we must also build into the message the idea
that the audience have the ability to adopt our suggestion (self-efficacy) and our recom-
mendation will mitigate the threat (response efficacy) (Frymier, 2021, p. 104).

It is also important to consider how the use of emotional appeals in a speech could impact
you personally. Some emotional appeals may be difficult to share during a presentation
and to an audience (even if you know some/all the audience). Never use a personal story,
or even a story of someone you do not know if the inclusion of that story causes you to
become overemotional. While it's important to discuss relevant and sometimes emotion-
ally difficult topics, you need to assess your own relationship to the message.

Becoming overemotional in a presentation can impact your speaker ethos and credibility
and your effectiveness. If you become upset during your presentation or are overemo-
tional, it may suggest the need to rewrite the message because you may not be ready to
discuss the issue you have selected or share the emotional appeal you wanted to include.
Similarly, it is important to keep in mind the visual supports that you include in the pre-
sentation and how they might impact you or the audience. If they stir too much emotion,
are very upsetting to you and/or your audience in any way or are graphic, it is best to find
other visuals to include to help make your point.

Now that we have discussed types of appeals, watch the video below to get ideas on how
to integrate logos, pathos, and ethos in your presentation.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://uta.pressbooks.pub/professionalandtechnicalcommunication/?p=438#oembed-1

This section is adapted from the following sources:

"Informative and Persuasive Presentations" in Communication@Work - Simple Book Pub­
lishing by Jordan Smith available licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

"Logos, Ethos, Pathos" in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication
- Simple Book Publishing Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah
LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt licensed under Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License

183 | 10.4.3 Pathos (Emotional Appeals)
10.4.4 Toulmin's Rhetorical Strategy

When you make an argument in a persuasive speech, you will want to present your posi-
tion logically by supporting each point with appropriate sources. You will want to give
your audience every reason to perceive you as an ethical and trustworthy speaker. Your
audience will expect you to treat them with respect, and to present your argument in a
way that does not make them defensive. Contribute to your credibility by building sound
arguments using Toulmin's rhetorical strategy.

Stephen Toulmin's (1958) rhetorical strategy, another persuasive strategy, focuses on three
main elements: a claim, data, and warrant. Claims are the statement of your position that
you will prove. Data is the evidence that you provide to support and offer proof for your
claim. Finally, the warrant ties up your ideas--it is the analysis including reasoning that
summarizes your thoughts and reinforces the validity of your claim. An illustration of the
claim-data-warrant structure is provided in Table 10.1 below:

                     Table 10.1 Three Elements of a Rhetorical Strategy

Element Description                         Example

Claim Your statement of belief or truth It is important to spay or neuter your pet.

Data     Your supporting reasons for the    Millions of unwanted pets are euthanized
         claim                              annually.

Warrant  You create the connection between  Pets that are spayed or neutered do not
         the claim and the supporting       reproduce, preventing the production of
         reasons                            unwanted animals.

This three-part rhetorical strategy is useful in that it makes the claim explicit, clearly illus-
trating the relationship between the claim and the data and allows the listener to follow
the speaker's reasoning. You may have a good idea or point, but your audience will be
curious and want to know how you arrived at that claim or viewpoint. The warrant often
addresses the inherent and often unspoken question, "Why is this data so important to
your topic?" and helps you illustrate relationships between information for your audience.
This model can help you clearly articulate it for your audience.

This section is adapted from Informative and Persuasive Presentations in Communica­
tion@Work - Simple Book Publishing by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                  10.4.4 Toulmin's Rhetorical Strategy | 184
10.4.5 Goals of Persuasive Presentations

Persuasive presentations often entail the audience to "do" something concrete. For exam-
ple, you may create a proposal to request funding for a highway expansion project. After
establishing the problem, and analyzing it, you would offer solutions. In this "call to action"
step, the speaker/you will attempt to persuade the board to sign a contract or send a
payment to a particular address. This is important because it drives the audience to take
immediate action towards the solution.

Action goals address the question, "What do I want the audience to do as a result of
being engaged by my presentation?" The goals of action include adoption, discontinuance,
deterrence, and continuance.

Adoption means the speaker wants to persuade the audience to take on a new way of
thinking or adopt a new idea. Examples could include buying a new product such as soft-
ware for the organizations or choosing a new vendor for laboratory equipment. The key is
that the audience member adopts, or takes on, a new view, action, or habit.

Discontinuance involves the speaker persuading the audience to stop doing something
that they have been doing. Rather than take on a new habit or action, the speaker is asking
the audience member to stop existing behavior or ideas such as eating or drinking a bev-
erage while handling laboratory equipment.

Deterrence is a call to action that focuses on persuading the audience not to start some-
thing if they haven't already started. The goal of action would be to deter or encourage
the audience members to refrain from starting or initiating behavior such as not ignoring
safety protocols.

Finally, with Continuance, the speaker aims to persuade the audience to continue doing
what they have been doing, such as keep buying a product, or keeping up with industry
certifications.

A speaker may choose to address more than one of these goals of action, depending on
the audience analysis. If the audience is largely agreeable and supportive, you may find
continuance to be one goal, while adoption is secondary.

This section is adapted from Informative and Persuasive Presentations in Communica­

185 | 10.4.5 Goals of Persuasive Presentations
tion@Work - Simple Book Publishing by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                            10.4.5 Goals of Persuasive Presentations | 186
10.5 Special Occasion Presentations

Special occasion speeches are unique to the situation/circumstance in which they occur
and to the related events. In business and professional settings special occasion speeches
are given in a variety of situations such as to introduce new team members, to honor retir-
ing team members (or those who are otherwise departing the organization), and to cel-
ebrate or pay tribute to accomplishments of individuals and/or the organization. Other
situations include speeches of acceptance when individuals receive awards and recogni-
tion and the recipient is asked to speak, and there are occasions when situations need to
be recognized, such as a speech related to an unexpected disaster that somehow impacts
the organization.
Special occasion speeches are short, usually, 1-3 minutes in length. We should utilize a
basic speechwriting format including an introduction to obtain interest and share the
focus/purpose of the presentation, a body developing the ideas, and a conclusion to tie up
and impact the ideas presented. Speakers often include elements of informative or per-
suasive presentation in special occasion speeches. Speakers might also use notes (if so,
they are brief and on the front of one notecard) and might also use some brief visual sup-
port.
You could be asked to deliver a special occasion speech in a professional setting, such
as celebrations regarding promotions, retirement, and introductions of new managers or
employees. An event designed to celebrate the person or occasion being recognized is
often structured using a direct approach (such as during an organization or industry's
award ceremony) while the special occasion speech given at more somber times (e.g. a
speech to remember a longtime team member who passed away) is often structured indi-
rectly.

187 | 10.5 Special Occasion Presentations
10.6 Exercises

    · Select a topic on which you could prepare a speech of explanation, description, or demonstration. Using
        the mind-mapping technique described in the outlining module, create a map of the main ideas and sub-
        ideas you would include. Also be sure to list particular words, language strategies (such as the use of
        metaphor), and descriptive words that you think are important to help achieve the speech objective.

    · Combine and apply: Deliver a one-minute impromptu special occasion speech. To deliver the impromptu,
        first identify the occasion for which you will pretend to speak and then think about the specific points
        you wish to make for the type of special occasion. Then, deliver the presentation in class for your class-
        mates, and remember to also ensure aspects of strong delivery like poise, eye contact, and use of voice.

    · Brainstorm any topical area for a presentation and decide who your audience will be. Then, on a blank
        page in any format, complete the following to apply the concepts outlined above. Once you're done,
        review and determine the overall approach you would use to design your presentation. For your topic and
        considering your audience identify: The general and specific purpose, the demographic and psychological
        characteristics of your audience, the type of audience you will speak to, and important situation and con-
        text factors. Given these answers, which of the persuasive appeals will you use?

                                                                                                                                                           10.6 Exercises | 188
10.7 Preparing Presentations: Purposes,
Audience, Situation

When preparing your presentations, keep in mind the purpose, audience and situation or
context, along with available resources and knowledge about the subject. These consid-
erations, taken together, will help inform how you can craft your presentation. Purposes
center on general (What is the broad focus or intent of your speech--to persuade? To
inform?) and specific (considers the topical area you'll speak about, e.g., you will inform
the audience about the evolutions of artificial intelligence or persuade the audience that
EV technology should be adopted in all cars manufactured in the U.S.).

Once you know your general and specific purpose, consider your audience. You should
likely have a target audience (those for whom the message is intended) and a global or
universal audience (anyone who may encounter the message but to whom the message
is not directly targeted). It is also important to consider demographic and psychological
characteristics of your audience and the audience's likely attitude toward your topic and
toward you as a speaker. The book Stand Up Speak Out offers the following guidance to
help understand audiences:

Demographic characteristics include factors such as gender, age range, marital status,
geography/location, race and ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. You can often research
these ahead of time if you do not know the audience personally by asking others, or by
researching a group online. If you can, conduct a survey to ask the audience members spe-
cific questions, which may provide you with precise information. Learning about demo-
graphics can give you a sense of the historic and social events of which the audience may
share a common understanding. Knowing about the education attained by an audience or
the occupations of the audience members' work can help you determine the level of lan-
guage to use and how technical you want to be in discussing subjects.

Psychological characteristics include such values, opinions, attitudes, and beliefs. Grice
and Skinner (2009) present a model in which values are the basis for beliefs, attitudes, and
behaviors. Values are the foundation of their pyramid model. They say, "A value expresses
a judgment of what is desirable and undesirable, right, and wrong, or good and evil. Values
are usually stated in the form of a word or phrase. For example, most of us probably share

189 | 10.7 Preparing Presentations: Purposes, Audience, Situation
values of equality, freedom, honesty, fairness, justice, good health, and family. These values
compose the principles or standards we use to judge and develop our beliefs, attitudes,
and behaviors."

We acknowledge that people inherit some values from their family upbringing, cultural
influences, and life experiences. The extent to which someone values family loyalty and
obedience to parents, thrift, humility, and work may be determined by these influences
more than by individual choice. Psychographic analysis can reveal preexisting notions that
limit your audience's frame of reference. By knowing about such notions ahead of time,
you can address them in your speech.

An audience's attitude toward you and your presentation topic are also important to con-
sider so you can adjust your message and approach to engaging the audience. Conor Neill,
Senior Lecturer at the IESE Business School and President of Vistage Spain outlines the
four types of audience as (Neill, 2018):

  · Friendly. Your purpose: reinforcing their beliefs and sense of shared interests.
  · Apathetic. Your purpose is to convince them that it matters for them.
  · Uninformed. Your requirement is to educate others before you can begin to propose

      a course of action.
  · Hostile. Your purpose is to respect them and their viewpoint. The most you may be

      able to gain is their respect and an openness to listen to your perspective. It is key
      that you can present some information that is viewed as new to the audience before
      asking for any change in their position. This is not only courteous, but also gives the
      listener's ego room to change without feeling demeaned ("based on this new infor-
      mation, I ask you to change")

You can view Neill (2018) summarizing the four types of audiences with examples in the
video below.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://uta.pressbooks.pub/professionalandtechnicalcommunication/?p=443#oembed-1

To connect these audience types with other ideas in this book, if the results of your audi-
ence analysis suggest that the audience is favorable to you and your message, use the

                                                                                                10.7 Preparing Presentations: Purposes, Audience, Situation | 190
direct approach to structure it. If the audience is likely to be hostile or oppose you or your
message, you're encouraged to structure your message using an indirect method.
Another important consideration when preparing your message is the overall situation
and context. The situation considers the occasion on which you are giving your presen-
tation, where and when you are giving the presentation, the length of time and modal-
ity in which you are presenting. Modality includes in-person, recorded, using electronic
means such as a televised presentation or via an online meeting platform. The context
includes social and political issues and events, including those which are historic, which
the audience will be aware of, and which could impact on how they receive and process
your message. Be sure that as part of your speech preparation you are considering all
these important factors to help you prepare the most appropriate presentation possible.
This section is adapted from "Three Types of Audience Analysis" in Stand up, Speak out
- The Practice and Ethics of Public Speaking - Social Sci LibreTexts authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Anonymous via LibreTexts Project licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution NonCommercial ShareAlike 3.0 License, unless otherwise noted.

191 | 10.7 Preparing Presentations: Purposes, Audience, Situation
10.8 Key Takeaways

    · There are three main types of presentations: informative, persuasive, and special occasion.
    · Informative presentations aim to increase audience knowledge through explanation, report, description,

        or demonstration.
    · Persuasive presentations use ethos, pathos, and logos to influence audience attitudes or behaviors, often

        with a call to action.
    · Special occasion presentations are tailored to specific events and often combine elements of informative

        and persuasive speeches.
    · Effective presentations require understanding the audience type and context and using appropriate

        rhetorical strategies like Toulmin's model.

                                                                                                                                                   10.8 Key Takeaways | 192
10.9 Non-OER References

Frymier, A. B. (2021). Persuasion: Integrating theory, research, and practice (5th ed.). Kendall
   Hunt.

Grice, G. L., & Skinner, J. F. (2009). Mastering public speaking: The handbook (7th ed.). Pear-
   son.

Lyon, A. (2017, August 28).Ethos Pathos Logos [Video]. YouTube.
Neill, C. (Director). (2018, April 17). Public Speaking: The 4 Types of Audience [Video].

   YouTube.
Robert, R. W. (n.d.). The Internet Classics Archive. Rhetoric by Aristotle. Retrieved July 24,

   2025.
Zauderer, S. (2023, September 19). 31 Fear of public speaking statistics. Cross River Therapy.

193 | 10.9 Non-OER References
CHAPTER 11 CREATING REPORTS
AND PROPOSALS

Ricks & Chatterjee

Learning Objectives

  · Recognize common written reports utilized in technical fields.
  · Identify differences between informational reports and proposals.
  · Develop appropriate sections for reports and proposals.

                                                                                                                        Chapter 11 Creating Reports and Proposals | 194
11.1 Informational Reports

An informational report informs or instructs and presents details of events, activities,
individuals, or conditions without analysis. An example of this type of "just the facts"
report is a police accident report. The report will note the time, date, place, contributing
factors like weather, and identification information for the drivers involved in an automo-
bile accident.
Informational reports typically focus on major projects or subjects beyond the scope
of everyday communication. At the same time, they are more specific in purpose than
reports designed to persuade, present, and discuss results, or argue for specific actions.
Informational reports encompass a variety of genres. We elaborate on progress and lab
reports in this section:
Progress reports provide status reports or project updates to supervisors and upper
management.
Lab reports comprehensively record the procedures, outcomes, and limitations of scien-
tific research.
Incident reports document onsite events such as accidents or malfunctions for which
involved parties may be held liable.
Evaluations provide an overview of performance on the job by organizational members
(e.g. employees, coworkers, employers, etc.).

195 | 11.1 Informational Reports
11.2 Parts of an Informational Report

A common approach to structuring informational reports includes a section on summary,
introduction, project status, and conclusion. See Table 11.1 for section details.

                                                                                                                                 11.2 Parts of an Informational Report | 196
              Table 11.1 Parts of an Informational Report

Section       Purpose
Name

Summary       Preface your progress report with a Summary section that provides a
              comprehensive overview of the most important information (i.e., the num-
              ber and a descriptor of each task and its completion status).
              As with your project proposal, you are most likely going to use a pure sum-
              mary to discuss the status of each task, rather than an executive summary.
              This is because progress reports tend to emphasize what needs to be done
              and if any changes need to be made, rather than analyzing data and mak-
              ing final recommendations.

Introduction  Review the details of your project's purpose, scope, and activities. The
              introduction may also contain the following:
              Date the project began
              Date the project is scheduled to be completed
              People or organization working on the project
              People or organization for whom the project is being done
              Overview of the contents of the progress report

Project sta-  This section (which could have sub-sections) should give the reader a clear
tus           idea of the status of your project. It should review the work completed,
              work in progress, and work remaining to be done on the project, organized
              into sub-sections by time, task, or topic. These sections might include

              Direct reference to milestones or deliverables established in previous doc-
              uments related to the project.

              A timeline for when the remaining work will be completed.

              Any problems encountered or issues that have arisen that might affect
              completion, direction, requirements, or scope.

Conclusion    The final section provides an overall assessment of the current state of the
              project and its expected completion, usually reassuring the reader that all
              is going well and on schedule. It can also alert recipients to unexpected
              changes in direction or scope, or problems in the project that may require
              intervention.

References    This additional section provides full citations for any outside material
              included in the progress report.

197 | 11.2 Parts of an Informational Report
Lab reports are another common type of technical document you can expect to produce
at work, especially if you enter a medical, scientific, technical, engineering, or research
field. The main purpose of a typical lab report is to document procedures and results
of experiments or another similar primary research. The target audience of a lab report
is usually a colleague or peer who will use the information to decide, better understand
the material being studied, or replicate the procedure or experiment. Although most lab
reports share these underlying similarities, the structure, organization, presentation of
material, and design of the document vary widely by field and institution. If your disci-
pline's style guide does not offer details on how to prepare a lab report, you should seek
the guidance of a subject-matter expert in your field or at your organization.
This section is derived from Types of Informational Reports and Progress Reports in
Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication - Simple Book Publishing
Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and
Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommer­
cial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                 11.2 Parts of an Informational Report | 198
11.3 Proposals

A Proposal is a persuasive document that aims to convince others to take specific
action(s). A proposal may convince a supervisor or a customer to approve a project or con-
vince someone to implement an idea. The idea maybe a start of a new project or asking for
funding towards equipment or supplies.

Proposals and reports are some of the most common types of written work you will likely
compose in the workplace. Proposals are especially common in grant-driven fields, such
as academia and public health.

Most businesses rely on effective proposal writing to ensure the successful continuation
of their businesses and to get new contracts. In a proposal, the writer tries to convince
the reader about the following:

  · The proposed plan or project is worth the time, energy, and expense necessary to
      implement or see through.

  · The author represents the best candidates for implementing the idea.
  · The proposed project or plan will result in tangible benefits for the reader.

Example scenarios where a proposal might be called for are listed below:

   Examples

         · A company has a scientific or technical problem or wants to make some sort of improvement. The com-
             pany sends out a request for proposals; you receive the request and respond with a proposal. You offer to
             come in, investigate, interview, make recommendations, and present all this information in the form of a
             report.

         · An organization wants a seminar in your expertise. You write a proposal to give the seminar and provide a
             guide or handbook that the people attending the seminar will receive.

         · An agency has just started using a new online data system, but the user's manual is technically complex
             and difficult to read. You receive a request from this agency for proposals to write a simplified guide or
             startup guide.

199 | 11.3 Proposals
This section is derived from "Introduction to Proposals" in Howdy or Hello? Technical
and Professional Communication - Simple Book Publishing Copyright © 2022 by Matt
McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 Interna­
tional License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                                11.3 Proposals | 200
11.4 Types of Proposals

Proposals may be solicited or unsolicited, and external or internal in nature. We briefly
explain each one in this section.

Solicited Proposal. If you have been asked to submit a proposal, it is considered solicited.
The solicitation may come in the form of a direct verbal or written request, but normally
solicitations are indirect, open bids formally published for everyone to see. A request for
proposal (RFP), request for quotation (RFQ), and invitation for bid (IFB) are common ways
to solicit business proposals for business, industry, and the government. RFPs typically
specify the product or service, guidelines for submission, and evaluation criteria. RFQs
emphasize cost, though service and maintenance may be part of the solicitation. IFBs are
often job-specific in that they encompass a project that requires a timeline, labor, and
materials. For example, if a local school district announces the construction of a new
elementary school, it normally has architect and engineering plans on file but needs a
licensed contractor to build it.

Unsolicited proposals. These are the "cold calls" of business writing. They require a thor-
ough understanding of the market, product and/or service, and their presentation is typ-
ically more general rather than customer specific. Unsolicited proposals can be tailored to
specific businesses to demonstrate knowledge of needs; this way the content and style of
writing is not generic.

Internal proposals. These proposals are written by and for someone within the same
organization. Since both the writer and reader share the same workplace context, these
proposals are generally shorter than external proposals and usually address some way to
improve a work-related situation (productivity, efficiency, profit, etc.). As internal docu-
ments, they are often sent as memos or introduced with a memo if the proposal is lengthy.

External proposals. These proposals are sent outside of the writer's organization to a sep-
arate entity (usually to solicit business). Since these are external documents, they are usu-
ally sent as a formal report introduced by a cover letter. External proposals are usually
sent in response to a Request for Proposals, but not always.

This section is derived from Designing and Formatting Proposals in Howdy or Hello?
Technical and Professional Communication - Simple Book Publishing Copyright © 2022

201 | 11.4 Types of Proposals
by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-
Schmidt licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                    11.4 Types of Proposals | 202
11.5 Common Parts of Proposals

Successful proposals have several elements, which we list below. Use the example shown
in Table 11.2 as a guideline because depending upon the proposal, certain sections may not
be useful.

203 | 11.5 Common Parts of Proposals
                        Table 11.2 Parts of a Proposal

Section        Purpose
Name

Executive      Cover all essential information in the proposal, either to encourage your
Summary        audience to continue to read the full proposal, or for the convenience of a
               specific audience who does not have the time or need to read the whole
               document. Since the writer has not yet begun the project, they would most likely
               use a pure summary here. This type of summary ascribes equal weight to all
               sections of the proposal. In a proposal, this includes methods of data collection,
               which enables the writer to present their project design persuasively.

Introduction/  Clearly and fully define the problem or opportunity addressed by the proposal
Background     and briefly describe how the project will address that need. Convinces the reader
               (consider persuasive writing strategies) that there is a clear need and a clear
               benefit to the proposed idea. This content should incorporate some outside
               research.

Project        Describes the project in detail and explains how the project will improve the
Description    situation:
               1. Confirms feasibility (is it doable?) with consideration to time. What makes the
               project realistically achievable?
               2. Explains the specific benefits of implementing the project and the
               consequences of not doing it.
               3. Give a detailed description or explanation of your proposed project plan or
               methodology and the resources needed to achieve goals.
               4. Addresses potential obstacles or objections.

Market         Contains information regarding what currently exists in the marketplace. You
Analysis       could include competing products or services and explain how your solution
               compares.

Credentials    Establish writer's qualifications, experience, and authority to lead this project.
               What is your connection to the problem or opportunity?

Timeline       Provide a detailed timeline for completion of the project. Use a method to
               indicate when each stage of the project will be completed.

Marketing      Often the greatest challenge for online services--how will people learn about
Plan Delivery  you? If you are bidding on a gross lot of food service supplies, this may not apply
               to you, but if an audience is required for success, you will need a marketing plan.

Budget         Provides an itemized budget for completing the proposed project.

Conclusion     Conclude with a final pitch that summarizes and emphasizes the benefits of
               implementing your proposed idea--but without sounding like an advertisement.
               You may also incorporate possible issues with the solution to be upfront about
               possible delays and concerns. Benefits should outweigh the possible problems.

References     List your research sources to document and credit appropriately; this clarifies
               and authenticates the project's work and avoids fallout of plagiarism.

This section is derived from Designing and Formatting Proposals in Howdy or Hello?
Technical and Professional Communication - Simple Book Publishing Copyright © 2022
by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-

                                                                                                                                       11.5 Common Parts of Proposals | 204
Schmidt licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

205 | 11.5 Common Parts of Proposals
11.6 Key Takeaways

    · Informational reports (e.g., progress, lab, incident reports) focus on presenting details and facts, while
        proposals aim to persuade the reader to take specific actions or approve a plan.

    · Effective reports include clear sections such as summary, introduction, project status, and conclusion.
        Each part serves a distinct purpose in communicating project progress or findings.

    · Proposals can be solicited or unsolicited, internal or external. Understanding the context helps tailor the
        content and format appropriately for the intended audience.

    · Strong proposals include an executive summary, background, project description, market analysis, cre-
        dentials, timeline, budget, and conclusion. These elements collectively build a compelling case.

    · Writing clear, well-organized proposals and reports is a critical skill in technical and professional fields,
        especially in grant-driven industries and project-based environments.

                                                                                                                                                   11.6 Key Takeaways | 206
   11.7 Discussion

         · Interview someone in a technical field about their experiences in working with teams. Write a brief
             report that describes your findings and recommendations.

         · Select a technical concern on your college campus that could be addressed in a brief proposal. Discuss
             how you would achieve your goal to convince the reader to fund the changes you hope to make.

         · Discuss your thoughts related to writing proposals. How would having the ability to put together an effi-
             cient proposal serve you as a professional in your career?

207 | 11.7 Discussion
11.8 Sample Student Work: Trip Report

Left photo: The Flying Pancake. Right photo: Exhibit on the Wright Brothers at Kitty Hawk.

This trip took place on June 21st, 2025, at the Frontiers of Flight Museum, which is in Dal-
las. The museum showcases the evolution of aircraft throughout history, beginning with
the earliest hot air balloon and then the Wright brothers' first airplane. The museum is
set up in chronological order, which allows visitors to see the evolution of aviation. Some
of the most notable displays include an F-18 Blue Angel, the Flying Pancake, the original
Apollo 7 Command Module, and the SR-71 Blackbird.

Introduction/ Background

The Frontiers of Flight Museum was made possible by George Haddaway. He was both a
publisher of Flight Magazine and an aviation historian. Haddaway donated his collection of
artifacts to The University of Texas, which was later transferred, in the late 1970s, to The
University of Texas at Dallas (UTD). UTD worked with Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison, Jan
Collmer, and William E Cooper in 1988 to establish the museum as a non-profit organiza-
tion. With the help of the City of Dallas, the Frontiers of Flight Museum officially opened to
the public in June 2004. This museum is dedicated to preserving aviation artifacts (Fron-
tiers of Flight Museum, 2025).

                                                                                                                             11.8 Sample Student Work: Trip Report | 208
Discussion

Since the exhibit is arranged in chronological order, it is simple to follow. Guests enter the
left section of the museum. It begins with the Early Dreamers, Early Flyers, and Balloons
& Airships. From there, it continues with these sections: General & Commercial Aviation,
the F-18 Blue Angel display, World War I, the model of the Flying Pancake, and World War
II. The next section starts with the Early Cold War/Korean, Late Cold War/Vietnam, and
Modern Air Power. Guests walk to the far-right section of the first floor, which is designed
as a runway, and will find an SR-71 Blackbird. A commercial airplane was also available for
guests to walk in and look at historical artifacts. Next to these two exhibits, there is a chil-
dren's play area.

Once guests have seen the exhibits on the first floor, they may head to the second floor.
Upstairs, there were artifacts from the Golden Age, the Braniff Exhibit, and the Love Field
Exhibit. It continues with the William W. Browning Gallery and the Southwest Airlines
Heart of Our History Exhibit. Each exhibit had a model of an airplane used in that era,
except for the William W. Browning Gallery. This exhibit featured many paintings of air-
craft from different eras.

Some of the key concepts of industrial engineering include optimization, efficiency, and
manufacturing. Aircraft have been modified, and some of these changes include safety,
saving fuel, improving speed, and refining engines. For example, one section of the
museum briefly described the Berlin Airlift and its purpose. More than two tons of food
and supplies were delivered on June 26, 1948. This project was called "Operation Vittles,"
and it helped the city survive and defend against the enemy. Also, this connects directly to
two other industrial engineering principles: logistics and supply chains. Supplies and food
were transported from one point to another in an efficient way.

Findings

The Frontiers of Flight Museum had information about the evolution of aviation through
decades of innovation and conflict. It was impressive to see how engineering design and
manufacturing worked together to build such impressive machines. This museum offers
information for students who are interested in aerospace and manufacturing systems.

209 | 11.8 Sample Student Work: Trip Report
While the museum is relatively small compared to others, it is rich in content. One of the
displays caught the attention of guests. There was a map showing the many routes the
National Airlines DC-3 had flown. This showed how large-scale transportation planning
industrial engineers focus on, such as figuring out which route is the most efficient.

Conclusion/Recommendations

Overall, this was a great educational experience. I recommend this trip to other students
in my major, especially if they are also interested in the aerospace industry. This museum
has a great wealth of information on these two engineering fields. Also, the museum
serves as an educational space for children. There are programs such as field trips and
summer camps. This means that, especially during the summer, it will be loud and
crowded. To improve the experience, the museum should expand and be divided into two
sections. One section should be for children, and the other for general visitors. With this,
both children and adults will be able to enjoy the museum experience to its fullest.

References

Frontiers of Flight Museum (2025.) Welcome to Texas' Premier Air and Space Museum.
This Trip Report is derived from work completed in COMS 2302 for Communicating

   strategically in the workplace: A resource for engineering and science students Copy-
   right © 2025 by Melissa Sanchez licensed under CC-BY license, unless otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                              11.8 Sample Student Work: Trip Report | 210
11.9 Sample Student Work: Proposal

                                          Cerulean Tech

                                                            1200 Wingspan Drive.
                                                           Arlington, Texas 76018
                                                   (817) 718-6018 Fax: (817) 718-8000
                                                 Email: cerulean.tech@techleaders.net
                                                           www.ceruleantech.com

July 1st, 2025
Keith Crawford
Spirit Airlines
4039 Rock Quarry Rd. Suite 600
Dallas, Texas 75211
(817) 345-6623
Subject: Proposal No. F-0087 for Cerulean Tech
Dear Keith Crawford:
Cerulean Tech respectfully submits the following proposal to implement digital twin engine sur-
veillance at your manufacturing facility in Wichita, Kansas. Our company has been a global
frontier for preventative aerospace parts surveillance since 2005, collaborating with many of
the top commercial airlines, including Delta and American Airlines. Our dedicated engineers
have pioneered the use of digital twins and sensors for continual monitoring solutions, and our
advancements have redefined industry standards.

211 | 11.9 Sample Student Work: Proposal
Background

The COVID-19 global pandemic was a challenging time for airlines, with a severe decrease
in the number of flights available for customers. In 2024, Spirit Airlines focused on increasing
profits and maintaining the public status of an ultra-low budget commercial airline, while techni-
cal issues grounded over 20% of your fleet. The use of PW1100G Pratt & Whitney jet engines
grounded 40 of your 200 aircraft alone. Pratt & Whitney jet engines are a common engine
choice in the airline industry, as they are fuel-efficient turbofan (GTF) engines that cut fuel
consumption by around 15% while maintaining low emissions (Cameron, 2023). Research has
shown that during the manufacturing process between 2015 and 2021, the powdered metal
used in production has been contaminated, which led to cracking in stage 1 and 2 disks of
the high-pressure turbine (Garbno, 2023). Premature engine maintenance and the resulting
recalls of the PW1100G engines have had a substantial impact on the financial standing of the
company. Complications in flight availability, delays, and operations have resulted in customer
dissatisfaction, threatening the public position of Spirit Airlines.

Our company offers a variety of digital twin part management solutions that can identify engine
issues as they begin, allowing for earlier maintenance as needed and fewer grounded flights.
Our digital twin technology is partnered with sensors and can be integrated into your existing
AeroSystems manufacturing facilities. Current maintenance and engine repairs for PW1100G
engines take over 60 days to repair, plus the waiting time for the maintenance response. The
resulting ground time can be upwards of 300 days (Hardee, 2025). When maintenance issues
are identified earlier, the damage inflicted on parts is typically minimized. With our proposed
upgrades, maintenance issues may be identified earlier, and post-repair inspections may be
expedited, getting planes back on the tarmac faster.

Based on the provided facilities layout and technologies listed in your call for proposals, we
present a digital twin package consisting of digital twin implementation and sensor installation,
with a subcontracted physics engine through COMSOL.

Proposed Approach and Work Plan

The proposed workflow for developing and deploying a digital twin system to detect powder-
metal defects in aircraft engines follows a structured 12-week plan. The project begins with
integrating flight data into the digital twin platform (Jul 21st -August 4th) and conducting a his-
torical analysis of past engine failure and inspection data (July 28th -August 8th). In parallel,
neural network training is performed using the historical data of past Spirit Airlines (e.g. turbine

                                                                                                                                  11.9 Sample Student Work: Proposal | 212
inlet temperature, exhaust gas temperature, oil pressure, fuel flow, torque, N1, N2, ambient
temperature, static pressure) (August 5th -22th), while the core digital twin infrastructure is
built to track engine-specific operational history (August 5th -15th). A physics-based modeling
engine, provided by COMSOL on August 20th, adds fatigue simulation capabilities to enhance
prediction accuracy. Model testing using real flight data takes place from August 25th -29th,
followed by final tuning and validation of the prediction engine (September 1st -6th). An alert
system for identifying engines at risk of microcracks is implemented between September 8th
-12th. The system is then deployed on a limited number of aircraft for initial testing (Septem-
ber 15th -October 10th), with final review and performance evaluation conducted from October
13th -17th.

Our chief engineer, Michael McKinley, will oversee a five-member software team. The software
team will primarily focus on the data integration and digital twin training of both historical data
and current PW1100G engines on A320neo aircraft. Senior Engineer Melissa Sanchez will
oversee the COMSOL model testing team, composed of one certified mechanical engineer
and one aerospace engineer. Project Liaison Arina Orlova will oversee the collaborative efforts
between Cerulean Tech and Spirit Airlines, ensuring a smooth program transition upon com-
pletion.

Process                                  Timeline
Data Integration to Digital Twin         July 21-August 4, 2025
Historical Analysis of Past Engine Data  July 28-August 8, 2025
Neural Network Training                  August 5-August 22, 2025
Digital Twin System Setup                August 5-August 15, 2025
Physics Modeling Engine (COMSOL)         August 20, 2025
Model Testing with Real Flight Data      August 25-August 29, 2025
Model Finalization of Prediction Engine  September 1-September 6, 2025
Alert System Setup for Crack Detection   September 8-September 12, 2025
Initial Aircraft Testing September       September 15-October 10, 2025
Review Results of Initial Testing        October 13-October 17, 2025

Qualifications
Since our founding in 2005, we, Cerulean Tech, have prided ourselves on hiring the best in the

213 | 11.9 Sample Student Work: Proposal
field. Our team is composed of certified professionals and experts in the aerospace industry.
Our software engineers are certified through the Institute of Certification of Computing Profes-
sionals, with many additional certifications such as Certified Software Quality Engineer (CSQE)
and Certified Project Management Professional (CPMP).

  · Cerulean Tech provides the following high-quality professional services
  · Aerospace engineering
  · Aircraft mechanic
  · Digital twin technology
  · Machine learning
  · Real-time data acquisition and analysis
  · Engine performance monitoring

After analyzing our results, the estimated costs are $942,000. A detailed list is provided below:

                                        Table 11.3 Project Cost Estimates

Cost Estimate                       Units        Rate ($)  Total Cost ($)

Sensor Analysis                     1            450,000.00 450,000.00

Project Management                  2,880 hours  70.00     201,600.00
Engineers                           1,440 hours  63.00     90,720.00
Aviation Maintenance Technicians

Maintenance, material, and repairs  N/A          N/A       200,000

Total Project Costs                 N/A          N/A       $942,000.00

(Based on U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2024)

This project management estimate is based on full-time professional services (U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 2024). The cost of maintenance, materials, and repairs is based on the cost of
any potential fixes needed and the constant maintenance for the digital twin interface. The total
cost of maintenance, material, and repairs is as shown (Thomas, 2024). The sensor analysis
cost estimate is based on the combined cost of the creation of digital twins that use the sensor

                                                                                                                                  11.9 Sample Student Work: Proposal | 214
data of multiple sensor tools on a plane to provide the best way to find any potential issues.
With sensor tools such as pitot pressure, fuel flow, exhaust gas temperature, turbine inlet tem-
perature, and many more being taken into account in the sensor analysis cost estimate.

Profit Analysis

The impact of flight groundings significantly reduces the number of flight hours averaged per
aircraft in the A320neo fleet. By reducing the average ground time of repairs from 300 days
to a potential of 14 days, more flight hours will be possible. This would allow for more flights,
fewer scheduling issues, and happier customers.

                                      Table 11.4 Profit Analysis Estimates

Criteria for calculating estimates              2023       2024       2025

Operational Revenue from A320neo                2.36 bil-  2.31 bil-  3.42 bil-
(Reported OR x Percentage of A320neo in Fleet)  lion       lion       lion
                                                (5.36 x    (4.91 x    (6.00 x
                                                44%)       47%)       57%)

Number A320neo in Fleet                         84         91         196

Average Daily Flight Hours per Aircraft         11.1       9.9        8.9

Maximum Yearly Flight Hours for A320neo Fleet   340,326    328,829    636,706
Revenue Per Flight Hour                         6,934      7,024      5,371

Revenue Potential if Average Flight Hour Returns to N/A N/A 4.26 bil-
11.1 Daily Average                                                    lion

Projected Profit Increase                       N/A N/A 840 mil-
                                                                                 lion

(Based on "Spirit Aviation Holdings" reports 2023, 2024, 2025)

In terms of the A320neo aircraft, 44% of the 2023 fleet were these airbuses, rising to 47%
in 2024, and projections of 57% in 2025. This data was used to determine percentages of
reported operating revenue each year due to these flights but did not consider the overall com-

215 | 11.9 Sample Student Work: Proposal
pany net profits/losses, as this would require an in-depth independent review by your company.
Estimated profits due to A320neo flights in 2023 were based on our findings, please review the
following preliminary analysis of profits based on improvements due to the digital twin system
alone.

Based on an estimated increase of 128% per year, there is a potential for 1.06 billion increased
Profits in 2026, 1.38 billion in 2027, and 1.76 billion in 2028.

Authorization

Backed by a team of certified engineers and experienced technicians, we believe that Cerulean
Tech is primed to deliver advanced solutions for streamlining engine surveillance.

If you would like to move forward with the proposal outlined above, please sign and return this
document no later than July 9, 2025. If you have any questions regarding this proposal or the
implementation process, please reach out to our office via phone or email.

Sincerely,

Arina Orlova
Subject Matter Expert and Project Liaison

Melissa Sanchez
Senior Engineer

Michael McKinley, P.E.
Chief Engineer

Nazrawi Adamu
Cost Strategist

                                           11.9 Sample Student Work: Proposal | 216
Veronica Schramm
Proposal Coordinator

By signing this authorization page, Spirit Airlines agrees to move forward with Proposal No.
F-0087 for Cerulean Tech subcontracting.

By_____________ on this day, _________

(Printed Name)                            (Date)

_______________________ _______________

Signature Position/Job Title

References

Cameron, D. (2023). Pratt & Whitney Engine Problems Lead Some Airlines to Reduce Flights.
   Wall Street Journal - Online Edition, N.PAG.

Garbuno, D. M. (2023, November 17). The Global Impact of The Pratt & Whitney Engine
   Issues. Simple Flying. https://simpleflying.com/global-impact-pratt-whitney-engine-issues/

Hardee, H. (2025, March 4). Spirit Airlines compensated $150m for ongoing Pratt & Whitney
   engine issues. Flight Global. https://www.flightglobal.com/fleets/spirit-airlines-compen­
   sated-150m-for-ongoing-pratt-and-whitney-engine-issues/162043.article

Spirit Airlines, Inc. - Financials - Quarterly Results. (2024). Spirit.com. https://ir.spirit.com/
   financials/Investor-Updates-Fleet-Plan/default.aspx

Thomas, D. (2024). Economics of Digital Twins: Costs, Benefits, and Economic Decision Mak­
   ing. https://doi.org/10.6028/nist.ams.100-61

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2024, April 3). Aircraft Mechanics and Service Technicians.
   U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. https://www.bls.gov/oes/2023/may/oes493011.htm

This Collaborative Proposal is derived from work completed in COMS 2302 for Com-
municating strategically in the workplace: A resource for engineering and science stu-

217 | 11.9 Sample Student Work: Proposal
dents Copyright © 2025 by Arina Orlova, Melissa Sanchez, Michael Mckinley, P.E., Nazrawi
Adamu, and Veronica Schramm licensed under CC-BY license, unless otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                  11.9 Sample Student Work: Proposal | 218
CHAPTER 12 EMPLOYMENT
DOCUMENTS AND INTERVIEWING

Ricks & Chatterjee

Learning Objectives

  · Create effective resume and cover letter documents.
  · Identify unlawful interview questions.
  · Prepare for interviews by answering commonly asked questions.

219 | Chapter 12 Employment Documents and Interviewing
12.1 Resumes

Kessler, Low, and Sullivan (2019) explained that employers value students who gain promi-
nent work experience during summer before their senior and junior years. This infor-
mation aligns with many college programs now requiring their students to complete
internships, thus making resumes and employee documents important.

A resumé is the central document of your job application because it is what employers
focus on most when judging an applicant's suitability for a position. Does the candidate
have the right combination of skills to do the job? Did they acquire skills with the right
combination of education, employment, and other experiences? Are they able to put a
document together in a clear, concise, correct, organized, and reader-friendly way? The
goal of the resumé is to convince the employer to include you in the small selection of
candidates they will interview to find the right person for the job (Smith, 2019).

To have any chance of attaining a suitable position, actively apply to job postings and make
your applications stand out with superior quality, knowing that your application will be
just one of dozens, perhaps even hundreds, vying for interview spots. When an employer
goes through the pile of applications that make it past the electronic filters, the resumés
targeted specifically at that job make the generic ones look amateur and underdeveloped.
Along with those marred by glaring errors, generic resumés are the first to go into the
shredder. They annoy hiring managers because they mean more work, but they're easy to
spot and reject when the goal is to thin out the pile.

A targeted resumé is the result of the job applicant tailoring their resumé to present noth-
ing more or less than what the job posting asks for. An employer's job posting is a wish-list
of all the skills and qualifications that would set up the applicant for success in the position
advertised. It also informs the selection criteria the employer applies to every job appli-
cation. This way, every application is measured objectively for how well it reflects what
the job posting asked for, as well as how current and well-presented it is. The employer
expects each section will prove that the applicant is perfect for the job, as well as meet
general expectations for quality of writing--clarity, conciseness, correctness, and accu-
racy--as well as document readability and organization.

Think of your resume as a strategic way to represent yourself; a résumé can

                                                                                                                                                                 12.1 Resumes | 220
  · represent you when you are not there: Your résumé can be uploaded to online global
      job boards like LinkedIn and Zip Recruiter, and others, or can be sent to a company's
      online database. It can then be shared with dozens of recruiters and hiring managers
      without you even knowing about it. In fact, it is a lot easier to get your résumé in
      front of a recruiter than it is to have a physical presence in their office; therefore,
      make certain it's a well-written, well-positioned document that makes an excep-
      tional first impression.

  · quantify your accomplishments: Quantifying your accomplishments gives your
      résumé readers the specific information they need to know about your abilities and
      to be intrigued by what you can do for them. For example, instead of stating you
      have "leadership experience", it is more impactful to describe the experience by stat-
      ing "experience leading a team of 12 employees."

  · show your command of the written word: Remember that if it has misspelled words,
      wrong words, and/or incorrect punctuation, your résumé could easily be dismissed,
      along with your candidacy. It is critical that you write clearly and correctly. Ensure to
      proofread your resume multiple times before submitting.

  · prove your worth to your past employers: Information relating to a company's profits
      and output is exactly what employers want to read. Highlighting results such as
      reducing errors by 35%, increasing profits by 55%, or boosting repeat sales to 75%
      increases your chances of having your résumé noticed.

  · demonstrate what you can do for your future employer: Past performance is an indi-
      cator of future success, so include and quantify your past performance, and future
      employers will be inclined to believe you can do the same for them. Remember that
      your résumé is introductory in nature; past performance can get attention and initi-
      ate interest in you as a potential employee.

  · provide details about your skills. Instead of describing your skills as "excellent com-
      municator," use descriptive and specific statements such as "met weekly with execu-
      tives and department managers to discuss the status of all ongoing engineering
      projects" and "Delivered updates on planned progress for the upcoming week" (12
      Essential Engineering Skills for Your Resume, indeed.com, 2024).

This section has been adapted from the following sources:

Resume purposes and types in Communication for Professionals | Simple Book Publishing
by Susan Oaks licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 Inter­
national License, except where otherwise noted.

221 | 12.1 Resumes
Resumes and Online Applications in Communication at Work - Simple Book Publishing
(2nd Ed.) Copyright © 2025 by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons Attribu­
tion 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                                  12.1 Resumes | 222
12.2 Choose from a List of Action
Words to Describe your Skills and
Experience

The figure below contains action words "verbs" you may use to describe and illustrate your
knowledge and skill sets. Demonstrating a strong match between your capabilities and the
job position is the goal or purpose of a resume: to get an interview for a job.

                                                                                                                    Figure 12.1
                                                                                                                    Common action
                                                                                                                    words to use
                                                                                                                    when creating
                                                                                                                    resume
                                                                                                                    descriptions
                                                                                                                    (Image created via
                                                                                                                    Microsoft Word by
                                                                                                                    Damla Ricks)

223 | 12.2 Choose from a List of Action Words to Describe your Skills and Experience
12.3 Resume Content and Format

Information to include in a resume

What are employers looking for? Here is some basic information to include on your
resume:

  · Include education regarding information. Name your college, degree, certificate,
      and/or training correctly (e.g., is it a B.S. in Biomedical Engineering (Imaging Track),
      or a B.S. in Biomedical Engineering (Tissue Track?)

  · Provide detailed information on past employment and experience. Ensure to
      include company name, location, job title, list of job duties, months, and years of
      employment.

Design and formatting considerations

  · Be concise! One page is preferable in most cases. Especially individuals applying for
      an entry level or internship positions usually do not have much experience to list.

  · Break information into small pieces that can be easily read and retained. Avoid big
      blocks of type. Bulleted lists and phrases work better than paragraphs and sentences.

  · Use a standard, easy-to-read type font, such as Arial or Calibri (sans serif) or the
      traditional Times New Roman, usually 12-point size (no smaller than 10 and no larger
      than 14; slightly larger for headings is o.k.).

  · Do not use colored paper, colored text, or shading, as these features make your
      resume harder to read. Stick with black text on a white background (unless you are
      in a creative field and are expected to deviate from a standard resume presentation).

  · Put your name on the first line of the resume. Include the rest of your contact
      information under your name, either all centered on the page or all in a block at the
      left-hand margin.

  · Do not include a photograph or image of yourself, unless expressly directed to do so.
  · Use a professional email address you check regularly. Email addresses that are dif-

                                                                                                                                     12.3 Resume Content and Format | 224
      ficult to remember and over the top may give the wrong impression. For example,
      avoid email addresses such as: beachbunny68@yahoo.com or
      poli_sci1l-67@gmail.com
This section is adapted from Resume Format in Communication for Professionals | Simple
Book Publishing by Susan Oaks licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCom­
mercial 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

225 | 12.3 Resume Content and Format
12.4 Types of Resumes

You have three options for organizing a resumé based on your situation and what the
employer wants:

Reverse-chronological resumé

For each experience section (Education, Employment, and Related), this resumé lists your
professional activities starting with the present or latest (most recent) at the top and your
first (oldest) at the bottom. A key feature is a column with date ranges in months and years
beside each educational program, job, and relevant activity you've done. This presents the
hiring manager with a snapshot of where you're right now in your professional develop-
ment, how you got there, and where you came from.

Functional (a.k.a. competency- or skills-based) resumé

Rather than organize the resumé around experience sections measured out in months and
years, the functional resumé makes important skills the subheadings. The bullet points
that follow explain in more detail what each skill entails, how it was acquired through
training or education, and how it was practiced and applied professionally. The functional
resumé is ideal if you have gaps or durations in your employment or educational history
because it omits or de-emphasizes date ranges.

Combination functional and reverse-chronological resume

This is the most popular form and the basis for the guide on targeted resumé parts
given below. It uses the reverse- chronological format for the standard experience sec-
tions showcasing the applicant's educational and employment history but adds a Skills and

                                                                                                                                                    12.4 Types of Resumes | 226
Qualifications Summary at the beginning to highlight the applicant's abilities and creden-
tials that match the job posting. See figure 12.2 for an example of a combination resume.

                                                                                                                    Figure 12.2
                                                                                                                    Example of a
                                                                                                                    Reverse
                                                                                                                    Chronological-Res
                                                                                                                    ume

This section is adapted from Resumes and Online Applications in Communication at Work
- Simple Book Publishing (2nd Ed.) Copyright © 2025 by Jordan Smith licensed under
a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

227 | 12.4 Types of Resumes
12.5 Cover Letters

A cover letter is a letter of introduction, usually 3-4 paragraphs in length, that you attach
to your résumé. It is a way of introducing yourself to a potential employer and explaining
why you are suited for a position. Employers may look for individualized and thoughtfully
written cover letters as an initial method of screening out applicants who may who lack
necessary basic skills, or who may not be sufficiently interested in the position.

Often an employer will request or require that a cover letter be included in the materials
an applicant submits. There are also occasions when you might submit a cover letter unin-
vited, for example, if you are initiating an inquiry about possible work or asking someone
to send you information or provide other assistance related to a potential job. Cover let-
ters usually combine the purposes of information and persuasion.

While cover letters should show interest in a company and highlight the applicants' qual-
ifications and strengths, the applicant should also create a paragraph focused on the val-
ues of the organization and a clear interest statement in the position that the individual
is seeking. This personalizes the letter and provides a give and take approach. Give: What
will the company gain by hiring you? What type of skills will you bring with you to the new
position? Take: What will you gain by working for this company? Why are you interested
in this organization and position particularly? This way you can create a balanced docu-
ment that lists your strengths and shows interest in the company and the position.

Cover letters should accomplish the following:

  · Get the attention of the prospective employer.
  · Set you apart from any possible competition.
  · Identify the position in which you are interested.
  · Specify how you learned about the position or company.
  · Present highlights of your skills and accomplishments.
  · Reflect your genuine interest in the company and the position.
  · Use clear, easy-to-read, correct language.

Do ensure you meet the listed criteria with a clear beginning, middle, and end. See Figure
12.3 for a sample cover letter.

                                                                                                                                                          12.5 Cover Letters | 228
                                                                                                                    12.3 Sample Cover
                                                                                                                    Letter with a
                                                                                                                    Clear Beginning,
                                                                                                                    Middle and
                                                                                                                    Ending

This section is adapted from Cover Letters in Communication for Professionals | Simple
Book Publishing by Susan Oaks licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCom­
mercial 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

229 | 12.5 Cover Letters
12.6 Job Search Techniques

  · Develop friendly relationships with peers in classes to obtain information related to
      job opportunities.

  · Ask your instructors and program coordinators for advice.
  · Attend industry conferences and network with participants.
  · Go to career fairs and sign up for interviews with visiting recruiters.
  · Visit company websites of organizations you are truly interested in to seek job post-

      ings.
  · Create a LinkedIn profile to network and look for career opportunities.
  · Use professional job sites such as Indeed and Monster.
This section is adapted from The Job Search in Communication at Work - Simple Book
Publishing (2nd Ed.) Copyright © 2025 by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Com­
mons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                             12.6 Job Search Techniques | 230
12.7 Preparing for an Interview

Between the moment you find out about the interview and the interview itself, you must
do everything in your power to build the confidence necessary to answer questions con-
vincingly. Confidence starts with knowing your stuff, so the first order of business is to
review and build upon whatever research into both the company and the position you
did for the written portion of your application. Think about interviewing as a two-way
process. Not only are you being considered for a position, but also is the organization a
good fit for you? Asking them about the organization's culture, flex work options, profes-
sional development opportunities, and promotion options are some ways you can ascer-
tain if the organization is a good match for you. Keeping the two-way process in mind,
consider the following:

  · Research the company
  · Research the position
  · Anticipate questions
  · Answer questions by providing examples
  · Rehearse by mock Interviews
  · Plan your attire
  · Show up on Time
  · Assess the employer by asking them questions

This section is adapted from The Job Search in Communication at Work - Simple Book
Publishing (2nd Ed.) Copyright © 2025 by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Com­
mons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

231 | 12.7 Preparing for an Interview
12.8 Consider Different Types of
Interviews

Potential employers may use different interview types to learn about their future employ-
ees. This includes applicants' ability to interact with others, social etiquette, working in
groups, problem solving, completing a task under duress etc. Indeed.com (2025) explains
15 different types of interviews, which are listed below.

  1. One on one Interview
 2. Group Interview
 3. Panel Interview
 4. Remote Video Interview
 5. Phone Interview
 6. Lunch Interview
  7. Behavioral Interview
 8. Competency-based Interview
 9. Stress Interview
10. Informal Interview
 11. On-the-spot Interview
12. Case Interview
13. Working Interview
14. Puzzle Interview
15. One-way Interview

                                                                                                                       12.8 Consider Different Types of Interviews | 232
12.9 Be Aware of Illegal Interview
Questions

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (2024) highlights it is illegal to ask inter-
view questions that are not related to the job. The following list includes questions con-
sidered illegal:

  · Are you biracial?
  · Are you pregnant?
  · Have you ever been arrested?
  · Do you plan to have children within the next year?
  · Do you attend church?
  · What languages do you speak at home?
  · I hear an accent. Where are you from?
  · Are you a US citizen?
  · Are you married?
  · How many children do you have?
  · Who takes care of your kids when you are at work?
  · Is your spouse currently employed?
  · List all your mental and physical disabilities.
  · List the medications you are currently taking.
  · Have you ever filed any workers' compensation claims?
  · Do you have any relatives that have been diagnosed with cancer?

Venus Gentile, a contributor to Monster.com offers tips on how one can respond to illegal
interview questions. Be aware of laws that prohibit illegal interview questions and be pre-
pared to respond tactfully so you can steer the conversation to the role for which you are
interviewing.

233 | 12.9 Be Aware of Illegal Interview Questions
12.10 Prepare for Interview Questions

Vicky Oliver, a career development expert provides a list of 10 most asked interview ques­
tions and how to answer them (Harvard Business Review, 2021). Use these to prepare for
internship and/or job interviews.

  · Could you tell me about yourself and describe your background in brief?
  · How did you hear about this position?
  · What type of work environment do you prefer?
  · How do you deal with pressure or stressful situations?
  · Do you prefer working alone or in a team?
  · When you are balancing multiple projects, how do you keep yourself organized?
  · What did you do in the last year to improve your knowledge in this field?
  · What are your salary expectations?
  · Are you applying for other jobs?
  · From your resume it seems you took a gap year. Would you like to tell us why that

      was?

                                                                                                                               12.10 Prepare for Interview Questions | 234
Luona and colleagues (2024) from the Pew Research Center reported on what workers in
the United States consider to be the most important skills sought out by employers in
today's economy. Both interpersonal skills and written and spoken communication skills
were listed to be the most important skills (reported by 85% employees), followed by crit-
ical thinking abilities (listed by 84% employees). Furthermore, skills that required physical
labor (44%), math, analytical or computer skills (39%) and understanding artificial intelli-
gence (35%) were reported by fewer employees compared to communication and inter-
personal skills.
The results are based on Pew Research Center's nationally representative panel of ran-
domly selected U.S. adults who indicated they currently worked either full or part time in
October 2024. A total of 5,395 participants responded from the approximately 6, 500 pan-
elists sampled. Data was collected via online and live telephone interviewing.

235 | 12.11 Research Spotlight
12.12 Key Takeaways

    · A targeted resume tailored to the job posting is far more effective than a generic one. Use action verbs,
        quantify achievements, and write with clarity.

    · A well-crafted cover letter should reflect genuine interest in the company, highlight relevant skills, and
        personalize the message by aligning with the organization's values.

    · Successful interviewing involves researching the company and role, rehearsing answers, dressing appro-
        priately, and treating the entire experience--from arrival to departure--as part of the interview.

    · Candidates should be aware of illegal interview questions and know how to respond tactfully. Questions
        about personal identity, religion, family, and health are off-limits.

    · Building professional relationships, engaging on platforms like LinkedIn, attending career fairs, and seek-
        ing guidance from instructors are essential strategies for job seekers.

                                                                                                                                                  12.12 Key Takeaways | 236
12.13 Discussion

   12.13 Discussion

         · Do you have any interview experiences? Discuss an interview you were a part of by identifying excelling
             and difficult moments.

         · What do you think is the most complex interview question? Explain why and attempt to answer the ques-
             tion in groups.

         · Research three other popular interview questions and come up with an appropriate answer.
         · Do you plan on adjusting your social media channels when you are actively seeking a position? If so, how

             do you plan on adjusting your social media settings to maintain your privacy and list job appropriate
             information?

237 | 12.13 Discussion
12.14 Non-OER References

Indeed Editorial Team (2024). 12 essential engineering skills for your resume. indeed Career
   Guide. Retrieved November 13, 2024, from https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/
   resumes-cover-letters/essential-engineering-skills

Indeed Editorial Team (2025). 15 major types of job interviews (plus tips for success). indeed
   Career Guide. Retrieved July 30, 2025, from https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/
   interviewing/major-types-of-job-interview

Gentile, V. (n.d.). How to respond to illegal interview questions: What to do when interview­
   ers cross the line. Monster. Retrieved July 22, 2025, from https://www.monster.com/
   career-advice/article/illegal-interview-ques-
   tions?msockid=04cec60dd3ae6389183fd6e0d20e6237

Kessler, J., Low, C., & Sullivan, C. (2019). Incentivized resume rating: Eliciting employer
   preferences without deception. American Economic Review, 109(11), 3713-3744.
   https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20181714

Luona, L., Horowitz , J. M., & Fry, R. (2024, December 10). Job skills and training. Pew
   Research Center. https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2024/12/10/job-skills-
   and-training/

Oliver, V. (2023, July 27). 10 common job interview questions and how to answer them. Har-
   vard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2021/11/10-common-job-interview-questions-
   and-how-to-answer-them

US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. (n.d.). What can't I ask when hiring?
   https://www.eeoc.gov/employers/small-business/4-what-cant-i-ask-when-hiring

                                                                                                                                               12.14 Non-OER References | 238
CHAPTER 13 CITING SOURCES
APPROPRIATELY

Chatterjee & Ricks

Learning Objectives

  · Define plagiarism
  · Identify when to cite sources.
  · Discuss and implement ethical principles when using sources.
  · Recognize types of sources.
  · Correctly use quotations and paraphrasing.
  · Utilize the APA formatting guide for references and in-text citations.

239 | Chapter 13 Citing Sources Appropriately
13.1 What is Plagiarism?

Plagiarism is when you use words, thoughts, or ideas that belong to someone else without
giving them credit. In both the classroom and in the professional world of publishing, doc-
umenting your information sources is the only way you can convey to others how thor-
ough and careful you have been in researching your topic. Moreover, if you do not tell
readers where your information came from, they may think (and many do) that you either
made up the information or "stole" it. Plagiarism can hurt you academically or have legal
implications, so it is best to understand and avoid it.

When to Cite

Documenting your sources entails providing information on the author of the referenced
materials and the publication in which they appear. This practice is also known as citing a
source. The specific requirements for citing a source vary across different citation styles.
In certain styles, such as American Psychological Association (APA), you must include the
date of publication somewhere in the body of text.

As a rule, cite whenever you use something (text, data, idea, or image) in whole or in part
from another source. Specifically, you must cite your source when you do the following:

  · Copy a sentence or paragraph verbatim (literally, word-for-word) from a book, arti-
      cle, website, blog posting, or anywhere online or in print.

  · Use an exact phrase or choice of words from a sentence or paragraph, even if you
      are not copying the whole sentence or paragraph.

  · Use original information that you have obtained from an interview or conversation
      with someone.

  · Paraphrase or reword a sentence or phrase from an outside source or use the ideas
      inherent in the exact sentence or phrase.

  · Reprint images, maps, diagrams, charts, or tables.
  · Embed video files or audio files into your work.

                                                                                                                                                  13.1 What is Plagiarism? | 240
When Not to Cite

You do not need to provide citations for common turns of phrase or idioms, such as "A
bird in the hand is worth two in the bush." In addition, you do not need to cite statements
that are common knowledge such as the earth is round, or there are 365 days in a year.
However, "common knowledge" can be contextual in nature, therefore, when in doubt, it
is better to "over"- cite than "under"- cite. Unnecessary citations can be easily removed,
and their presence has little overall impact; however, information that lacks proper docu-
mentation is much harder to correct and may reduce the credibility of the source.
This section is adapted from Plagiarism in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional
Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire,
Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri­
bution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.

241 | 13.1 What is Plagiarism?
13.2 Three Tips for Avoiding Plagiarism

To avoid plagiarism, remember to do the following:
Ask for help. Your professor, your campus libraries, and writing centers are great places
to get information about sources and how to cite them.
Give yourself time. Make sure that you have enough time to complete your assignment.
If you budget your time carefully, you will be able to ask for help when necessary and will
not feel the pressure to "copy and paste" sections of writing.
Take notes. When you are researching, always drop in the last name of the author, or even
just a note saying "CITE," in your writing. Take down as much bibliographic (source) data
as you can. This way you can keep track of your ideas and where they came from. You can
format your citations later in the revision process.
This section is adapted from Plagiarism in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional
Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire,
Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri­
bution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.

                                                                                                                             13.2 Three Tips for Avoiding Plagiarism | 242
13.3 Ethical Principles for Choosing and
Using Sources

Students are often concerned with the details of correct citation--when to include an
author's name in parentheses, how to format a references section, how to indicate a quo-
tation within a quotation--and while these are all important and helpful to know, it is
more important to understand the larger ethical principles that guide choosing and using
sources. Here are a few of these larger ideas to keep in mind as you select and synthesize
your sources:

You must represent the topic or discipline you are writing about fairly. If nine out of ten
sources agree that evidence shows the middle class in the United States is shrinking, it is
unethical to use only the tenth source that argues it is growing without also acknowledg-
ing the minority status of that source.

You must represent the individual source fairly. If a source acknowledges that a small
segment of the middle class in the United States is growing but most of the middle class
is shrinking, it is unethical to suggest that the former is the writer's main point.

You must acknowledge bias in your sources. While they may be credible, it is unethical
to represent sources that offer extreme political views as if these views are mainstream.

You must cite all sources. Using a dictionary definition or encyclopedia article is still
considered utilizing a source: if you use exact words, you need quotation marks. If you
paraphrase, you still need a citation. Using common/popular sources does not mean the
information is "common knowledge."

You must summarize and paraphrase in your own words. A summary or paraphrase must
be completely in your own words and sentence structure. Be sure to give credit where
credit is due: clearly distinguish what work and words belong to another and what work
and words are yours.

This section is adapted from the chapter on Plagiarism in Howdy or Hello? Technical and
Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah
LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under a Creative Com­

243 | 13.3 Ethical Principles for Choosing and Using Sources
mons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

                                                                                                       13.3 Ethical Principles for Choosing and Using Sources | 244
13.4 Types of Sources

Beyond avoiding plagiarism, using sources effectively allows you to draw on the expertise
of others to support your points. Using sources effectively also helps the reader under-
stand how you are situated with different findings, ideas, and arguments in conversation
with one another, as well as how you yourself are participating in that conversation.

To help you master these skills, this section will review the different kinds of sources and
citation forms that you are likely to encounter in technical and professional writing.

Primary Sources and Secondary Sources

Primary sources are direct, firsthand sources of information or data. These are sources
that are fixed in a point in time and typically do not contain analysis or discussion. For
example, if you were writing a report about the First Amendment right to freedom of
speech, the text of the First Amendment in the Bill of Rights would be a primary source.
Other types of primary sources include the following:

  · Data sets (your own or from a published source)
  · Surveys
  · Interviews
  · Photographs
  · Visuals such as schematics or plans
  · Historical and some government documents
  · Art & literature, including but not limited to novels, paintings, musical recordings,

      movies, and video games

Secondary sources discuss, interpret, analyze, consolidate, or otherwise rework informa-
tion from primary sources. In researching a report about freedom of speech, you might
read articles about legal cases that involved First Amendment rights, or editorials express-
ing commentary on the First Amendment. These sources would be considered secondary
sources because they are one step removed from the primary source of information.
Other examples of secondary sources include the following:

245 | 13.4 Types of Sources
  · Biographies
  · Histories and historical analysis
  · Journal articles
  · News articles and commentaries
  · Video essays
  · Textbooks
Your topic, audience, and purpose determine whether you must use both primary and
secondary sources in your document. Ask yourself which sources are most likely to
provide the information that will answer your research questions. If you are writing a
research report about cyber security, you will need to use some experts as a primary
source, but secondary sources, such as published research, are also important. If you are
writing about the LASIK procedure as a pre-med student, you will probably want to read
the published results of scientific studies, but secondary sources, such as news stories
and/or magazine articles discussing the outcome of a recent study, may also be helpful.
This section is adapted from Using sources in your document in Howdy or Hello? Tech­
nical and Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pat-
tison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under
a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License,
except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                      13.4 Types of Sources | 246
13.5 Basics of Using Quotations

Direct quotations are portions of a text taken word-for-word and placed inside of another
document. Readers know when an author is using a direct quote because it is denoted by
using quotation marks and an in-text citation. In this section, you will learn when to use
direct quotes and the rules for direct quotation.

When Should I Use Direct Quotes?

Direct quotes should be used sparingly because you want to rely on your own under-
standing of material and avoid over-relying on others' words. Over-quoting does not rein-
force your credibility as an author. According to the Purdue Online Writing Lab (Purdue
Writing Online Lab, 2025) you should use direct quotes when "the author you are quoting
has coined a term unique to her or his research and relevant within your own paper." In
other words, quoting is particularly important when you're defining and contextualizing
key terms and concepts in your text.
While quoting may be the first step that many people think of when they think about inte-
grating sources, paraphrasing, summarizing, and referencing data are also ways to incor-
porate information from outside materials into your essays or projects.
NOTE: UTA students may refer to UTA Libraries quick guide to citations including using
quotes and block quotes.
This section is derived from Using Sources in Your Document in Howdy or Hello? Tech­
nical and Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pat-
tison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under
a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License,
except where otherwise noted.

247 | 13.5 Basics of Using Quotations
13.5.1 Paraphrasing

Paraphrases allow you to describe specific information from a source (ideas from a para-
graph or several consecutive paragraphs) in your own words. Paraphrases of the text
should be expressed in your own words, with your own sentence structure, and in your
own way. You should not simply "word swap" or replace a few words from the original text
with synonyms. If you use a few of the author's words within your paraphrase, place quo-
tation marks around them.
Paraphrases are more common in number-driven fields such as sciences and social sci-
ences than in text-based fields such as the humanities or sciences focusing on human
participants. However, while there is a difference between quoting and paraphrasing, how
quotes and paraphrases are cited is not that different at all. As with a quote, you need to
explain to your reader why the paraphrased material is significant to the point you are
making in your paper or presentation.
This section is derived from Using Sources in Your Document in Howdy or Hello? Tech­
nical and Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pat-
tison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under
a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License,
except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                         13.5.1 Paraphrasing | 248
13.5.2 Summarizing

Summaries allow you to describe general ideas from a source. You do not express detailed
information as you would with a paraphrase. If you are unsure whether you are summa-
rizing or paraphrasing, compare your writing to the original.
If you can locate a specific point in the original text, then you are constructing a para-
phrase and should include the appropriate page number or other marker. If your writing
is focused on a larger idea or argument that your source discusses throughout, then you
have a summary. Therefore, there is no need to cite a specific page number, although you
will, of course, attribute the summary to the source from which you are drawing it.
Like paraphrases, any summaries of the text should not include direct wording from the
original source. All text should be in your own words, though the ideas are those of the
original author. You should indicate the original source by using a signal phrase that iden-
tifies the author of the original text, or the title of the text if no author is available.
This section is derived from Using Sources in Your Document in Howdy or Hello? Tech­
nical and Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pat-
tison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under
a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License,
except where otherwise noted.

249 | 13.5.2 Summarizing
13.5.3 Referencing

When you provide a reference in the main body of a document, you are signaling to the
reader that the citation is an example of something you have just said without taking the
time to analyze the content of the source. When a source is alluded to in this manner, the
author signals that while this source is important in the chain of research, its findings or
methods are not as relevant to the current document's purpose and audience.
Most often, you will see referencing early on as part of a literature review or introduction
to the document. References are less common in analytical sections of reports and arti-
cles, but they may still appear if the author needs to make a quick point.
To employ a reference, observe the following guidelines:

  · Identify what the source or sources are doing as a whole.
  · Provide in-text parenthetical citations that support the claim you made. These

      should go at the end of the claim.
  · Provide full citations in a References page at the end of the document.

   Example

     Several studies on stress and engineering students focus specifically on intersectionality (Armani et al., 2003;
     Blackistone & Paige, 2010; Kim, 2015).

In the above example the writer offers a claim regarding the three sources provided in the
in-text citation. The claim is that those three studies "focus specifically on intersection-
ality." Notice that the claim alludes to the general content of the cited articles and does
not offer any additional analysis or page numbers. However, the combined claim and cita-
tions allow readers who are interested in this topic to more easily locate the three recom-
mended sources. For the writer, referencing can show credibility and content expertise.

                                                                                                                                                          13.5.3 Referencing | 250
NOTE: UTA students please look up resources UTA Libraries offers such as an APA video
on how to effectively paraphrase.
"This section is derived from Using Sources in Your Document" in Howdy or Hello? Techni­
cal and Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison,
Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

251 | 13.5.3 Referencing
13.6 Integrating Information from
Sources

Incorporating information from sources involves more than simply inserting quotations,
paraphrasing, or a summary and including a bibliographic entry in your document. Intro-
ducing context for the information and integrating the information into your own sen-
tences also forms a critical aspect of using sources successfully.

Signal Phrases

Academic writing requires the use of signal phrases (or attributive tags) to properly doc-
ument quoted, paraphrased, and summarized material. In APA, signal phrases require the
use of the author's last name and a strong verb. These phrases may also emphasize differ-
ent types of information related to the source, such as the source's title or publisher, to
further contextualize and guide your reader's response to the cited material.

Using Strong Verbs in Signal Phrases

To avoid repetition, you will want to vary your vocabulary. Rather than simply using
"states" back-to-back throughout your entire document, offer a more specific verb that
signals to the reader just how you are using the source. See Table 13.1 below for examples
of strong signal-phrase verbs.

                                                                                                                         13.6 Integrating Information from Sources | 252
              Table 13.1 Strong Signal-Phrase Verbs

Acknowledges                                     Counters     Notes

Admits                                           Declares     Observes

Agrees                                           Denies       Points out

Argues                                           Disputes     Reasons

Asserts                                          Emphasizes   Refutes

Believes                                         Finds        Rejects

Claims                                           Illustrates  Reports

Compares                                         Implies      Responds

Confirms                                         Insists      Suggests

Comments                                         Maintains    Thinks

Contends                                         Mentions     Writes

Signal phrases provide the audience with valuable insight into how you, the writer, intend
the quoted material to be understood. In addition to setting up how you use the source
and its reliability, signal phrases can also be used as meaningful transitions moving your
readers between your ideas and those of your support.

While providing the author credentials is the most common type of signal phrase, there
are others you should be aware of. Table 13.2 below offers examples of common types of
signal phrases and why you might use them in a document.

253 | 13.6 Integrating Information from Sources
                             Table 13.2 Common Signal Phrases

Type of Signal Phrase        Purpose                                 Example

The author's credentials     Build credibility for the passage you   Grace Chapmen, Curator of
are indicated.               are about to present.                   Human Health & Evolutionary
                                                                     Medicine at the Springfield
                                                                     Natural History Museum,
                                                                     explains...

The author's lack of cre-    Illustrates a lack of the source's      Matthew Smythe, whose back-
dentials is indicated.       authority on the subject matter and     ground is in marriage counsel-
                             persuades the audience not to           ing and not foreign policy,
                             adopt the author's ideas. Pointing to   claims...
                             an author's lack of credentials can
                             be beneficial when developing your
                             response to counterarguments.

Author's social or politi-   Helps a reader to understand why        Employing nonviolent civil dis-
cal stance, if necessary to  the author expresses a particular       obedience, Roland Hayes,
the content, is explained.   view. This understanding can posi-      prominent civil rights activist,
                             tively or negatively influence an       preaches...
                             audience.
                                                                     Richard Spencer, who takes
                                                                     credit for the term "alt-right,"
                                                                     denies...

Publisher of the source is   Reinforces the credibility of the       According to a recent Gallup
identified.                  information presented by utilizing      poll...
                             the reputation and credibility of the
                             publisher of the source material.

                             Note: When only referencing the
                             publisher, make sure to include a
                             parenthetical in-text citation iden-
                             tifying the author (or title, if no
                             author is available) at the end of the
                             cited material.

The title of the source is   Informs the reader where the cited      In "Understanding Human
included.                    passage is being pulled from. This is   Behavior," Riley argues...
                             especially useful if the author has
                             multiple publications or if the publi-
                             cation is particularly well-known.

Information that estab-      Clarifies the author's purpose.         In a speech presented during
lishes context is pre-       Offers more information on the          the Boston Free Speech Rally,
sented.                      original circumstances for the quo-     Elaine Wallace encourages...
                             tation.

                                      13.6 Integrating Information from Sources | 254
This section is derived from Using Sources in Your Document in Howdy or Hello? Tech­
nical and Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pat-
tison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under
a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License,
except where otherwise noted.

255 | 13.6 Integrating Information from Sources
13.7 A Quick Guide to APA formatting

Properly formatted APA citations include two main elements: the reference list entry and
the in-text citation. Below you will find sample citations for a couple of commonly used
reference types. For a detailed list, consult the Publication Manual of the American Psy-
chological Association (7th ed.) or reference examples on APA Style website.
Note: For University of Texas at Arlington Students. You may access the Academic Style
Tutorial that will help you learn APA 7th edition of style basics. A permanent link to the
tutorial is available at UTA libraries website.

Reference List

The reference list is found at the end of your document, and it includes all the sources
used when developing your paper or project. References are listed in alphabetical order
by the author's last name, and each reference will have a hanging indent to make it easier
to visually distinguish between each reference.

Book

Books list the author, followed by the year, and then the title in italics. The title is in sen-
tence case, which means that you only capitalize the first word, any proper nouns or
adjectives, and the first word after a colon or period. APA also includes the publisher's last
name. If the book is accessed electronically, also include the digital object identifier (doi).
Figure 13.1 illustrates the components of a book citation in APA format.

                                                                                                                                13.7 A Quick Guide to APA formatting | 256
                                                                                                                    Figure 13.1
                                                                                                                    Example of How
                                                                                                                    to List a Book in
                                                                                                                    the Reference
                                                                                                                    Section of a Paper
                                                                                                                    Using APA 7th
                                                                                                                    Edition Style.

Article from a Database

Articles from online databases like Google Scholar or EBSCO include the author names,
year of publication, and article title in sentence case. For the journal title, follow the cap-
italization provided by the journal itself. The journal title and the volume number are in
italics. The issue is in parentheses, followed by the page range.
To help the reader access the article, always include the doi (permanent url) if one
is available. It is generally listed near the top of the article. It may appear as doi: or
https://dx.doi.org/ followed by a sequence of numbers and/or letters. The doi number
typically starts with the number 10, as in the example below. If there is a doi available,
include it in your citation using the format https://doi.org/[insert doi number]. Figure
13.2 illustrates the components of a journal article citation in APA format.

                                                                                                                    Figure 13.2 An
                                                                                                                    Example of How
                                                                                                                    to List a Journal
                                                                                                                    Article in the
                                                                                                                    Reference Section
                                                                                                                    of a Paper Using
                                                                                                                    APA 7th Edition
                                                                                                                    Style.

257 | 13.7 A Quick Guide to APA formatting
In-Text Citations

APA in-text citations use the last name(s) of the author(s), followed by a comma and the
year of publication. If using a direct quotation, also include the page number where that
quotation can be found. The abbreviation "p." precedes any page numbers. These items are
all separated by commas.
In APA format, you can also embed the in-text quotation directly into your sentence (for
example, Smith (2001) found that...), which then obviates the need for a parenthetical at
the end of the sentence, except in the case of a direct quotation.
Here is a short list of examples of some common types of in-text citations:

No Author

As with the reference list, the in-text citation will use the title if there is no author avail-
able. Use the first few words of the title if it is long and place it in quotation marks.
Example: ("Down the Line," 1895).

Single Author

If the work has a single author, use the author's last name, followed by a comma and the
year of publication.
Example: (no direct quotation) (Clark, 2009).
Example: (direct quotation) (Clark, 2009, p. 42).

Two Authors

When there are two authors, list the last names of both connected by an ampersand (&).
Be sure to keep the authors in the order in which they appear on the source.

                                                                                                                                13.7 A Quick Guide to APA formatting | 258
Example: (Rutledge & LeMire, 2016).
If the citation is a part of the sentence, you would spell out the "and".
Example: Rutledge and LeMire (2016) explained...

Three or More Authors

When there are three or more authors, list the first author's last name, followed by et al.
This is a Latin phrase meaning "and others" and used in some citation formats to abbrevi-
ate a list of names. Notice that the switch to "et al." occurs after three authors when using
in-text citations. In your References list, you will include up to twenty authors.
Example: (Tribble et al., 2002).

Institutional Author

As with the reference list, you will list the organization as the author in the in-text citation.
Example: (Texas A&M University, 2019).

This section is derived from the following sources:
Figure 13.1 Adapted by Sarah LeMire from Deborah Bernnard, Greg Bobish, Jenna Hecker,
Irina Holden, Allison Hosier, Trudi Jacobson, Tor Loney, and Daryl Bullis, The Information
Literacy User's Guide: An Open, Online Textbook, edited by Greg Bobish and Trudi Jacobson
(Geneseo, NY: Open SUNY Textbooks, Milne Library, 2014), p. 56, Licensed under a Cre­
ative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License.
Figure 13.2 Adapted by Sarah LeMire from Deborah Bernnard, Greg Bobish, Jenna Hecker,
Irina Holden, Allison Hosier, Trudi Jacobson, Tor Loney, and Daryl Bullis, The Information
Literacy User's Guide: An Open, Online Textbook, edited by Greg Bobish and Trudi Jacobson
(Geneseo, NY: Open SUNY Textbooks, Milne Library, 2014), p. 57, Licensed under a Cre­
ative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License.

259 | 13.7 A Quick Guide to APA formatting
APA Format Quick Reference in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communi­
cation Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders,
and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non­
Commercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                               13.7 A Quick Guide to APA formatting | 260
   13.8 Key Takeaways

         · Always cite when using direct quotes, paraphrased ideas, interviews, images, or multimedia.
         · Cite all sources, even dictionaries and encyclopedias, whether quoting or paraphrasing.
         · Primary sources include firsthand data like interviews, surveys, historical documents, and artworks.
         · Examples of secondary sources include analyses or interpretations of primary data, such as journal arti-

             cles and commentaries.
         · Use quoting, paraphrasing, summarizing, and referencing to integrate source material effectively.
         · APA citations include both in-text citations and a reference list.

261 | 13.8 Key Takeaways
13.9 Discussion

    · How do you plan to ensure you are not plagiarizing?
    · Why is citing resources an important element of writing and presenting?
    · What is the most important ethical principle listed in this chapter? Explain your answer.

                                                                                                                                                         13.9 Discussion | 262
13.10 Non-OER References

American Psychological Association (2019). "The Official Guide to APA Style," Publication
Manual of the American Psychological Association, (7th ed.). American Psychological Asso-
ciation.
Purdue Writing Online Lab (2025). How to Use Quotation Marks. Purdue University.
UTA Libraries APA Guide: 7th Edition (2023). Tutorial: Basics of 7th Edition APA Style. Uni-
versity of Texas Arlington.

263 | 13.10 Non-OER References
Links by Chapter

Links by chapter are provided in the order that they appear in the chapter.

Chapter 1.1

  · Video showcasing differences in body language across cultures: https://youtu.be/
      YAV4SDgVv-o?si=YPMsxlwOvZpnFLdA

Chapter 1.2

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources: https://odp.library.tamu.edu/
      howdyorhello/chapter/what-is-technical-and-professional-communication/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 1.3

  · This chapter is adapted by the following sources:
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/what-is-technical-and-pro-
      fessional-communication/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 1.4

  · This chapter is adapted by the following sources:
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/what-is-technical-and-pro-

                                                                                                                                                            Links by Chapter | 264
      fessional-communication/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/chapter/2-2-ana-
      lyzing-your-audience-2/
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/
  · This text discusses the transition period of engineering students from school to the
      workplace: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9411748
  · How to develop technical writing skills for engineering students: https://www.sci-
      encedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212017315001590?via%3Dihub
  · How to prevent cynicism in employees during organizational changes:
      https://bpspsychub.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/joop.12369
  · Formal applications of communication: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/
      0002764201000802

Chapter 2.2

  · This chapter is adapted from the following resources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/13/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 2.3

  · This website shows the "Situational Leadership" model: https://situational.com/sit-
      uational-leadership/

  · This chapter was adapted from the following sources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/13/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

265 | Links by Chapter
Chapter 2.4

  · Website describes "courageous followership" and "courageous leadership:
      https://www.courageousfollower.net/

  · Difference between followership and leadership shown through the Tango:
      https://youtu.be/Cswrnc1dggg?si=mZaotyLaj3Y-tM8R

  · This chapter is adapted from the following resources: https://milnepublishing.gene-
      seo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/13/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 2.5

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/chapter/10-2-pro-
      fessionalism-etiquette-and-ethical-behaviour/
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/

Chapter 2.6

  · TedTalk - 10 ways to have a better conversation: https://youtu.be/
      R1vskiVDwl4?si=NfLjHMx9GYLjiuAi

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/chapter/10-1-ver-
      bal-communication-and-conversation/
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/

Chapter 2.7

  · This chapter is adapted from the following source: https://ecampusontario.press-

                                                                                                                                                            Links by Chapter | 266
      books.pub/profcommsontario/
  · Table 2.1 was derived from the following source: https://courses.lumenlearn-

      ing.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/chapter/medium/
  · This chapter is adapted from the following source: https://courses.lumenlearn-

      ing.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/

Chapter 2.8

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/chapter/chapter-46-profes-
      sional-etiquette/
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/chapter/6-1-1-email-address/
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/

Chapter 2.9

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/13/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 2.10

  · Case study discussing interpersonal relationships: https://www.nature.com/arti-
      cles/s41599-021-00789-8

267 | Links by Chapter
Chapter 2.12

  · This chapter is adapted from the following source:
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/

Chapter 3.1

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://uta.pressbooks.pub/teamworkstudent/chapter/what-is-a-team/
      https://uta.pressbooks.pub/teamworkstudent/
      https://oercommons.org/authoring/54645-professional-and-technical-writing/
      10/view#h1
      https://oercommons.org/authoring/54645-professional-and-technical-writing

Chapter 3.3

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://oercommons.org/authoring/54645-professional-and-technical-writing/
      10/view
      https://oercommons.org/authoring/54645-professional-and-technical-writing

Chapter 3.4

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://oercommons.org/authoring/54645-professional-and-technical-writing/
      10/view
      https://oercommons.org/authoring/54645-professional-and-technical-writing
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/chapter/11-1-teamwork/
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/

                                                                                                                                                            Links by Chapter | 268
Chapter 3.5

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://oercommons.org/authoring/54645-professional-and-technical-writing/
      10/view
      https://oercommons.org/authoring/54645professional-and-technical-writing

Chapter 3.6

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://oercommons.org/authoring/54645-professional-and-technical-writing/
      10/view
      https://oercommons.org/authoring/54645professional-and-technical-writing

Chapter 3.8

  · Article discussing Google's quest to build the "perfect" team:
      https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/magazine/what-google-learned-from-its-
      quest-to-build-the-perfect-team.html

  · Video discussing Google's goal to build the "perfect" team: https://youtu.be/
      v2PaZ8Nl2T4?si=F9t7tYiChNZdGVMT

Chapter 4.1

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://pressbooks.atlanticoer-relatlantique.ca/buscomm/chapter/unit-45-inter-
      cultural-communication/
      https://pressbooks.atlanticoer-relatlantique.ca/buscomm/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/6/

269 | Links by Chapter
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 4.2

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://pressbooks.atlanticoer-relatlantique.ca/buscomm/chapter/unit-45-inter-
      cultural-communication/
      https://pressbooks.atlanticoer-relatlantique.ca/buscomm/

Chapter 4.3

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/6/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 4.5

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://pressbooks.atlanticoer-relatlantique.ca/buscomm/chapter/unit-45-inter-
      cultural-communication/
      https://pressbooks.atlanticoer-relatlantique.ca/buscomm/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/6/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 4.6

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/6/

                                                                                                                                                            Links by Chapter | 270
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 4.7

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/6/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 4.8

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/6/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 4.9

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/6/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 4.10

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/6/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

271 | Links by Chapter
Chapter 4.11

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/6/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 4.12

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 4.13

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/6/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 4.14

  · Study examining conflict styles across different cultures: https://www.tandfon-
      line.com/doi/full/10.1080/08824096.2011.640093

Chapter 4.15

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/6/

                                                                                                                                                            Links by Chapter | 272
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 4.16

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/chapter/6/
      https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/interpersonalcommunication/

Chapter 5.2

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://opentextbc.ca/provincialenglishabe/chapter/prewriting/
      https://opentextbc.ca/provincialenglishabe/

Chapter 5.3

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://opentextbc.ca/provincialenglishabe/chapter/prewriting/
      https://opentextbc.ca/provincialenglishabe/

Chapter 6.1

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/tone-2/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/

273 | Links by Chapter
Chapter 6.2

  · Tone in business writing: https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/subject_specific_writing/
      professional_technical_writing/tone_in_business_writing.html

  · This chapter is adapted from the following source: https://courses.lumenlearn-
      ing.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/chapter/tone-2/

  · This chapter is adapted from the following source: https://courses.lumenlearn-
      ing.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/

Chapter 6.3

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      part/effective-language-use/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/

Chapter 6.4

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/concrete-language/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/

Chapter 6.5

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/technicalprofessionalcommunication2e/chapter/
      3-2-the-you-viewpoint-and-tone/
      https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/technicalprofessionalcommunication2e/

                                                                                                                                                            Links by Chapter | 274
Chapter 6.7

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/you-positive-approaches/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/

Chapter 6.8

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/active-voice/

Chapter 6.9

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/eliminating-bias-in-langauge/

Chapter 6.9.1

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/eliminating-bias-in-langauge/

275 | Links by Chapter
Chapter 6.9.2

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/eliminating-bias-in-langauge/

Chapter 6.9.3

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/eliminating-bias-in-langauge/

Chapter 6.12

  · Double negation and negative concord meanings across different languages:
      https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10936-021-09816-w

  · Plain language communication: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8115322

Chapter 7.1

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/chapter/8-1-information-
      shares-action-requests-and-replies/
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/

                                                                                                                                                            Links by Chapter | 276
Chapter 7.2

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/concrete-language/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/

Chapter 7.3

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://open.library.okstate.edu/technicalandprofessionalwriting/chapter/chap-
      ter-6/
      https://open.library.okstate.edu/technicalandprofessionalwriting/

Chapter 7.4

  · Checking your email less frequently reduces stress: https://www.sciencedi-
      rect.com/science/article/pii/S0747563214005810?via%3Dihub

  · Study showing effective work email activity: https://bpspsychub.onlineli-
      brary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/joop.12462

Chapter 7.7

  · Article discussing how often you should check your email: https://www.forbes.com/
      sites/reneemorad/2018/03/31/how-often-should-you-check-your-work-email-
      etiquette-experts-weigh-in/

  · Tips on checking your email less frequently to reduce stress:
      https://www.forbes.com/sites/lucianapaulise/2024/06/26/tips-to-checking-
      email-less-frequently-and-reducing-stress/

277 | Links by Chapter
  · Study showing effective work email activity: https://bpspsychub.onlineli-
      brary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/joop.12462

Chapter 8.1

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esccommunicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/bad-news/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/

Chapter 8.2

  · This chapter is adapted from the following resources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/bad-news/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/

Chapter 8.3.1

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/bad-news/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/

Chapter 8.3.2

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/chapter/8-3-negative-mes-

                                                                                                                                                            Links by Chapter | 278
      sages/
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/bad-news/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/

Chapter 8.7

  · Advice for delivering bad news to employees: https://www.indeed.com/career-
      advice/career-development/delivering-bad-news-to-employees

Chapter 8.8

  · Disclosing bad news to customers: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/
      s11747-024-01079-w

  · How to deliver bad news to employees: https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/
      career-development/delivering-bad-news-to-employees

  · Example of the wrong way to deliver bad news to employees:
      https://www.forbes.com/sites/jackkelly/2022/04/09/bettercom-ceo-who-fired-
      dumb-dolphin-workers-over-a-one-way-zoom-call-now-says-he-pissed-
      away-200-million/?sh=4f b38bcc3ce8%22%3Epissed-
      away-200-million/?sh=4f b38bcc3ce8

  · Study consolidating theoretical and practical understanding of bad news delivery:
      https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
      S1053482223000220?via%3Dihub

Chapter 9.2

  · This chapter is adapted from the following source: https://oer.galileo.usg.edu/com-
      munication-textbooks/1/

279 | Links by Chapter
Chapter 9.4

  · This chapter is adapted from the following source: https://acrobat.adobe.com/id/
      urn:aaid:sc:VA6C2:80e166df-d4b0-4752-a14a-7beb49592ad1

  · This chapter is adapted from the following source: https://oer.galileo.usg.edu/com-
      munication-textbooks/1/

Chapter 9.5

  · This chapter is adapted from the following source: https://acrobat.adobe.com/id/
      urn:aaid:sc:VA6C2:80e166df-d4b0-4752-a14a-7beb49592ad1

Chapter 9.9

Article on the psychology of influence: https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/mono/
10.4324/9781315618906/psychology-influence-joop-pligt-michael-vliek

Chapter 10.3

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/chapter/12-3-presentations-
      to-persuade/
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/

Chapter 10.4.2

  · This chapter was adapted from the following sources:

                                                          Links by Chapter | 280
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/chapter/12-3-presentations-
      to-persuade/
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/

  · Inductive and deductive reasoning: https://www.khanacademy.org/math/algebra-
      home/alg-series-and-induction/alg-deductive-and-inductive-reasoning/v/deduc-
      tive-reasoning-1

Chapter 10.4.3

  · Ethos, pathos, and logos: https://youtu.be/2ey232I5nUk?si=jAF0KLBKu1Lts6pJ
  · This chapter is adapted by the following sources:

      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/chapter/12-3-presentations-
      to-persuade/
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/logos-ethos-pathos/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 10.4.4

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/chapter/12-3-presentations-
      to-persuade/
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/

Chapter 10.4.5

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/chapter/12-3-presentations-
      to-persuade/

281 | Links by Chapter
      https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/buscomm/

Chapter 10.7

  · The four types of audiences for public speaking:
      https://youtu.be/f3ZAtIamu-4?si=C3N25JNrlSHaISAD

  · Three types of audience analysis: https://socialsci.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Com-
      munication/Public_Speaking/Stand_up_Speak_out_-_The_Prac-
      tice_and_Ethics_of_Public_Speaking/05%3A_Audience_Analysis/
      5.03%3A_Three_Types_of_Audience_Analysis

  · The practice and ethics of public speaking: https://socialsci.libretexts.org/Book-
      shelves/Communication/Public_Speaking/Stand_up_Speak_out_-_The_Prac-
      tice_and_Ethics_of_Public_Speaking

Chapter 10.9

  · Rhetoric: https://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/rhetoric.html
  · Key fears of public speaking: https://www.crossrivertherapy.com/public-speaking-

      statistics#:~:text=75%25%20of%20the%20popula-
      tion%20has,it%20comes%20to%20public%20speaking

Chapter 11.2

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/types-of-informational-
      reports/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/progress-reports/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

                                                                                                                                                            Links by Chapter | 282
Chapter 11.3

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/introduction-to-proposals/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 11.4

  · This chapter is adpated from the following sources:
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/designing-and-formatting-
      proposals/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 11.5

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/designing-and-formatting-
      proposals/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 12.1

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/chapter/
      9-2-resumes-and-online-applications/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/print-resume-formats/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/

283 | Links by Chapter
Chapter 12.3

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/resume-types-formats-layout/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/

Chapter 12.4

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/chapter/
      9-2-resumes-and-online-applications/
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/

Chapter 12.5

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/
      chapter/cover-letters/
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-communicationforprofessionals/

Chapter 12.6

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/chapter/9-1-the-
      job-search/
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/

                                                                                                                                                            Links by Chapter | 284
Chapter 12.7

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/chapter/9-1-the-
      job-search/
      https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/communicationatwork/

Chapter 12.8

  · 15 types of job interviews:
      https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/interviewing/major-types-of-job-inter-
      view

Chapter 12.9

  · How to respond to illegal interview questions:
      https://www.monster.com/career-advice/article/illegal-interview-ques-
      tions?msockid=04cec60dd3ae6389183fd6e0d20e6237

Chapter 12.10

  · Common job interviews and how to answer them:
      https://hbr.org/2021/11/10-common-job-interview-questions-and-how-to-
      answer-them

285 | Links by Chapter
Chapter 12.11

  · Research on the views of job training:
      https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2024/12/10/job-skills-and-training/

Chapter 13.1

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/plagiarism/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 13.2

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/plagiarism/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 13.3

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/plagiarism/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 13.4

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/using-sources-in-your-docu-

                                                                                                                                                            Links by Chapter | 286
      ment/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 13.5

  · An introduction to writing in APA style: https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/
      research_and_citation/apa_style/apa_style_introduction.html

  · How to make basic in-text citations for APA 7th edition: https://libguides.uta.edu/
      apa/citations

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources: https://odp.library.tamu.edu/
      howdyorhello/chapter/using-sources-in-your-document/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 13.5.1

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/using-sources-in-your-docu-
      ment/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 13.5.2

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/using-sources-in-your-docu-
      ment/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

287 | Links by Chapter
Chapter 13.5.3

  · How to create basic in-text citations for APA 7th edition: https://libguides.uta.edu/
      apa/citations

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
  · https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/using-sources-in-your-docu-

      ment/
  · https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 13.6

  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources: https://odp.library.tamu.edu/
      howdyorhello/chapter/using-sources-in-your-document/
      https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

Chapter 13.7

  · APA reference examples: https://apastyle.apa.org/style-grammar-guidelines/refer-
      ences/examples

  · UTA LibGuide for APA references: https://libguides.uta.edu/apa
  · This chapter is adapted from the following sources:
  · https://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks/textbooks/190
  · https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/apa-format-quick-reference/
  · https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/

                                                                                                                                                            Links by Chapter | 288
Image Credits

This work contains copyrighted material the use of which has not always been specifically
authorized by the copyright owners. The creators of this OER believe in good faith that
reuse of these materials constitutes a "fair use" as described in Section 107 of the Copy-
right Act. Downstream users who wish to use copyrighted material from this resource for
purposes beyond those authorized by the fair use doctrine should obtain permission from
the copyright owner(s) of the original content.
Unless noted below, all figures used in the text are the intellectual property of the content
creators and are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.

Chapter 1

Figure 1.1 A Model of Communication. Source: This image was created using AI in Canva
on 03/29/2025 by Karishma Chatterjee. [link to source] Licensed under CC0 1.0 Univer­
sal. This work has been marked as dedicated to the public domain.

Chapter 2

Figure 2. 1 Hersey and Blanchard's Situational-Leadership Theory: This image derived from
Interpersonal Relationships at Work in Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Pub-
lishing Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S.
Thweatt licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 4

Figure 4.1 Low Context vs. High Context Cultures derived from Cultural Characteristics

289 | Image Credits
and Communication in Interpersonal Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench;
Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Com-
munication - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 5

Figure 5.1 An Example of Freewriting: This image was created using Microsoft Power
Point on 02/14/2025 by Damla Ricks. [link to source: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/
microsoft-365/powerpoint] Licensed under CC0 1.0 Universal. This work has been marked
as dedicated to the public domain.
Figure 5.2 An Example of Idea Mapping: This image was created using Microsoft Power
Point on 03/18/2025 by Damla Ricks. [https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365/
powerpoint] Licensed under CC0 1.0 Universal. This work has been marked as dedicated to
the public domain.

Chapter 6

Figure 6.1 Four Elements of Language Use: This image was created using Microsoft Power
Point on 02/27/2025 by Karishma Chatterjee.[link to source: https://www.microsoft.com/
en-us/microsoft-365/powerpoint] Licensed under CC0 1.0 Universal. This work has been
marked as dedicated to the public domain.

Chapter 8

Figure 8.1 Two Approaches of Communicating Bad News: This image derived from "Bad
News" available at Communication for Professionalsby Susan Oaks, licensed under CC BY-
NC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International, unless otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                                Image Credits | 290
Chapter 13

Figure 13.1 Example of How to List a Book in the Reference Section of a Paper Using
APA 7th Edition Style: This image was adaptad by Sarah LeMire from Deborah Bernnard,
Greg Bobish, Jenna Hecker, Irina Holden, Allison Hosier, Trudi Jacobson, Tor Loney, and
Daryl Bullis, The Information Literacy User's Guide: An Open, Online Textbook, edited by
Greg Bobish and Trudi Jacobson (Geneseo, NY: Open SUNY Textbooks, Milne Library, 2014),
p. 56, Licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share-
Alike 3.0 Unported License.
Figure 13.2 An Example of How to List a Journal Article in the Reference Section of a Paper
Using APA 7th Edition Style: This image was adaptad by Sarah LeMire from Deborah Bern­
nard, Greg Bobish, Jenna Hecker, Irina Holden, Allison Hosier, Trudi Jacobson, Tor Loney,
and Daryl Bullis, The Information Literacy User's Guide: An Open, Online Textbook, edited
by Greg Bobish and Trudi Jacobson (Geneseo, NY: Open SUNY Textbooks, Milne Library,
2014), p. 56, Licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share-
Alike 3.0 Unported License.

291 | Image Credits
Derivative Notes

The following chapters were adapted from the listed resources below, unless otherwise
noted:

Chapter 1.2

"What is Technical and Professional Communication?" in Howdy or Hello? Technical and
Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah
LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt, licensed under a Creative Com-
mons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

Chapter 1.3

"What is Technical and Professional Communication?" in Howdy or Hello? Technical and
Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah
LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt, licensed under a Creative Com-
mons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

Chapter 1.4

"What is Technical and Professional Communication" in Howdy or Hello? Technical and
Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah
LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt, licensed under a Creative Com-
mons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                            Derivative Notes | 292
"Analyzing Your Audience" in Communication at Work Copyright © 2019 by Jordan Smith is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

Chapter 2.2

Interpersonal Relationships at Work in Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Pub­
lishing Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S.
Thweatt licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 2.3

Interpersonal Relationships at Work in Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Pub­
lishing Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S.
Thweatt licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 2.4

Interpersonal Relationships at Work in Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Pub­
lishing Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S.
Thweatt licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 2.5

Professionalism, Etiquette, and Ethical Behavior in Communication at Work - Simple Book

293 | Derivative Notes
Publishing (2nd ed.) Copyright © 2025 by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Com­
mons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 2.6

Verbal Communication and Conversation in Communication at Work - Simple Book Pub­
lishing (2nd ed.) Copyright © 2025 by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 2.7

Professional Communications by J.R. Dingwall, Chuck Labrie, Trecia McLennon, and Laura
Underwood. Copyright © by Olds College licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
Communication for Professionals | Simple Book Publishing by Susan Oaks licensed under
CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial.

Chapter 2.8

Emailing in Communication @ Work Copyright © 2019 by Jordan Smith licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 2.9

Interpersonal Relationships at Work in Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Pub­
lishing Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench, Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter, and Katherine S.
Thweatt licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                            Derivative Notes | 294
Chapter 3.1

"What is a Team?" In Teamwork: An Open Access Practical Guide Copyright © 2020 by
Andrew M. Clark; Lolin Martins-Crane; Mengqi Zhan; and Justin Dellinger T. available at
Teamwork: An Open Access Practical Guide , licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.
"The Team and the Organization" in Professional and Technical Writing 2025 by Suzie
Baker, licensed under Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 International.

Chapter 3.3

"The Team and the Organization" in Professional and Technical Writing (2025) by Suzie
Baker and is under license Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 Interna-
tional

Chapter 3.4

"The Team and the Organization" in Professional and Technical Writing (2025) by Suzie
Baker and is under license Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 Interna-
tional
"Developing Successful Teams" in Communication @ Work Copyright © 2019 by Jordan
Smith licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

295 | Derivative Notes
Chapter 3.5

"Why Teamwork Works" in Professional and Technical Writing by Suzy Baker (2025, June
01), licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 International.

Chapter 3.6

This section is adapted from "Class Team Projects" in Professional and Technical Writing
by Suzy Baker (2025, June 01), licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCom-
mercial 4.0 International.

Chapter 4.1

"Intercultural Communication" in Communication @ Work Seneca Edition Copyright ©
2019 by Jordan Smith, licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.
"What is Culture?" in Interpersonal Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench;
Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt, licensed under a Creative Com­
mons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

Chapter 4.2

"Intercultural Communication" in Communication @ Work Seneca Edition Copyright ©
2019 by Jordan Smith, licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                            Derivative Notes | 296
Chapter 4.3

What is Culture? in Interpersonal Communication Copyright © by Jason S. Wrench; Naris-
sra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available at Interpersonal Commu­
nication - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where other-
wise noted.

Chapter 4.5

"Intercultural Communication" in Communication @ Work Seneca Edition Copyright ©
2019 by Jordan Smith, licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.
"The Function of Culture" in Interpersonal Communication Copyright © by Jason S.
Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt, licensed under a Cre­
ative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

Chapter 4.6

Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal Communication Copyright
© by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available
at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted

Chapter 4.7

Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal Communication Copyright

297 | Derivative Notes
© by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available
at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

Chapter 4.8

Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal Communication Copyright
© by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available
at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

Chapter 4.9

Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal Communication Copyright
© by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available
at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

Chapter 4.10

Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal Communication Copyright
© by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available
at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                                                                            Derivative Notes | 298
Chapter 4.11

Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal Communication Copyright
© by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available
at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

Chapter 4.12

Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal Communication Copyright
© by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available
at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

Chapter 4.13

Cultural Characteristics and Communication in Interpersonal Communication Copyright
© by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available
at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

Chapter 4.15

Improving Intercultural Communication Skills in Interpersonal Communication Copyright
© by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available
at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative

299 | Derivative Notes
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

Chapter 4.16

Improving Intercultural Communication Skills in Interpersonal Communication Copyright
© by Jason S. Wrench; Narissra M. Punyanunt-Carter; and Katherine S. Thweatt available
at Interpersonal Communication - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

Chapter 5.2

"Prewriting" in Provincial English - Simple Book Publishing Copyright © 2022 by Allison
Kilgannon licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 5.3

"Prewriting" in Provincial English - Simple Book Publishing Copyright © 2022 by Allison
Kilgannon licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 6.1

Communications for Professionals by Susan Oaks licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution-
NonCommercial

                                                                                                                                                            Derivative Notes | 300
Chapter 6.2

"Style: Formality, Tone & Voice, Word Choice" in Communications for Professionals by
Susan Oaks licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International,
except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 6.3

"Effective Language Use" in Communications for Professionals by Susan Oaks, licensed
under CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International, except where otherwise
noted.

Chapter 6.4

"Concrete, Precise, Specific Language" in Communications for Professionals by Susan
Oaks, licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International, except
where otherwise noted.

Chapter 6.5

This section is reused from The You Viewpoint and Tone in Introduction to Technical
Communication, 2nd Edition [Pre-publication] Copyright © by Jessica Jorgenson Borchert
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License,
except where otherwise noted.

301 | Derivative Notes
Chapter 6.7

"You" Approach and Constructive Language' in Communications for Professionals by Susan
Oaks, licensed under CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International, except
where otherwise noted.

Chapter 6.8

"Active and Passive Voice" in Communications for Professionals by Susan Oaks, licensed
under CC BY-NC: Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 International, except where otherwise
noted.

Chapter 6.9.1

"Eliminating Bias in Language" in Communication for Professionals by Susan Oaks, licensed
under CC BY-NC: Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 International, except where otherwise
noted.

Chapter 6.9.2

"Eliminating Bias in Language" in Communication for Professionals by Susan Oaks, licensed
under CC BY-NC: Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 International, except where otherwise
noted.

Chapter 6.9.3

"Eliminating Bias in Language" in Communication for Professionals by Susan Oaks, licensed

                                                                                                                                                            Derivative Notes | 302
under CC BY-NC: Attribution NonCommercial 4.0 International, except where otherwise
noted.

Chapter 7.1

Information Shares, Action Requests, and Replies in Communication@Work Copyright ©
2019 by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 7.2

Concrete, Precise, Specific Language in Communication for Professionals | Simple Book
Publishing by Susan Oaks licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommer­
cial 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 7.3

When (and When Not!) to Email in Technical and Professional Writing Genres - Simple
Book Publishing Copyright © 2019 by Michael Beilfuss, Staci Bettes, and Katrina Peterson
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 Interna­
tional License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 8.1

"Bad News" in Communication for Professionals by Susan Oaks, licensed under CC BY-NC:
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International, unless otherwise noted.

303 | Derivative Notes
Chapter 8.2

"Bad News" available at Communication for Professionals by Susan Oaks, licensed under
CC BYNC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International, unless otherwise noted.

Chapter 8.3.1

"Bad News" available at Communication for Professionals by Susan Oaks, licensed under
CC BYNC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International, unless otherwise noted.

Chapter 8.3.2

"Negative Messages" in Communication@Work Copyright © 2019 by Jordan Smith, licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.
"Bad News" available at Communication for Professionals by Susan Oaks, licensed under
CC BYNC: Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International, unless otherwise noted.

Chapter 9.4

Organizing Persuasive Speeches in Elements of Public Speaking by Marty Ennes Copyright
© by Lumen Learning licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License

Chapter 9.5

Organizing Persuasive Speeches in Elements of Public Speaking by Marty Ennes Copyright

                                                                                                                                                            Derivative Notes | 304
© by Lumen Learning licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License

Chapter 10.3

Informative and Persuasive Presentations by Jordan Smith available at Communica­
tion@Work - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 10.4.2

Informative and Persuasive Presentations by Jordan Smith available at Communica­
tion@Work - Simple Book Publishing licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 10.4.3

"Informative and Persuasive Presentations" in Communication@Work - Simple Book Pub­
lishing by Jordan Smith available licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.
"Logos, Ethos, Pathos" in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication
- Simple Book Publishing Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah
LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt licensed under Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License

Chapter 10.4.4

Informative and Persuasive Presentations in Communication@Work - Simple Book Pub­

305 | Derivative Notes
lishing by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 10.4.5

Informative and Persuasive Presentations in Communication@Work - Simple Book Pub­
lishing by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 10.7

"Three Types of Audience Analysis" in Stand up, Speak out - The Practice and Ethics of
Public Speaking - Social Sci LibreTexts authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via LibreTexts Project licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial
ShareAlike 3.0 License, unless otherwise noted.

Chapter 11.2

Types of Informational Reports and Progress Reportsin Howdy or Hello? Technical and
Professional Communication - Simple Book Publishing Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKin-
ney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 11.3

"Introduction to Proposals" in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication
- Simple Book Publishing Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah

                                                                                                                                                            Derivative Notes | 306
LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where other-
wise noted.

Chapter 11.4

Designing and Formatting Proposals in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Com­
munication - Simple Book PublishingCopyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison,
Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

Chapter 11.5

Designing and Formatting Proposals in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Com­
munication - Simple Book PublishingCopyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison,
Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

Chapter 12.1

Resume purposes and types in Communication for Professionals | Simple Book Publishing
by Susan Oaks licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 Inter­
national License, except where otherwise noted.
Resumes and Online Applications in Communication at Work - Simple Book Publishing
(2nd Ed.) Copyright © 2025 by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons Attribu­
tion 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

307 | Derivative Notes
Chapter 12.3

Resume Format in Communication for Professionals | Simple Book Publishing by Susan
Oaks licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 12.4

Resumes and Online Applications in Communication at Work - Simple Book Publishing
(2nd Ed.) Copyright © 2025 by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons Attribu­
tion 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 12.5

Cover Letters in Communication for Professionals | Simple Book Publishing by Susan
Oaks licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 12.6

The Job Search in Communication at Work - Simple Book Publishing (2nd Ed.) Copyright
© 2025 by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 12.7

The Job Search in Communication at Work - Simple Book Publishing (2nd Ed.) Copyright

                                                                                                                                                            Derivative Notes | 308
© 2025 by Jordan Smith licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 13.1

Plagiarism in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication Copyright ©
2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole
Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 13.2

Plagiarism in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication Copyright ©
2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole
Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 13.3

Plagiarism in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication Copyright ©
2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole
Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 13.4

Using sources in your document in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Com­
munication Copyright © 2022 by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy

309 | Derivative Notes
Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribu­
tion-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.

Chapter 13.5

Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt
McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 Interna­
tional License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 13.5.1

Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt
McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 Interna­
tional License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 13.5.2

Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt
McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 Interna­
tional License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 13.5.3

Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt

                                                                                                                                                            Derivative Notes | 310
McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 Interna­
tional License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 13.6

Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt
McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 Interna­
tional License, except where otherwise noted.

Chapter 13.7

The Information Literacy User's Guide: An Open, Online Textbook, edited by Greg Bobish
and Trudi Jacobson (Geneseo, NY: Open SUNY Textbooks, Milne Library, 2014), p.
56, Licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0
Unported License.
Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication Copyright © 2022 by Matt
McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 Interna­
tional License, except where otherwise noted.

311 | Derivative Notes
AI Disclosure

Mavs Open Press AI policy

Mavs Open Press embraces innovation in open publishing, including the ethical and trans-
parent use of generative AI. The Mavs Open Press AI Policy permits the use of AI assis-
tance throughout the creation process and the inclusion of AI-generated images, data
visualizations, graphics, and supplemental materials. Authors must disclose any instances
of AI-generated content on this page and must ensure it meets all applicable copyright
and licensing requirements.

AI-assisted content

Mavs Open Press defines work as AI-assisted when author-created content is enhanced,
organized, or edited using a generative AI tool.
This OER was created using AI assistance.

AI-generated content

Mavs Open Press defines work as AI-generated when it is produced by a generative AI
tool in response to a prompt from an author. AI-generated content may be in any format,
including text, data, images, videos, or audio files. The content may or may not be edited
or modified by the author after it is generated.
This OER contains AI-generated content. AI-generated content appears in the chapters
listed below using Microsoft Copilot unless otherwise noted. We carefully reviewed and
edited all the content created.

                                                                                                                                                                 AI Disclosure | 312
Chapter 1.1

Figure 1.1 a model of communication was created using an AI tool in Canva.

Chapter 1.5

Key Takeaways

Chapter 2.11

Key Takeaways

Chapter 3.9

Key Takeaways

Chapter 4.17

Key Takeaways

Chapter 5.4

Key Takeaways

313 | AI Disclosure
Chapter 6.10

Key Takeaways

Chapter 7.5

Key Takeaways

Chapter 8.5

Key Takeaways

Chapter 9.7

Key Takeaways

Chapter 10.8

Key Takeaways

Chapter 11.6

Key Takeaways

               AI Disclosure | 314
Chapter 12.12

Key Takeaways

Chapter 13.8

Key Takeaways

315 | AI Disclosure
Accessibility Rubric

Web version evaluated on 12/02/2025
Accessibility Standards Passed - 10/10

                                                                                                                                                        Accessibility Rubric | 316
Evaluation Criteria                               Pass/ Fail Additional Information

Accessibility Documentation:                      Pass  Accessibility statement is present
                                                        in the front matter.
 1. The organization providing materials has a
      formal accessibility policy.

 2. The organization providing materials has an
      accessibility statement.

Content Organization:

1. Chapter titles and section headers should be   Pass
    marked as headers and distinct from body
    text.

2. Table of contents should be present and allow
    navigation.

3. Page numbers should be present and
    correspond with print numbers.

4. Content should remain organized after user
    `reflows' page.

Images:

1. Non-decorative images should be marked with    Pass
    alternative text.

2. Images should be compatible with screen
    reader and magnification software.

3. Decorative images should be marked with null
    alternative text.

Tables:                                           Pass

 1. Tables should be simple and compatible with
      screen readers and magnification software.

 2. Tables should be single celled and contain
      ordered lists.

 3. Tables should include markup that identify
      their rows and columns.

317 | Accessibility Rubric
Hyperlinks:                                        Pass

 1. In-book links should function and connect to
      their correct location in the text.

 2. Hyperlinks should connect to a working
      webpage. Hyperlinks should preferably open
      pages in the same window.

 3. All links should be distinct from body text.
      They should be descriptively titled and a
      different color or italicized.

Multimedia:

1. Closed captions should be provided for any      Pass
    video content.

2. Descriptive transcripts should be provided for
    any video content.

3. Audio or video player used for multimedia
    content should be compatible with assistive
    technology.

4. No content should flash more than 3 times per
    second.

STEM Content

1. STEM formulas and equation should be            Pass  There is not any STEM content
    created with an editor compatible with screen        present in this OER textbook.
    readers such as LaTex or MathML.

2. If equations are inserted as images they
    should be described in an alt tag.

Font

1. Font should be adjustable and compatible with   Pass
    screen readers, magnification software, and
    colored displays. Text must remain accessible
    when any font size is selected.

2. All font should have zoom capabilities to
    200%.

3. Font should meet standard size requirements
    (12 pt. body, 9 pt. footnote).

4. Alternative color and line spacing adjustments
    should be available.

                                                         Accessibility Rubric | 318
Color Contrast:

1. All information presented in color should also  Pass
    be conveyed in text or other images.

2. Headers should meet WCAG AA contrast
    standards.

3. Body text should meet WCAG AA contrast
    standards.

4. Simple images should meet WCAG AA contrast
    standards.

Interactive Elements:

1. Interactive elements such as menus, examples,   Pass  Interactive elements include
    practice questions, etc., allow keyboard only        embedded YouTube videos, which
    operation with and without assistive                 have been reviewed and confirmed
    technology.                                          to have timed captions.

2. All instructions, error messages, and prompts
    are in text and compatible with assistive
    technology.

3. Text should allow for keyboard only operation.
4. Text should be accessible on mobile devices.

319 | Accessibility Rubric
Errata and Versioning History

The peer review process for Mavs Open Press resources varies by publication and author.
We strive for transparency and describe the creation process in the front matter of each
text so readers may evaluate the work on its own merit. Because we offer web-based ser-
vices, we can quickly and easily address any errors that arise after publication. This page
provides a record of edits and changes made to the web version of this book since its ini-
tial publication.

Changes logged here are reflected in the web text only until a new version of the resource
is released, at which point the file downloads are also updated. Version updates are noted
in the Status field below.

If you have a correction to suggest, submit it to library-open@listserv.uta.edu. We will
contact the author then make and log necessary changes here. Below is a list of Correction
Types we currently update:

  1. Typo
 2. Broken link
 3. Addition
 4. Other factual inaccuracy in content
 5. Incorrect calculation or solution
 6. General/pedagogical suggestion or question

Date       Format  Correction  Location  Description Status
Submitted          Type

                                         Errata and Versioning History | 320
