DC Electrical Circuit Analysis

A Practical Approach

                                    James M. Fiore
2
       DC Electrical Circuit Analysis

                             A Practical Approach

                                                             by
                                                      James M. Fiore
                                           Version 1.0.14, 11 December 2025

3
 This DC Electrical Circuit Analysis, by James M. Fiore is copyright James M. Fiore, and released under the
                                            terms of a Creative Commons license:

               This work is freely redistributable for non-commercial use, share-alike with attribution
              Device data sheets and other product information are copyright by their respective owners

                     and have been obtained through publicly accessible manufacturer's web sites.
                                         Published by James M. Fiore via dissidents
                                                   ISBN13: 978-1654515478

For more information or feedback, contact:
James Fiore, Professor Emeritus
oer@jimfiore.org
jfiore@mvcc.edu

For the latest revisions, related titles, and links to low cost print versions, go to:
www.mvcc.edu/jfiore or my mirror sites www.dissidents.com and www.jimfiore.org
YouTube Channel: Electronics with Professor Fiore

Cover art, Chapman's Contribution, by the author

4
Preface

Welcome to DC Electrical Circuit Analysis, an open educational resource (OER). The goal of this text is to
introduce the theory and practical application of analysis of DC electrical circuits. It is offered free of charge
under a Creative Commons non-commercial, share-alike with attribution license. For your convenience, along
with the free pdf and odt files, print copies are available at a very modest charge. Check my web sites for links.

This text is based on the earlier Workbook for DC Electrical Circuits, which it replaces. The original expository
text has been greatly expanded and includes many examples along with computer simulations. For the
convenience of those who used the Workbook, many of the problem sets are the same, with some re-ordering
depending on the chapter.

The text begins with coverage of scientific and engineering notation along with the metric system. Also included
is a discussion of the scientific method, the underpinning of our entire system of investigation and technology.
From there, basic concepts and quantities are introduced such as charge, current, energy, power and voltage.
Subsequent chapters introduce resistance, series circuits, parallel circuits and series-parallel circuits. The text
continues with chapters covering network theorems, more advanced techniques such as nodal and mesh analysis,
and finally finishes with introductions to capacitors, inductors and magnetic circuits. The companion AC
Electrical Circuit Analysis text picks up after this point. Each chapter begins with a set of learning objectives
and concludes with practice exercises that are generally divided into four major types: analysis, design,
challenge and simulation. Many SPICE-based circuit simulators are available, both free and commercial, that can
be used with this text. The answers to most odd-numbered exercises can be found in the Appendix. A table of
standard resistor sizes is also in the Appendix, which is useful for real-world design problems. Finally, the
Appendix includes a section reviewing simultaneous equation solutions. If you have any questions regarding
this text, or are interested in contributing to the project, do not hesitate to contact me.

This text is part of a series of OER titles in the areas of electricity, electronics, audio and computer
programming. It includes three other textbooks covering semiconductor devices, operational amplifiers, and
embedded programming using the C language with the Arduino platform. There is a text covering AC electrical
circuits similar to this one, and also seven laboratory manuals; one for each of the five texts plus individual titles
covering computer programming using the Python language, and the science of sound. The most recent versions
of all of my OER texts and manuals may be found at my MVCC web site as well as my mirror site:
www.dissidents.com

This text was created using several free and open software applications including Open Office, Dia, SciDAVis,
and XnView.

Special thanks to the following individuals for their efforts in reviewing and proofreading the DC and AC
Electrical Circuit Analysis texts: Glenn Ballard, John Markham, João Nuno Carvalho, Mark Steffka and Jim
Noon.

5
                                             For Those Without and Those Within

                                           

                "All we can do...is to run over several instances, and examine carefully the principle,
                                      which binds the different thoughts to each other,

                           never stopping till we render the principle as general as possible."
                        -- David Hume, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (1748)

6
Table of Contents

Chapter 1: Fundamentals . . . . . . . 10

1.0 Chapter Objectives .          .  .     .       .  .  .  .  10

1.1 Introduction .   .            .  .     .       .  .  .  .  10

1.2 Significant Digits and Resolution .    .       .  .  .  .  11

1.3 Scientific and Engineering Notation .  .       .  .  .  .  14

1.4 The Metric System .           .  .     .       .  .  .  .  16

1.5 The Scientific Method.        .  .     .       .  .  .  .  18

1.6 Critical Thinking .           .  .     .       .  .  .  .  21

1.7 RoHS   .         .            .  .     .       .  .  .  .  24

Summary    .         .            .  .     .       .  .  .  .  25

Exercises  .         .            .  .     .       .  .  .  .  26

Chapter 2: Basic Quantities . . . . . . 30

2.0 Chapter Objectives .          .  .     .       .  .  .  .  30

2.1 Introduction .   .            .  .     .       .  .  .  .  30

2.2 An Atomic Model .             .  .     .       .  .  .  .  30

2.3 Charge and Current .          .  .     .       .  .  .  .  34

2.4 Energy and Voltage .          .  .     .       .  .  .  .  36

2.5 Power and Efficiency .        .  .     .       .  .  .  .  39

2.6 Energy Cost and Battery Life .   .     .       .  .  .  .  42

2.7 Resistance and Conductance .     .     .       .  .  .  .  47

2.8 Instrumentation and Laboratory .       .       .  .  .  .  63

Summary    .         .            .  .     .       .  .  .  .  67

Exercises  .         .            .  .     .       .  .  .  .  68

Chapter 3: Series Resistive Circuits .             .  .  ..    74

3.0 Chapter Objectives .          .  .     .       .  .  .  .  74

3.1 Introduction .   .            .  .     .       .  .  .  .  74

3.2 Conventional Current Flow and Electron Flow .  .  .  .  .  74

3.3 The Series Connection         .  .     .       .  .  .  .  75

3.4 Combining Series Components      .     .       .  .  .  .  77

3.5 Ohm's Law .      .            .  .     .       .  .  .  .  78

3.6 Kirchhoff's Voltage Law       .  .     .       .  .  .  .  82

3.7 Series Analysis  .            .  .     .       .  .  .  .  83

3.8 Potentiometers and Rheostats     .     .       .  .  .  .  92

Summary    .         .            .  .     .       .  .  .  .  96

Exercises  .         .            .  .     .       .  .  .  .  97

7
Chapter 4: Parallel Resistive Circuits . . . . . 110

4.0 Chapter Objectives .      .    .        .       .  .  .  .  110

4.1 Introduction .  .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  110

4.2 The Parallel Connection   .    .        .       .  .  .  .  111

4.3 Combining Parallel Components .         .       .  .  .  .  111

4.4 Kirchhoff's Current Law   .    .        .       .  .  .  .  115

4.5 Parallel Analysis .       .    .        .       .  .  .  .  117

4.6 Current Limiting: Fuses and Circuit Breakers .  .  .  .  .  125

Summary    .        .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  127

Exercises  .        .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  128

Chapter 5: Series-Parallel Resistive Circuits . . . . 138

5.0 Chapter Objectives .      .    .        .       .  .  .  .  138

5.1 Introduction .  .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  138

5.2 Series-Parallel Connections .  .        .       .  .  .  .  139

5.3 Simplifying Series-Parallel Components  .       .  .  .  .  139

5.4 Series-Parallel Analysis  .    .        .       .  .  .  .  143

Summary    .        .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  155

Exercises  .        .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  157

Chapter 6: Analysis Theorems and Techniques . . . . 170

6.0 Chapter Objectives .      .    .        .       .  .  .  .  170

6.1 Introduction .  .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  170

6.2 Source Conversions .      .    .        .       .  .  .  .  171

6.3 Superposition Theorem     .    .        .       .  .  .  .  177

6.4 Thévenin's Theorem .      .    .        .       .  .  .  .  181

6.5 Norton's Theorem .        .    .        .       .  .  .  .  187

6.6 Maximum Power Transfer Theorem .        .       .  .  .  .  188

6.7 Delta-Y Conversions .     .    .        .       .  .  .  .  191

Summary    .        .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  197

Exercises  .        .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  199

Chapter 7: Nodal & Mesh Analysis, Dependent Sources . . 214

7.0 Chapter Objectives .      .    .        .       .  .  .  .  214

7.1 Introduction .  .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  214

7.2 Nodal Analysis  .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  215

7.3 Mesh Analysis   .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  229

7.4 Dependent Sources .       .    .        .       .  .  .  .  238

Summary    .        .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  243

Exercises  .        .         .    .        .       .  .  .  .  244

8
Chapter 8: Capacitors . . . . . . . 260

8.0 Chapter Objectives .   .       .     .               .  .  .  .  260

8.1 Introduction .  .      .       .     .               .  .  .  .  260

8.2 Capacitance and Capacitors .   .     .               .  .  .  .  261

8.3 Initial and Steady-State Analysis of RC Circuits .   .  .  .  .  272

8.4 Transient Response of RC Circuits .  .               .  .  .  .  274

Summary        .    .      .       .     .               .  .  .  .  285

Exercises      .    .      .       .     .               .  .  .  .  287

Chapter 9: Inductors . . . . . . . 294

9.0 Chapter Objectives .   .       .     .               .  .  .  .  294

9.1 Introduction .  .      .       .     .               .  .  .  .  294

9.2 Inductance and Inductors .     .     .               .  .  .  .  295

9.3 Initial and Steady-State Analysis of RL Circuits .   .  .  .  .  303

9.4 Initial and Steady-State Analysis of RLC Circuits .  .  .  .  .  306

9.5 Transient Response of RL Circuits .  .               .  .  .  .  307

Summary        .    .      .       .     .               .  .  .  .  317

Exercises      .    .      .       .     .               .  .  .  .  318

Chapter 10: Magnetic Circuits and Transformers . . . 324

10.0 Chapter Objectives .  .       .     .               .  .  .  .  324

10.1 Introduction   .      .       .     .               .  .  .  .  324

10.2 Electromagnetic Induction. .  .     .               .  .  .  .  325

10.3 Magnetic Circuits .   .       .     .               .  .  .  .  329

10.4 Transformers   .      .       .     .               .  .  .  .  342

Summary        .    .      .       .     .               .  .  .  .  348

Exercises      .    .      .       .     .               .  .  .  .  350

Appendices

A: Standard Component Sizes .      .     .               .  .  .  .  355

B: Methods of Solution of Linear Simultaneous Equations .      .  .  356

C: Equation Proofs .       .       .     .               .  .  .  .  361

D: Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Problems .              .  .  .  363

E: Base Units       . . . . . . . . 373

F: Appropriate Commentary .        .     .               .  .  .  .  374

9
1 Fundamentals

1.0 Chapter Learning Objectives

After completing this chapter, you should be able to:

    · Describe significant digits and resolution.
    · Express and compute numeric values using scientific and engineering notation.
    · Describe the metric system and detail its advantages.
    · Define the scientific method.
    · Give examples of cognitive biases and logical fallacies that affect critical thinking.
    · Describe the RoHS directive.

1.1 Introduction

A Little Background and Perspective

This text focuses on the analysis of DC (direct current) electrical circuits. It assumes no prior knowledge of
electrical quantities, systems or circuit theory. As with any new endeavor, it is important to define the
terminology and tools to be used at the outset. We shall be examining the basic electrical quantities, their
relationships, proper terminology, and a variety of analysis techniques and theorems that have broad application
in the field. In this regard, our analytical "tools" are the appropriate mathematics and standards, and the
scientific method, which are detailed in this chapter. The definition of specific electrical quantities and their
relationships begins in Chapter Two. Various analysis techniques and theorems are detailed in subsequent
chapters.

The initial research into electricity occurred in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries by individuals
such as Alessandro Volta, André-Marie Ampère, Michael Faraday and Georg Ohm. This work was expanded
later in the nineteenth century by Gustav Kirchhoff, James Clerk Maxwell, Léon Charles Thévenin and others.
The late 1800s and early 1900s saw the practical application of electrical theory to solve practical problems (i.e.,
the field of electrical engineering). Perhaps the two names most associated with this period are Thomas Edison
and Nikola Tesla. Numerous other individuals made contributions as well, eventually leading to the age of
electronics, fully coming into its own by the mid-twentieth century with the introduction of solid state devices
such as the bipolar junction transistor. The pace of these developments has been quite rapid. For example, a little
over a century ago the average person did not have ready access to something as simple as a modern flashlight.
To put this into perspective, if we were to scale all of human history from the emergence of modern homo
sapiens to today into a single year; radio, television, digital computers and all the rest would show up only
within the last couple of hours before midnight on the last day of the year.

10
At this point we need to distinguish between electricity and electronics. The term       Figure 1.1
electricity tends to refer to the general relationships between electrical quantities    345,000 volt transmission
such as voltage and current. In practical use, an electrical system tends to refer to a  lines.
system where electrical energy is used directly to perform some manner of physical
work. Examples include commercial and residential wiring systems for lighting,
heating and the like. Electrical power generation and transmission would normally
fall into this category, such as the high voltage transmission line seen in Figure 1.1.

In contrast, electronic systems, or simply electronics, tends to refer to systems where  Figure 1.2
electrical signals are used to represent, store and/or manipulate some kind of           A digital SLR camera.
information. This runs the gamut from radio and television to computing devices,
cell phones, non-acoustic musical instruments, etc. Some of these applications may
be obvious, where the individual interacts directly with the device such as a cell
phone or tablet. On the other hand, the human interaction may be minimal such as
with the engine management system of a modern car. A good example of a modern
device packed with electronics is the DSLR, or Digital Single Lens Reflex camera.
These devices include numerous electronic sensors and actuators to adjust to
ambient light, for automatic focus, and the like. An example is shown in Figure 1.2.
The usage and scale of power transmission lines versus digital cameras may seem to
be wildly separated but, ultimately, they are both made possible by the application
of the basic laws of electrical circuit theory.

Another good example of the shear scale of difference is to look at a single
electrical device such as a DC motor. Figure 1.3 shows a simple DC hobby motor,
the kind of device that might be used for a motorized toy. This device runs on 12
volts, as available from a battery, and draws only a few hundredths of an amp of
current (to put this in perspective, the typical old-fashioned incandescent light bulb
draws between one half and one amp of current from a 120 volt socket).

Compare this to the industrial DC motor seen in Figure 1.4. This is a 4000               Figure 1.3
horsepower motor used to reduce eight inch thick copper slabs down to ½ inch             A DC hobby motor.
thickness. It draws 4680 amps maximum at 700 volts. It clearly dwarfs the
technician standing nearby.

Now that we have a little background and perspective, it's time to look at
mathematics, specifically, how we represent and manipulate values that may be
very, very large or very, very small, all while keeping appropriate accuracy.

1.2 Significant Digits and Resolution

A key element of any measurement or derived value is the resulting resolution.
Resolution refers to the finest change or variation that can be discerned by a
measurement system. For digital measurement systems, this is typically the last or

11
lowest level digit displayed. For example, a bathroom scale may show weights in
whole pounds. Thus, one pound would be the resolution of the measurement. Even if
the scale was otherwise perfectly accurate, we could not be assured of a person's
weight to within better than one pound using this scale as there is no way of
indicating fractions of a pound.

Related to resolution is a value's number of significant digits. Significant digits can   Figure 1.4
be thought of as representing potential percentage accuracy in measurement or             An industrial DC motor.
computation. Continuing with the bathroom scale example, consider what happens
when weighing a 156 pound adult versus a small child of 23 pounds. As the scale
only resolves to one pound, that presents us with an uncertainty of one pound out of
156 for the adult, but a much larger uncertainty of one pound out of 23 for the child.
The 156 pound measurement has three significant digits (i.e., units, tens and
hundreds) while the 23 pound measurement has but two significant digits (units and
tens).

In general, leading and trailing zeroes are not considered significant. For example,
the value 173.58 has five significant digits while the value 0.00143 has only three
significant digits (the "143" portion) as does 0.000000143. Similarly, if we compute
the value 63/3.0, we arrive at 21, with two significant digits. If your calculator
shows 21.0 or 21.00, those extra trailing zeroes do not increase accuracy and are not
considered significant. An exception to this rule is when measuring values in the
laboratory. If a high resolution voltmeter indicates a value of, say, 120.0 volts, those
last two zeroes are considered significant in that they reflect the resolution of the
measurement (i.e, the meter is capable of reading down to tenths of volts).

When performing calculations, the results will generally be no more accurate than
the accuracy of the initial measurements. Consequently, it is senseless to divide two
measured values obtained with three significant digits and report the result with ten
significant digits, even if that's what shows up on the calculator. The same would be
true for multiplication. For these sorts of calculations, we can't expect the result to
be any better than the "weakest link" in terms of resolution and resulting significant
digits. For example, consider the value 3.5 divided by 2.3. Both of these values have
two significant digits. Using a standard calculator, we find an answer of 1.52173913.
The result has nine significant digits implying much greater accuracy and resolution
than we started with, and thus is misleading. To two significant digits, the answer
would be rounded to 1.5. On a long chain of calculations it may be advisable to
round the intermediate results to a further digit and then round the final answer as
indicated previously. This will help to mitigate accumulated errors.

When it comes to addition and subtraction, the larger value will tend to indicate the
number of significant digits available, particularly in the laboratory. This is due to
the resolution of the measurement (that is, its finest digit). For example, suppose we
have to add two distances. We drive a car from a parking lot to its exit, a distance we
record with a tape measure as being 51.17 feet. We then drive from the exit to the
next city, which the car's odometer records as being 60.0 miles. Is it fair to say the

12
total distance is 60 miles plus 51.17 feet? No, it is not. Why? Because we cannot
expect the car's odometer to be accurate to within 0.01 feet, like the tape measure. In
fact, the odometer is reading out a value with one-tenth mile resolution. One-tenth of
a mile is 528 feet, or more than ten times the entire measurement given by the tape.
We would simply ignore the tape measurement because it is smaller than the
resolution of the odometer. The proper result is 60.0 miles. Now in contrast, if the
tape measure had indicated 552.7 feet, or slightly more than 0.1 miles, we could
safely say the total distance was 60.1 miles, rounding the result to finest resolution
digit of the more coarsely measured value. Of course, this example is a bit contrived
but it is designed to show the limitations of measurement devices. It is also
complicated by the fact that we are using using USA customary unit (miles, feet),
complete with their odd conversion factors. Fortunately, virtually all current work in
science and technology uses the much simpler metric system, which we will be
examining shortly.

In summary,

    · When multiplying and dividing, the value with the least number of
         significant digits indicates the number of significant digits in the result.

    · When adding and subtracting, the value with the least resolution (i.e., the
         most coarse) will set the limit of resolution in the result.

Example 1.1

         Determine the number of significant digits in the following values.

         A. 12.6
         B. 0.0034
         C. 43.001
         D. 5400

         Answers:

         A. All three digits are significant.
         B. Two. Only the 3 and 4 count because leading zeroes are not significant.
         C. Five. Embedded zeroes are significant.
         D. Two. Trailing zeroes are not generally considered significant.

13
Example 1.2

         Perform the following computations, leaving the answer with the
         appropriate number of significant digits.

         A. 55  10.1
         B. 2312.5 / 16.2
         C. 1756.2 + 345.1
         D. 750.2 - 0.004

         Answers:

         A. 555.5 which rounds to 560 (55 has only two significant digits).
         B. 142.7469136... which rounds to 143 (16.2 has three significant digits).
         C. 2101.3 (both values have resolution to tenths place).
         D. 750.2 (do not extend the answer beyond the more coarse resolution of
         tenths place).

1.3 Scientific and Engineering Notation

Scientific and engineering notations are ways to express numbers without a lot of          Figure 1.5
trailing or leading zeroes. They also simplify calculations. Before going any further,     Scientific calculators.
it would be a good idea to obtain a proper scientific calculator, such as the ones
shown in Figure 1.5. The simplest can be had for $10 to $20, while more
powerful graphing types will run ten times as much (although good buys
can often be found on the used market). Some of the brands to consider are
Casio, Sharp and Texas Instruments. If you plan to continue study into AC
electrical circuits, it would be wise to make sure the calculator can solve
simultaneous equations with complex coefficients.

The idea behind scientific notation is to represent the value in two parts: a precision
portion, or mantissa; and the magnitude, a power of ten called the exponent. Thus,
360 can be written as 3.6 times 100, or 3.6  102, where 3.6 is the mantissa and 2 is
the exponent. Similarly, 0.00275 can be written as the value 2.75 times 0.001, or
2.75  10-3. As the base of the exponent is always 10, a more compact form replaces
" 10" with "E". Thus, these two values can be written as 3.6E2 and 2.75E-3. When
adding or subtracting values in this form, the first step is to make sure that all of the
values have the same exponent. Then, the precision portions are simply added
together. Thus, 3.6E2 + 1.1E2 is equal to 4.7E2. Similarly, 3.6E2 + 5E1 is converted
as 3.6E2 + 0.5E2 yielding 4.1E2. Alternately, it can be converted as 36E1 + 5E1
yielding 41E1 (the same answer, or 410 in ordinary form). Where this notation is

14
particularly useful is when multiplying or dividing. For multiplying, multiply the
mantissas and add the exponents. For dividing, divide the mantissas and subtract the
exponents. For example, multiply 20000 by 360000. This is equivalent to 2E4 times
3.6E5. The result is 7.2E9 (i.e., 7200000000). Similarly, dividing the value 0.006 by
50000 yields 6E-3 divided by 5E4, or 1.2E-7 (or in ordinary form 0.00000012).
Notice the cumbersome and error-prone quantities of trailing and leading zeroes in
these examples when using ordinary form. With scientific notation, we no longer
have to deal with them.

Engineering notation is the same as scientific notation with the caveat that the
exponent must by a multiple of 3. Thus, 390000 would be written as either 390E3 or
possibly as 0.39E6. Each multiple of 3 has a name and abbreviating letter to make
the written representation even more compact. You are probably already familiar
with many of them. For example, 103 or 1000, is kilo which is abbreviated as k.
Also, 106, or one million, is Mega, and abbreviated M (note capital letter).

    Exponent  Name      Abbreviation                                                   Figure 1.6
        12    Tera              T                                                      Common engineering notation
         9    Giga             G                                                       prefixes and abbreviations.
         6    Mega             M
         3     kilo             k
        -3    milli
        -6    micro  m (note lower case)
        -9    nano    (Greek letter mu)
       -12    pico
                                n
                                p

A partial list of exponents, their names, and abbreviations is shown in Figure 1.6.
There are standards for both larger and smaller exponents, but this table is
something that should be committed to memory as they are in wide use.

Example 1.3

         Convert the following into engineering notation using appropriate prefixes.

         A. 2100 grams
         B. 0.005 meters
         C. 32,000,000 bits per second (bps)
         D. 0.0000741 seconds

15
         Answers:

         A. 2.1 kilograms (2.1 kg)
         B. 5 millimeters (5 mm)
         C. 32 Megabits per second (32 Mbps)
         D. 74.1 microseconds (74.1 s)

         Notice that the final answers are much more compact and less error prone.

After some initial effort, certain common shortcuts will become second nature. For
example (and keeping it generic), micro times kilo will yield milli (i.e., millionths
times thousands yields thousandths). Similarly, the reciprocal of kilo is milli and the
reciprocal of micro is Mega. Further, milli divided by kilo yields micro, Mega
divided by kilo yields kilo, and so on. Gaining facility with these kinds of shortcuts
will allow you to make estimates in your head very quickly, a much desired skill.

1.4 The Metric System

In order to make consistent measurements of physical phenomena, some system of
measurement needs to be standardized. While almost any scheme can be made to
work, some systems are more logical and easier to deal with than others. The current
standard in the world of science and technology is the metric system, or more
properly, the International System of Units (abbreviated SI, from the French Système
International). This standard has found wide adoption across the globe and is the
system used by roughly 95% of the human population. This is in contrast to the
system of USA customary units which is based on a prior system of units originating
in England. It should be noted that the USA, comprising some 5% of the global
population, is the only country of reasonable economic power left that has not
adopted the metric system for general use. This is only true in the consumer realm
though as virtually all scientists, engineers and technicians in the USA routinely use
the metric system1. Even many products built and sold in the USA use metric
components internally; it's just not noticed by the consumer.

Why has the metric system seen such wide adoption compared to USA customary
units? The simple answer is because it is an easier system to learn and manipulate.
First, a main strength of the metric system is that everything is based on powers of
ten. Second, customary units often consist of many different variations on a single
parameter while the metric system uses just a single parameter. For example,
consider the measurement of length. For human-size lengths we might measure
something in inches or feet. If it's a bit larger we might use yards. If it's even farther,
we would use miles. In the metric system there is just one unit for length and that's

1 It is also true of consumers who buy soda and similar beverages that are routinely sold in
    metric two or three liter bottles. Go figure.

16
the meter (roughly 39.37 inches). If we want to talk about particularly small or large
values we would simply add our engineering notation prefixes to come up with
millimeters or kilometers for everyday conversion (although if a value happened to
be particularly large or small we would say something like 2.3E9 meters).

But customary units complicate the system even more because the various versions
of a parameter are usually not based on a power of ten. For example, there are 12
inches in a foot and 5280 feet in a mile. This is further complicated by the fact that
there is more than one kind of mile (the common statute mile is 5280 feet but the
nautical mile is roughly 6076 feet). Similarly, if we measure the weight of something
we could use ounces, pounds and tons (more than one kind), and again, the
conversion factors are not convenient (16 ounces to the pound, 2000 pounds to the
common ton).

These odd conversion factors unnecessarily complicate matters. For example,
suppose we have a length measurement of 2 feet, 8 ½ inches and we need to
multiply this by a factor of 3. Multiplying each part by three yields 6 feet, 25 ½
inches, but that needs to be simplified to 8 feet, 1 ½ inches. This extra step can be
avoided if we base everything on powers of ten.

For individuals only familiar with USA customary units, the ease of the metric
system can be illustrated with currency. USA currency is, in effect, metric: 100 cents
make up one dollar. Simply imagine how difficult it would be if, instead of cents, a
dollar consisted of 13 flarkneks and 85 dollars made up a skroon. Further, imagine
you decide to buy a new computer that costs 21 skroon, 10 dollars and 12 flarkneks.
Now compute the total with a 6.5% local tax rate. Will 22 skroon be enough? What's
the change? Ouch! It's not impossible but it's extra error prone work. That's precisely
the issue with feet, miles, ounces, pounds, pints, gallons and so on.

In the metric system typically we use the MKS variation: meters for length or
distance, kilograms for mass and seconds for time. Further, we typically use liters for
volume (liquid measure) and Celsius (AKA Centigrade) for temperature, although it
is sometimes more convenient to use the absolute temperature scale of kelvin.
Fortunately, the thermal energy indicated by a one degree Celsius change is identical
to that for kelvin. The two schemes only differ in their zero reference point (absolute
zero for kelvin and the point at which water freezes for Celsius).

As virtually all of the calculations presented in this text are metric, there is little
need to concern ourselves with conversions back and forth between the two systems.
Indeed, if the USA were to finally make the switch to metric, no one would ever
need to concern themselves with conversions, with the possible exception of
historians, and perhaps people trying to recreate old family recipes and the like.

Sometimes, careless people tend to think of units of measure as an afterthought.
Don't get caught in this trap. Failure to pay attention to proper units can have
catastrophic results. One example is the Mars Climate Orbiter. In 1999 this mission

17
to study the planet Mars suffered a spectacular failure. A subcontractor had used
USA customary units for its software which then fed values to other systems that
were expecting metric/SI units (as specified in the system contract). The result was
the destruction of the orbiter as it attempted orbital insertion. The cost of the mission
was nearly $330 million, completely wasted.

A table of commonly used quantities, their SI units and typical equivalents is shown
in Figure 1.7. Further details on units can be found in Appendix E.

      Quantity            Unit         Approximate Equivalent                              Figure 1.7
   (abbreviation)    (abbreviation)                                                        Common quantities, SI units
                                          1 m  39.37 inches                                and equivalents.
     Length (l)        meter (m)     1 kg  2.2 pounds (on Earth)
      Mass (m)       kilogram (kg)                                                         Note: As a general rule, when
      Time (t)                                      NA                                     units are abbreviated they are
      Force (F)        second (s)      1 N  0.225 pound-force                              capitalized. When they are
     Energy (w)       newton (N)                                                           spelled out they are treated as
     Power (P)                              3.6E6 J  1 kWh                                 common nouns and therefore
                        joule (J)       746 W  1 horsepower                                not capitalized, even when
 Temperature (T)        watt (W)      Fahrenheit = 32 + 9/5  °C                            named in honor of someone (an
                     kelvin (K) or       kelvin = °C + 273.15                              exception being some
Electric Charge (Q)   Celsius (°C)                                                         temperature scales).
     Current (I)     coulomb (C)                    NA
                        amp (A)                     NA
 Voltage (V or E)       volt (V)                    NA

1.5 The Scientific Method

The scientific method is a means of uncovering and explaining physical phenomena.
It relies on observation and logical reasoning to achieve insight into the actions and
relations of the phenomena, and a means of relating it to similar items. The method
starts with observations and measurements. Based on these and background
knowledge such as mathematics, physics, the behavior of similar phenomena, and so
on, a tentative explanation, or hypothesis, is derived. The hypothesis is then tested
using experimental or field data. The precise nature of the tests depend on the area of
study, but the idea will always be the same: namely to see if the predictions of the
hypothesis are borne out under alternate applicable conditions or data sets. A proper
hypothesis must be testable and falsifiable. That is, the hypothesis must be able to be
proven wrong by subsequent observation. If it is not, then the hypothesis is better
classified as philosophy. For example, Newtonian gravitation could be proven false
by letting go of a suspended hammer and watching it remain motionless or fall
upwards, rather than fall down toward the Earth. Similarly, Evolution could be
proven false by the discovery of "fossil rabbits in the Precambrian", to quote famous

18
biologist J. B. S. Haldane (Haldane was being somewhat snippy, but in general, he
meant anything that would be clearly out of the expected time-line, in this case a
small mammal predating even the most simple creatures with backbones).

A hypothesis is tested by repeated cycles of prediction, observation and
measurement, and also subject to peer review, that is, the critique of others in the
field of study who may point out inconsistencies in the explanations or logic, errors
in experimental design, and so on. This cycle continues until the weight of data and
scientific opinion elevates the hypothesis to a theory. One might say that a theory is
a hypothesis that has withstood the rigors of the scientific method. This cycle was
well expressed by the Marquise du Châtelet2. She explained hypotheses as "probable
propositions". While it would only take one observation to falsify a hypothesis,
several would be required to vindicate it: "each non-contradictory result would add
to the probability of the hypothesis and ultimately...we would arrive at a point
where its `certitude' and even its `truth', was so probable that we could not refuse
our assent".

It is important to note that the scientific usage of the word theory is entirely different
from its popular usage, which is perhaps closer to "hunch" or "seat-of-the-pants
guess". Also, a scientific theory is not true in the same sense as a fact. Facts come in
three main varieties: direct observations, indirect observations and those that may be
logically deduced. A direct observation is something that you have measured
yourself, such as noting the time it takes for a ball to reach the ground when released
from a given height. An indirect observation is something that may be inferred from
other known quantities or proper historical data, such as "George Washington was
the first president of the United States of America". An example of the third variety
would be "If x is an even integer larger than four and smaller than eight, then x must
be six". At first glance, it may seem that facts are highest on the pecking order, but
scientific theories are much more useful than facts because isolated facts have very
little predictive capacity. It is the predictive and explanatory ability of theories that
make them so powerful.

Consider the following. Suppose you hold out a stone at arm's length and let go. It
drops to the ground. That's a fact. You saw it happen. Unfortunately, by itself, it
doesn't tell you very much. Suppose you repeat this several times and each time the
stone drops in precisely the same way as it did initially. This is beginning to get
useful because you're noticing a pattern, and patterns can be predictive. Now,
suppose you pick up stones of differing sizes, say 100 grams, 200 grams, half a
kilogram and a kilogram, and drop each of them in turn. You observe that they each
hit the ground in the same amount of time. Further, you drop them from different
heights and you notice that the higher up they are, the longer it takes for them to hit
the ground, but they all take the same amount of time to reach the ground.

2 Du Châtelet was that most rare of 18th century women: a mathematician and physicist.
    She translated Newton's Principia Mathematica into French and was a companion of
    Voltaire. Unfortunately, after an affair with the poet Jean François de Saint-Lambert in
    her early 40's, she became pregnant and died six days after giving birth.

19
You might now formulate a hypothesis: namely that the mass of a stone doesn't have
an effect on how fast it falls from a given height and that height and fall time are
directly related. Your hypothesis is predictive. Although you used only four sizes of
stones and a few heights, your broadened hypothesis should apply to any stone
dropped from any height. So now you (and a bunch friends) starting picking up
random pairs of stones and drop them from random heights, and sure enough, you
see the same effect again and again. If you do this enough and it is continually
verified without exception, you might even make a "law of falling stones",
particularly if you were able to quantify the times and heights through careful
measurement and reduce the relation to a nice formula. It is useful because you can
now predict what will happen with any stone dropped from any height. But this law
is rather limited. It only applies to stones because you may have noticed that stones
drop much faster than pieces of cork. While you might then proceed to make a "law
of falling cork", that would unnecessarily complicate things. Instead, you could take
a step back and try to figure out why stones and cork both fall, but not at the same
rate. Eventually, you might discover that the difference has to do with air friction
and you can now create a law governing falling bodies in a frictionless environment.
That's even more useful than the original "law of falling stones".

But even this new and improved "law of falling bodies" doesn't offer a lot of insight
into what is really going on in the larger scheme of things. Through repeated
observations and experiments this could be extended to cover not just falling bodies
on the Earth, but the interactions between any bodies, including falling stones and
cork on the moon, or the interaction between the Earth and the Sun, the Sun and the
other planets, the Sun and other stars, and so on. What you'll have arrived at is a
full-blown theory of gravitation (Newtonian gravitation). Now that is an extremely
useful tool. It helps us design airplanes, get satellites into orbit, even get people to
the moon and back safely.

Thus a theory is a "best estimate so far", a model to explain some observable aspect
of the universe. It is understood that as our view of what is observable widens and
our knowledge extends, so too a given theory may be refined. The Newtonian
gravitation model was sufficient to describe the movements of the planets around the
sun and is still used to plan the flight of spacecraft. In the early 1900's, however,
Einstein's Theory of Relativity refined Newtonian Gravitation to include more
extreme (relativistic) effects. It is important to note that we did not "throw out"
Newton's equations; rather, we now have a better understanding of the set of
conditions under which they apply. While this trek towards more and more
refinement is not truth in and of itself, to paraphrase the late Harvard paleontologist,
Stephen Jay Gould, to ignore the weight of scientific data behind an established
theory would be perverse.

20
1.6 Critical Thinking: Avoiding Being Fooled

As humans, we need to recognize that we are fallible. No matter how good our
intentions, we make mistakes and can be fooled. The first step toward reducing and
ultimately eliminating these sources of error is to understand them. We will lump
these into two broad categories: cognitive bias and logical fallacies. Understanding
these will enhance our ability to think critically and avoid being fooled (or fooling
ourselves).

Cognitive Bias

A cognitive bias is an inclination toward looking at a situation in an unbalanced or
unfair manner. Generally, people are not aware of these biases. One example is
confirmation bias (AKA, confirmation of expected outcomes). That is, we expect (or
hope) to see a certain result and thus we tend to overvalue evidence that confirms it
while discounting evidence that contradicts it. One way to avoid this is through the
use of a double-blind test. Suppose we wish to test a new drug to see if it is effective
and safe. As we may have invested a lot of time and money developing the drug, it is
only natural that we want it to work, and this may skew our analysis
(unintentionally, of course). What we do is have a third party create two sets of pills;
one is the drug under test and the other is a placebo (it looks like the other pill but
does nothing). These sets are identified using codes known only to the third party.
The sets are then given to the researchers who, in turn, give them to the patients. The
important thing is that neither the patients nor the researchers know which pills are
which. When the trial has run its course, the researchers (us) analyze the data to
determine if any set of pills was successful. Only after the analysis is completed
does the third party tell the researchers which set was real and which set was the
placebo.

Another cognitive bias is the Dunning-Kruger effect, named after the two social
psychologists who studied it. This states that the knowledge needed to determine if
someone is competent in a certain field is competence in that same field. Thus,
individuals who have low competence are not in a position to accurately evaluate
their own level of competence. Consequently, these individuals often over estimate
their competence. This is known as illusory superiority. To put it crudely, these
individuals are too ignorant of the subject to understand just how ignorant they are.
Among the highly competent, two other effects may be seen. First, the advanced
individual may be keenly aware of any shortcomings or gaps in their competence
and may undervalue their level as a result. Second, they may assume that their level
of competence is typical, and that most people are therefore "at their level".

It is useful to remember that in our complex and interdependent society, no one can
be an expert at everything, or even at most things. Instead, it is likely that we are all
largely ignorant of a majority of subjects and/or incompetent at a variety of skills.

21
Logical Fallacies

Logical fallacies represent faulty reasoning. They are "thinking traps" that people
sometimes fall into. Familiarity with them will help reduce their occurrence. There
are dozens of logical fallacies but we shall only investigate a representative few.

To help explain the process, we'll begin with a syllogism. This is, in essence, a
simple argument. It starts with a major premise (a generalization) which is followed
by a minor premise (a more specific statement). From these, we derive a conclusion.
For example:

    All humans breathe air.          (major premise)
    Alice is a human.                (minor premise)
    Therefore, Alice breathes air.   (conclusion)

Errors can occur when either premise is false or when the conclusion does not
follow (the latter being referred to as a non-sequitur). For example:

    All fish live in water.
    Lobsters live in water.
    Therefore, lobsters are fish.

The problem with this is the linkage between the major and minor premises. Saying
"all fish live in water" does not preclude something else (like a lobster or a sea snake
or kelp) from living in water. Compare the prior example to this version:

    All fish live in water.
    Trout are fish.
    Therefore, trout live in water.

While these examples may seem obvious, there are trickier versions. For example:

    I am made of nothing but atoms.
    Atoms are not alive.
    Therefore, I am not alive.

Nope. Doesn't work. This error is called the fallacy of composition. Basically, it says
that what is true of the parts must be true of the whole, and vice versa. It ignores the
concept of emergent properties (consider the behavior of a single bird to a flock, or a
single fish to a school).

The fallacy of composition can be illustrated without using a syllogism. Suppose
you are in a crowded movie theater. If you stand up, you will have a better view of
the screen. In contrast, it is not true that if everyone stands up, everyone will have a
better view. In fact, everyone will most likely have a worse view. If one person

22
stands, they are unique. That unique character is lost when everyone stands.

Turning to a different fallacy, the Latin phrase post hoc ergo propter hoc can be
translated as "Before this, therefore because of this". This fallacy is sometimes
referred to as the post hoc fallacy or the causation fallacy. It is an error regarding
causality; the assumption being that because event A occurred before event B, then
event A must have caused event B. On the surface, it seems logical enough. For
example, you might see a lightning strike and then hear a clap of thunder. It seems
reasonable to assume that the lightning caused the thunder (generally speaking, that
is the case). On the other hand, you might wake up some morning when it's dark
outside. Shortly thereafter, the sun rises. Obviously, your waking did not cause the
sun to rise.

Another error involves proportional contribution to an outcome. Relative size is
mistakenly seen as a determiner. That is, the error assumes that only large
contributors have any sway in the outcome. Basically, this fallacy proposes that if
something makes up only a small percentage of the total, then its effect must be
minimal. This is easily proven wrong. As an example, the atmosphere of the Earth is
comprised largely of nitrogen (78%) and oxygen (21%) along with a number of trace
gases such as argon, carbon dioxide and so forth. If the atmosphere was suddenly
altered so that it included just 0.1% hydrogen sulfide, every human likely would be
dead after their first breath of this new combination.

Along with size, there is a similar issue regarding linearity of effect. A linear
function is one that can be plotted as a straight line. More to the point, if we have a
linear system, then doubling an input to that system doubles its effect. To wit, if you
order two pieces of pie for dessert, it will cost twice as much as one piece. The
reality is that many systems do not behave in a linear fashion. Systems or
relationships can be logarithmic, square law, cubic, or follow some other
characteristic. For instance, the braking distance of a car does not vary linearly with
its speed, it varies in accordance with the square of its speed. Therefore, if you're
traveling twice as fast, it doesn't take twice as far to come to a stop, it takes four
(two squared) times farther to stop. Remember this the next time you're speeding
down a highway.

The next two items sometimes appear in arguments for or against a proposition.
They are the excluded middle and the ad hominem. The excluded middle presents a
false set of choices. Essentially, it falsely reduces the set of possible outcomes and
then proceeds to disprove all but one of them. By process of elimination, the
remaining outcome should be true. For example, someone might complain that a
particular politician would only support a particular bill if said politician was either
stupid or a communist (or a fascist, take your pick). They then show that the
politician is not stupid, so by their logic the politician must be a communist. Of
course, there are any number of other possible scenarios that have been excluded;
for instance, the politician might have taken a hefty bribe to vote for the bill or the
analysis of the bill by the complainer might be faulty.

23
Finally, ad hominem is a Latin term meaning "to the person". The ad hominem
attempts to disprove a point by arguing against the person making a claim, not the
claim itself. For example, suppose Doug makes a claim in favor of a new theory of
gravity. Fran's counterargument is that Doug is an evil person because he likes to
spray paint foul words on other people's pet cats, and therefore he can't be trusted.
The reality is that, in spite of his proclivity for penning feline profanity, Doug's ideas
regarding gravity might be spot on. Those ideas need to be addressed directly.

1.7 RoHS

Electrical components are not without a downside. Some devices potentially may
contain hazardous substances such as toxic metals. Even if the devices are
constructed and used with care, these substances can still create life cycle issues; that
is, when their useful life is over, simply "throwing them away" can create
environmental contamination.

In the early 2000s the European Union ratified the RoHS Directive. This stands for
the Restriction of Hazardous Substances, and controls the use of several materials
used in the construction of electrical and electronic systems. These materials include
lead, mercury, cadmium, hexavalent chromium (used in chrome plating), and other
specific chemicals such as certain flame retardants and plasticizers. The RoHS
Directive specifies the amount of these materials allowed in any homogeneous
material that makes up the device or product. Homogeneous materials, are, in
essence, the smallest parts that could be separated mechanically. Examples would be
items such as a machine screw, the toggle lever of a switch, or the magnet of a
loudspeaker. Each of these items must individually meet the limits set by the
directive. Most of these substances have limits of 1000 ppm (parts per million)
although cadmium (used in rechargeable Ni-Cd batteries and certain light detectors)
has a limit of 100 ppm.

The RoHS Directive has been updated periodically. The third variation (RoHS 3)              Figure 1.8
became effective in the summer of 2019. Related to RoHS is WEEE, which stands               RoHS compliance label.
for Waste from Electrical and Electronic Equipment. This controls the recovery and
recycling of these devices. Generally, products sold in the EU market must meet the
WEEE requirements. Several countries outside of the EU have adopted similar
requirements including Japan, China, South Korea and Turkey. The USA has not
adopted RoHS per se, however, several US states have adopted "RoHS-like"
requirements, including California, Colorado and New York. With increasing
environmental consciousness, it is likely that more countries will adopt similar
measures.

To help electronic and electrical system designers make their products meet the
RoHS requirements, electrical component manufacturers often use some manner of
"RoHS compliant" logo or statement on their data sheets. There is no standard for

24
these logos, however, a finished product will bear the standard RoHS compliance
label, as shown in Figure 1.8.

1.8 Summary

An electrical system is one that refers to the direct use of electrical energy in terms
of power generation, transmission or application. In contrast, an electronic system is
one that tends to use electrical signals as a means to represent, store and manipulate
information.

When measuring physical quantities and in computations, care must be taken to
maintain accuracy. Of particular importance are the concepts of resolution and
significant digits. Resolution refers to the finest digit place that may be discerned
(e.g., tenths or hundredths place). Generally, accuracy increases with the number of
significant digits used to represent a value. Leading and trailing zeroes are not
considered significant, the exception being trailing zeroes as reported by a
measurement device such as a digital multimeter. In computations, results can be no
more accurate or have greater resolution than the original values being manipulated.
Thus, if the division of two values, each with three significant digits, yields a
calculated result with much more than three significant digits, those extra digits only
lead to a false sense of accuracy and resolution. As a general rule, the results of
multiplication and division will have as many usable significant digits as the least
precise of the original values. For addition and subtraction, the resolution of the
result can be no greater than that of the original value with the least resolution.

Scientific and engineering notations are ways of representing values in a compact
and less error prone form. They consist of two parts: a mantissa consisting of the
significant digits and an exponent, or power of ten, for scaling. Engineering notation
further stipulates that the exponent must be a multiple of three, and these multiples
use prefix names such as kilo and milli for further simplification. When multiplying
or dividing values, the mantissas are multiplied (or divided) while the exponents are
added (or subtracted). For addition and subtraction the values are adjusted so that
they have the same exponent and the mantissas are then added or subtracted as
needed.

The metric system (or SI) is a measurement system based on powers of ten.
Conversions between units of the same type are no longer necessary which
simplifies computations. It is a global standard that is ubiquitous in the field of
science, engineering and technology.

The scientific method is a technique used to uncover the reality behind the physical
world. It begins with observations of phenomena which then lead to a tentative
hypothesis. The hypothesis is tested experimentally with the results either
confirming or denying the hypothesis. The process is repeated creating a feedback

25
loop. If the hypothesis is repeatedly verified and not rejected, it may be elevated to a
scientific theory. It is important during this process to be aware of logical fallacies
and cognitive biases that can lead to false interpretations of the experimental results.

Finally, RoHS, or the Restriction of Hazardous Substances, is a European Union
directive aimed at reducing environmental contamination by restricting the use of
certain substances such as lead and mercury. RoHS has a direct impact on the
construction and disposal of electrical and electronic products. Other countries and
states have similar directives and restrictions in place to help protect the
environment.

Review Questions

    1. Describe the differences between scientific notation and engineering
         notation.

    2. List the terms and abbreviations (i.e, words and symbols) for engineering
         notation from 10-12 through 1012.

    3. Give at least one advantage of the metric system over the
         customary/Imperial system of measurement.

    4. Outline the process of the scientific method.
    5. Explain the differences between a scientific theory, a hypothesis and a fact.
    6. Describe at least three examples of cognitive biases and logical fallacies.
    7. What is RoHS?

1.9 Exercises

Analysis

    1. Round the following to four significant digits: a) 14.5423 b) 30056
         c) 76.90032 d) 0.00084754

    2. Round the following to three significant digits: a) 354.005 b) 9100.46
         c) 1.0054 d) 0.000052753

    3. Round the following to five significant digits: a) 5.100237 b) 1020.765
         c) 1.00540 d) 0.00004578053

    4. Round the following to four significant digits: a) 5.100237 b) 1020.765
         c) 1.00540 d) 0.00004578053

    5. Convert the following to scientific notation: a) 23.61 b) 12000 c) 7632
         d) 0.00509

    6. Convert the following to scientific notation: a) 4253 b) 640000000 c) 2.03
         d) 0.00000658

26
    7. Convert the following to scientific notation: a) 41.56 b) 954000 c) 84.035
         d) 0.0001632

    8. Convert the following to scientific notation: a) 11200 b) 30000000 c) 325.2
         d) 0.00002504

    9. Convert the following to engineering notation: a) 12000 b) 470 c) 6.5
         d) 0.00198

    10. Convert the following to engineering notation: a) 3500 b) 17.9 c) 5601000
         d) 0.0000355

    11. Convert the following to engineering notation: a) 33.2 b) 313.6 c) 43000
         d) 0.000076

    12. Convert the following to engineering notation: a) 0.23 b) 76.95 c) 45500
         d) 0.00890

    For problems 13 through 18 express the results using engineering notation
    without rounding or truncating.

    13. Compute the following: a) 1.2E2 times 3.0E4 b) 5.4 times 3.1E3
         c) 6.01E3 times 2.0E-1 d) 5.3E9 times 4.1E-5

    14. Compute the following: a) 7.1E1 times 4.0E2 b) 2.32 times 5.6E3
         c) 6.01E3 times 3.0E-2 d) 5.2E5 times 8.2E-7

    15. Compute the following: a) 8.2E1 / 4E2 b) 2.42 / 2.0E3 c) 6.09E3 / 3.0E-2
         d) 9.6E5 / 3.1E-7

    16. Compute the following: a) 4.6E2 / 2.0E2 b) 2.35 / 4.0E6
         c) 5.15E4 / 3.0E-3 d) 6.8E-2 / 5.0E-4

    17. Compute the following: a) 8.2E1 + 4E2 b) 2.42 + 2.0E1
         c) 6.09E3 - 3.0E-2 d) 9.6E5 - 5.1E6

    18. Compute the following: a) 4.2E3 + 9E2 b) 3.53 + 4.2E-1
         c) 1.05E-2 - 5.0E-2 d) 9.4E5 - 3.2E4

    For problems 18 through 22 express the results using engineering notation with
    proper rounding to reflect the resulting resolution.

    19. Compute the following: a) 16.2 - 0.4 b) 4356 + 378 c) 0.012 - 0.005
    20. Compute the following: a) 4.5  43.1 b) 1201 / 23.6 c) 890.1  0.172
    21. Compute the following: a) 51E3  62.7E2 b) 6.733E2 / 1.01E-3

         c) 20.12E6 / 65.6E9
    22. Compute the following: a) 17.9E3 - 10.4E6 b) 81E3 + 12E3

         c) 76.0E3 + 1465

27
    For problems 23 through 26 determine the result of the computation in SI base
    units (meters, kilograms, seconds) with appropriate engineering notation units
    (kilo, milli, etc.).
    23. Determine the result of 20 meters times 0.10 kilograms in kg·m.
    24. Determine the result of 34 kilometers divided by 10 millimeters.
    25. Determine the resulting velocity in m/s if a distance of 3.6 meters is covered

         in the space of 1.2 milliseconds.
    26. Determine the result of 24 s divided by 3.0 km.

28
Notes

                                                                                                                                 
29
2 Basic Quantities

2.0 Chapter Learning Objectives

After completing this chapter, you should be able to:

    · Describe a basic, functional atomic model.
    · Describe fundamental quantities and relations including charge, current, energy, voltage, power,

         resistance and conductance; and perform basic computations using them.
    · Compute efficiency, energy cost, battery life and DMM accuracy.
    · Utilize the resistor color code.

2.1 Introduction

In this chapter we shall examine the major quantities of interest in electrical systems and describe their
relationships. These include voltage, current, power, energy and resistance. We begin with basic definitions and
proceed to example computations. We shall go beyond the theoretical and investigate practical aspects as found
in electrical laboratories. This includes measurement devices and power sources, as well as various resistive
devices. We shall examine batteries from a functional perspective, and perform computations regarding
efficiency and cost of energy. We will also introduce some of the device symbols used to create electrical circuit
schematics. This material presents the foundation upon which we will build circuit analysis techniques in
subsequent chapters. Treat it accordingly.

2.2 An Atomic Model

In order to understand electrical circuit behavior we must first define what it is that we are chasing. Ultimately,
electrical circuits are all about the movement of electric charge. What do we mean by charge? To answer that
question, we need to come up with a usable model of an atom, in other words, a functional description of its
internal structure. To be sure, atoms are far smaller than most people imagine. There are far more atoms in a
gallon of water than there are gallons of water in all of the oceans, lakes and rivers of planet Earth combined. It
would be pointless to ask what an atom might "look like" because its components are all smaller than the
shortest wavelengths of light that humans can see. That would be a little like asking a human what a dog whistle
sounds like, when in fact it's at a pitch that's higher than humans can hear. Ultimately though, all we really need
is a model to explain its observed behavior.

Perhaps the most prolific model in the popular imagination is the planetary model shown in Figure 2.1, so
named because it is reminiscent of simple models of our solar system. In this model, the core, or nucleus, is
drawn at the center and contains positively charged protons and non-charged neutrons. Revolving around this

30
core are negatively charged electrons, each following a nice, regular, planar path
much like a planet around the sun. Unfortunately, this model is not accurate to say
the least, although its popularity can sometimes lead to wildly erroneous and darkly
humorous conclusions. In spite of its inaccuracy, the components (nucleus, protons,
neutrons and electrons) are perfectly valid. Before we come up with a more accurate
and useful model, let's take a closer look at these items.

Unlike people, all particles of a type are indistinguishable: every proton is identical  Figure 2.1
to every other proton and every electron is identical to every other electron. The       Planetary atomic model:
number of protons determine what the element is. The simplest element, hydrogen,         Popular but sadly incorrect.
has a single proton in its nucleus. In contrast, helium has two protons in its nucleus
and copper has 29. The nucleus may also contain a number of neutrons as well (not        Image source (modified)
necessarily equal to the number of protons). In any stable atom, the number of
electrons will equal the number of protons. If they aren't the same, the atom is
called an ion (technically, a cation has fewer electrons than protons and an anion is
its opposite). With an external energy source, it is possible to separate an electron
from an atom. This leaves us with an electron and an atom that now has a net
positive charge. It is this ability to separate these particles, and thus separating
charge, that gives rise to our concept of electricity including such items as current
and voltage, as we shall see.

Most of the mass of any given atom is from the protons and neutrons. Protons and
neutrons have similar masses, about 1.67E-24 grams each. The mass of an
electron is roughly 2000 times smaller. The radius of a proton is approximately
0.87E-15 meters and the mean distance to the nearest electron is about 5.3E-11
meters. Therefore an electron is about 60,000 times farther away from the proton
than the size of said proton. To put this into perspective, that's roughly the same as
the ratio between a golf ball and a sphere with a radius of 3/4ths of a mile or 1200
meters. This would be the case for a hydrogen atom as it consists of a single proton
and electron. The magnitude of this ratio is not much different for other substances,
including things like diamond and quartz that are very hard and solid. If you think
about that for a moment, you realize that the idea of "solidity" is in some ways an
illusion because the vast majority of what we call "something" is really just empty
space (like a golf ball rattling around inside a sphere that's a mile and a half wide).
In reality, the feeling of solidity when you grab something with your hand is just the
result of the interaction of atomic forces between your hand and the object. Indeed,
if we could somehow get rid of that "empty space", we could fit a mountain inside
of a car (although it would probably require a severely upgraded suspension).

For our immediate work, perhaps the most important issue is that of charge, an
essential part of the theory of electromagnetism. It was mentioned that protons are
positively charged and electrons are negatively charged. What then is charge?
Charge is not an obvious physical attribute like someone's height or eye color. It's
closer to a behavioral characteristic. Saying a particle is charged is like saying
someone has an attractive personality. The magnitude of the charge on an electron is
the same as the magnitude of the charge on a proton. The only difference is the

31
polarity: protons are positively charged while electrons are negatively charged. An
important thing to remember is that particles with the same polarity repel each other
while opposites attract3.

Charge is measured in coulombs, named after Charles-Augustin de Coulomb a
French physicist of the eighteenth century. The charge on a single electron is tiny, a
mere 1.602E-19 coulombs. Alternately, it takes 6.242E18 electrons to create a
charge of one coulomb. More on this in a moment.

One of the major issues with the planetary model is the idea that electrons whirl          Figure 2.2
around the nucleus in stable, planet-like orbits. That's simply not true. First, the       Electron behavior versus
electron inhabits a region of 3D space and does not simply move through a plane.           migratory birds.
Second, due to the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, we can't precisely plot
the position and trajectory of a given electron. The best we can do is make a
plot of where the electron is likely to be. This is called a probability contour.
To understand this concept, imagine that you could record the position of a
specific electron relative to the nucleus at a specific time. A moment later you
record its new position, a moment after that you record the next position, and
so on for thousands of measurements. If you attempted to plot them all, you
would wind up with a cloud of dots around the nucleus. This cloud is referred
to as an orbital. You wouldn't know how the electron got from one position to
the next but you would get a general idea of where it was likely to be.
Ultimately, an orbital looks nothing like a planetary orbit.

A good analogy to an electron probability contour is the mapping of the flight of          Figure 2.3
migratory birds. For example, a certain group of Canada geese might migrate from           Electron probability contour
their summer range in the far north of Canada to their summer abode in the southern        for innermost orbital, 1s.
USA via s section of the Atlantic Flyway, perhaps through central New York State, as
shown in purple, in Figure 2.2. The flyway tells you where these birds are likely to       Image source
be found while migrating. If they are taking the route through central New York, at
some point it is likely that any particular goose in that flock will be found near the
cities of Utica, Syracuse and so forth. It is much less likely that any particular goose
from that flock will be found in Ohio or New Hampshire. Texas, of course, is right
out. The flyway gives a good bit of data regarding where these birds are likely to be
but in no way can it predict with any accuracy precisely where any individual bird
will be on a specific date, nor precisely where it will end its migration.

Returning from our avian diversion, we note that there are several potential orbitals.
Due to quantum physics, only certain orbitals are allowed. The permissible electron
energy levels are first grouped into shells, then subshells and finally orbitals. It is
important to remember that orbitals indicate the electron energy level. That is, a
higher orbital implies a higher energy level. Further, orbitals fill in first from lowest
energy level to highest energy level.

3 The obvious question might be "Why doesn't the nucleus break apart?" The answer is that
    the sub-atomic strong nuclear force has a greater effect at atomic distances than
    electromagnetism, and thus binds the protons and neutrons together in the nucleus.

32
Shells are denoted by their principal quantum number, n; 1, 2, 3, etc. The higher the
number, the more subshells it can contain. Subshells are designated by letters, the
first four being s, p, d, and f. Shell 1 contains only subshell s while shell 2 contains
subshell types s and p. Shell 3 contains subshell types s, p and d, and so on. These
subshells may also have variations within them. There is one variation on s, three
variations on p, five variations on d, etc. These variations are the orbitals and each
orbital can hold a maximum of two electrons.

Putting this all together, we find that the first shell can contain a maximum of two       Figure 2.4
electrons: two in the single s subshell orbital (1s). The second shell can contain a       A higher order electron
maximum of eight electrons: two in the s subshell (2s) plus two in each of the three       probability contour.
p subshell orbitals (2p). In like manner the third shell can contain a maximum of 18
electrons: two in 3s, six in 3p and two in each of the the five d subshell orbitals (3d).  Image source
You can condense this into a simple formula:

    Number of electrons per shell = 2n2, where n is the shell number

Figure 2.3 shows the electron probability contour of the innermost orbital, namely
1s (i.e., principle quantum number 1, subshell s). As you can see, it is spherical in
shape. The nucleus is located at the center, obscured here. All s orbitals are similarly
spherically shaped although the internals change. 1s is the lowest energy orbital.

Orbitals are not limited to simple spherical shapes. Higher order orbitals can take on
a variety of forms. Figure 2.4 shows a much more complex electron probability
contour. The nucleus is situated in the center of the concentric rings. Obviously, this
is nothing like the well-behaved elliptical orbits of planets around the sun (nor the
paths of migratory birds, unless they are very confused).

As visually interesting as these graphics are, they are cumbersome to work with.           Figure 2.5
Consequently, a more functional graphic is called for. Such a device is the Bohr           Generic Bohr model.
model, named after Danish physicist Niels Bohr. An example is shown in Figure 2.5.
                                                                                           Image source

It is important to understand that the Bohr model is an energy description of the
atom, not an attempt to mimic its physical appearance or structure. The nucleus is
placed at the center. It is surrounded by concentric rings that represent the electron
shells. The higher the number, the larger the ring and the greater the energy level. If
an electron were to move from a higher level to a lower level, the energy difference
is radiated out. This could be in the form of heat or light. This is a point worth
remembering. For example, this transition is what makes light emitting diodes
(LEDs) function. The inverse is also possible, namely that by absorbing energy, an
electron can move into a higher orbital. This is an equally powerful concept.

Using the Bohr model we can create diagrams to represent individual elements. For
example, copper has an atomic number of 29 meaning that it has 29 protons and 29
electrons. The electron shell configuration is 2-8-18-1. That is, the first three shells
are completely filled and there is a single electron in the fourth shell. The Bohr

33
model for copper would simply show four rings, the first three being filled and with
a single electron in the fourth ring. This is shown in Figure 2.6. In this version, the
individual electrons are drawn in each shell and the atomic number is indicated at
the nucleus. Again, please do not imagine this representing individual electrons
orbiting the nucleus in lanes. This is an energy level depiction.

                                                                                                                   Figure 2.6
                                                                                                                   Bohr model of copper.

                                                                                            +29

It is worth noting that a lone outer electron is only loosely bound to the nucleus thus
making the movement of charge through said material relatively easy, given the
application of some external energy source. Consequently, copper is a very good
conductor. This is a characteristic shared by common metals: they are good
conductors because they only have one or two loosely held electrons in their outer
shell. Examples include silver, gold and aluminum (one outer electron for each, all
of them being very good conductors); and iron, tin and nickel (two outer electrons
for each, and this group being not quite as conductive as those in the first group).

2.3 Charge and Current

As already noted, charge is an attractive force. It is denoted by the letter Q and has   Figure 2.7
units of coulombs. Electrons are negatively charged and protons are positively           Defining current as charge
charged. All electrons and protons exhibit the same magnitude of charge, roughly         flow through a wire.
1.602E-19 coulombs. Thus, one coulomb is equivalent to the charge exhibited by
approximately 1/1.602E-19, or 6.242E18 electrons. Further, opposite charges attract
while like charges repel, similar to the poles of a magnet.

It is possible to move charge from one point to another. The rate of charge
movement over time is called current. It is denoted by the letter I and has units of
amps (or amperes)4. One amp of current is defined as one coulomb per second.

    1 amp  1 coulomb / 1 second  (2.1)

That is, one amp can be visualized as approximately 6.242E18 electrons passing
4 I stands for Intensity (of current), and was so named by André-Marie Ampère.

34
through a wire in a period of one second. Consider Figure 2.7. Here we have a wire
with electrons flowing through it in the direction of the arrow. We cut this wire with
an imaginary plane, leaving us with the highlighted disk. Now imagine that we could
count the number of electrons passing through this disk over the course of one
second. Because we know the charge possessed by one electron, we simply multiply
the number of electrons by the charge for each to yield the total charge, and thus we
arrive at the current. As a formula:

             I = Q / t                (2.2)

    Where
    I is the current in amps,
    Q is the the charge in coulombs,
    t is the time in seconds.

A common analogy for electric current is the flow of water through a pipe or river.
Just as we can imagine water flow as "gallons or liters per minute", we imagine
electric current as "coulombs per second".

Example 2.1

         In the course of one-half second, a certain battery delivers a charge of three
         coulombs. Determine the resulting current.

                      I = Qt
                      I= 3C

                          0.5 s
                      I= 6A

Example 2.2

    A device delivers a current of 25 mA. Determine the charge transferred in
    two seconds along with the equivalent total number of electrons.

             I = Qt         from Definition 2.1, amp-seconds is coulombs
             Q = I ×t
             Q = 25 mA×2 s
             Q = 50 mC

    As one coulomb is equivalent to 6.242E18 electrons, just multiply to find
    the total number of electrons transferred.

35
           Total electrons = Q×number of electrons per coulomb
           Total electrons = 50 mC×6.242E18
           Total electrons = 3.121E17 electrons

In sum, the larger the charge transferred within a given time period, the greater the
current. Modern electrical and electronic systems might deal with currents of under a
picoamp or, at the other extreme, thousands of amps. That is an astonishing range. It
is roughly equivalent to a single drop of water dripping from a leaky faucet each
second compared to 1000 times the flow of water over Niagara Falls.

2.4 Energy and Voltage

Energy is defined as the ability to do work. It is denoted by the letter W. The basic
unit is the joule although other units are sometimes used (for example, the calorie or
the kilowatt-hour, kWh).

If we were to move a charge from one point to another (for example, separating an
electron from an atom), we would have to expend energy to do so. This is illustrated
in Figure 2.8. In this Figure, we would say that B has a higher electric potential than
A. In other words, there is a potential difference between B and A. We refer to this
change as voltage. It is denoted by the letter V (or sometimes E5) and has units of
volts, in honor of Alessandro Volta. One volt is defined as one joule per coulomb.

           1 volt  1 joule / 1 coulomb  (2.3)

As you might guess, the bigger the charge to be moved, the greater the energy                    Figure 2.8
required. Expressed as a formula,                                                                Defining voltage as work to
                                                                                                 move charge.

           V = W / Q                    (2.4)

    Where                                                                                                     B
                                                                                                    Energy
    V is the voltage in volts,

    W is the energy in joules,                                                                   A

    Q is the charge in coulombs.

Unlike current, voltage always implies two points for measurement because it
involves a difference. Often, one of the points is a common reference, such as earth
ground or a circuit ground (i.e., chassis ground). Sometimes people will refer to a
point in a circuit as having a certain voltage, as in "point X is 12 volts". Although
common in use, this is somewhat sloppy and not strictly correct. It is important to
always remember that this value is relative to some reference point. As a general
rule, a voltage will be denoted using the two points as subscripts, for example, VAB,
that is, the voltage at point A relative to point B. If only a single subscript is used, as

5 E is used for voltage sources such as batteries. It is short for EMF, or electromotive force.

36
in VA, then the second, or reference, point is assumed to be the system common or
ground. In this case, we're referring to the voltage at point A relative to the system
common point. Finally, by definition, VAB = VA - VB, as they have the same reference.

Example 2.3

         100 joules are expended to move a 20 coulomb charge from point A to point
         B. Determine the resulting voltage.

                      V BA = WQ
                     V BA = 100 J 20C
                     V BA = 5 V

Note that it is possible for a voltage to be negative. This simply means that the
potential at the point of interest is less than that of the reference point. In Example
2.3 we discovered that point B is five volts above point A. We could just as easily
say that point A is five volts below point B, or VAB = -5 V. Further, we can state the
difference in terms of the individual ground-referenced voltages, or VBA = VB - VA.

Static Electricity and ESD

While it is obviously true that higher voltages imply higher associated energies
(charge being held constant), it is not true that a particularly high voltage is
necessarily lethal. This is because a very high voltage can be achieved by moving a
small charge with only modest energy input. A good example of this is static
electricity, so called because it is not associated with a moving current.

Static electricity is commonly generated through the triboelectric effect which
involves the transfer of electrons from one material to another via physical contact
such as rubbing or scraping. If said materials are good electrical insulators, charges
will remain on the materials and can build to very high levels, creating a large
voltage. Many plastics, such as polystyrene and polyester, are good candidates. The
effect can be noticed with certain fabrics, especially under low humidity. For
example, removing a polyester fleece pullover or jacket can elicit a certain crackling
sound. The sliding of the fleece builds up the charge and eventually the voltage will
be become so large that it will arc through the air to surrounding objects which have
a lower voltage. This happens quickly over many parts of the garment, each crackle
being an individual arc. In fact, if tried in darkness, it is possible to see a cascade of
small sparks. This is the same phenomenon that causes a spark when you touch a car
after sliding off the seat on a cold and dry winter's day, or a small shock when you
touch an object (or another person) after walking across a carpet in a dry library.

37
Anyone who has opened a box filled with polystyrene packing peanuts can                       Figure 2.9
attest to the troublesome nature of the triboelectric effect, as the very light               Triboelectric effect and static
peanuts can easily adhere to other objects due to the electric charge generated               electricity: Cat fur meets
through their displacement. No amount of manic brushing or throwing of the                    polystyrene. Image source.
pieces will reduce the effect and may, in fact, make it worse. A simple
solution in some instances is to spray a fine mist of water on the packing
peanuts as the water will provide a conduction path, draining off the
charges. Of course, this will not be appropriate in all situations, particularly
in the one shown in Figure 2.9. In the prior examples, the static voltage
may be on the order of a few thousand volts but the associated energy may
be just a few microjoules. In spite of the high voltage, this is not enough to
kill someone. On the other hand, the same voltage achieved with a much
higher charge and energy could be lethal.

Beyond its simple inconvenience and inadvertent feline entertainment capabilities,
high static potential can damage sensitive electronic devices. Care must be taken
to prevent the accidental buildup of damaging charges. In the electronics industry
this is commonly referred to as ESD, or electrostatic discharge. Steps to reduce
ESD include humidity control and the use of conductive devices such as resistive
wrist straps for technicians to continually bleed off the charges, thus preventing
the creation of a high static potential.

The Height Analogy

Just as the flow of water can be seen as an analogy for electrical current, a                 Figure 2.10
serviceable analogy for voltage involves pressure or height. Indeed, sometimes                Understanding voltage:
voltage is referred to as "electrical pressure". The height analogy ties together the         David Hume does a header.
concepts of voltage and energy. In this analogy, height corresponds to voltage and
mass corresponds to charge.

To begin, we note that there are two kinds of energy: kinetic energy, or energy of
motion; and potential energy, or energy by virtue of position. Potential energy is the
product of mass, gravity and height, or w = mgh. Keeping gravity equal, we see that
the more mass something has or the higher up it is, the greater its potential energy.
We might think of potential energy as the object's potential to inflict damage when
released.

To illustrate, we shall call upon 18th century Scottish philosopher and noted soccer
fan6, David Hume. If a soccer ball is held stationary over Mr. Hume's head, as shown
in Figure 2.10, the ball has energy by virtue of its position. Releasing the ball from
the position shown will scarcely bother Mr. Hume as there is little energy associated
with this position relative to the top of his noggin. In fact, he would be hard pressed
to head the ball to another player. If, on the other hand, the ball were held

6 Hume, author of An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, died in 1776. The
    modern game of soccer was established in 1863. Let's not let that deter our own inquiry.

38
considerably higher, its potential energy would be much greater. Therefore, the
impact on Mr. Hume's head would be increased dramatically and he would have
little difficulty heading the ball down field (i.e., the transformation of potential
energy into kinetic energy), although the chances of him gaining a concussion are
greatly increased.

Thus, we note that the height of the ball gives us some insight into its potential
energy, although these terms are not synonymous. That is to say, if, instead of a
soccer ball, we had used a ping-pong ball, even when dropped from an extreme
height, the chances of a concussion are non-existent7. On the other hand, if the ball
had been replaced with one made of solid iron, a drop from even a modest height
could render our most excellent philosopher seriously dead. So it is with voltage. If
the charge associated with the voltage is small, even a relatively high voltage will
not be lethal (as in the case of simple static electricity on clothing), however, if
associated with a sufficiently large charge, a much lower voltage can be deadly.

2.5 Power and Efficiency

The terms power and energy are often used incorrectly as synonyms. Although
related, they are not the same thing. As already mentioned, energy is the ability to do
work. In contrast, power is the rate of energy usage. Power is denoted by the letter P
and has units of watts, although other units are sometimes used such as the
horsepower (1 horsepower  746 watts). One watt is defined as one joule of energy
consumed per second.

               1 watt  1 joule / 1 second  (2.5)

As a formula,

               P = W / t                   (2.6)

Where
P is the power in watts,
W is the energy in joules,
t is the time in seconds.

To better understand the concept, consider for a moment a delicious peanut butter
and banana sandwich. This sandwich contains a certain number of food calories, let's
say 300 in total. A food calorie refers to a certain amount of energy that humans can
extract from an item of food. That energy enables us to do some manner of work
such as walking, swimming or just breathing. The sandwich can be seen as an
energy storage medium, a battery for biological units called humans. The question

7 The construction of the referred sentence owes a certain debt to the writing style of Mr.
    Hume.

39
is, what do we do with the energy, and more to the point, how fast do we use it?
For example, that sandwich might be sufficient to allow someone to run a 5k (3.1
mile) road race in 17 minutes. In contrast, it also might be sufficient to allow that
same person to watch television for three hours. It's the same amount of energy
being used, it's just being used at a much faster rate in the former case. That rate is
power. The 5k runner has a much higher power output than the TV watcher.

Example 2.4

    100 joules are consumed by a device in 0.1 seconds. Determine the power in
    watts and in horsepower.

                P = Wt
                P = 100 J

                      0.1 s
                P = 1000 W

    As one horsepower is approximately 746 watts, this is equivalent to

                Php = PW 746 W/hp
                Php = 1000 W 746 W/hp
                Php = 1.34 hp

Power can also be found by multiplying a current by the associated voltage. To
begin, we note the definitions of current and voltage, Equations 2.2 and 2.4
respectively, and then combine them.

             I = Qt
            V=W

                  Q
    I ×V = Qt × WQ = Wt

From equation 2.6, we know that P = W/t, thus P = IV. This is known as power law.

    P = I ×V                    (2.7)

    Where
    P is the power in watts,
    I is the current in amps,
    V is the voltage in volts.

40
Example 2.5

         If a 9 volt battery delivers a current of 0.1 amps, determine the power
         delivered in watts.

            P = I ×V
            P = 0.1 amps × 9 volts
            P = 0.9 W

Efficiency

Efficiency is the ratio of useful output power to applied power expressed as a
percentage. It is denoted by the Greek letter  (eta) and is always less than 100%.
Expressed as a formula,

              = Pout ×100 %         (2.8)
                   P in

    Where                                                                           Figure 2.11
     is the efficiency in percent,                                                  Basic concept of efficiency.
    Pout is the output power,
    Pin is the input power.

Generally speaking, the higher the efficiency, the better. This implies less                 Useful
waste. In other words, if a system is 30% efficient, then 70% of the input Input             Output
power is wasted, whereas if a system is 99% efficient, then only 1% of the
input power is wasted. The concept is illustrated graphically in Figure 2.11.       Waste
In most systems, waste power turns into heat which is not a desired
commodity, and in fact often reduces the lifespan of electrical components.

Example 2.6

    If a device draws 200 watts of power and has a useful output of 120 watts,
    determine the efficiency.

                 = Pout × 100 %
                     P in

                 = 120 W 200 W × 100 %
                 = 60%

    In this case, the device is wasting 40% of the input power, or 80 watts.

41
Example 2.7

         An audio amplifier has a maximum rated output of 100 watts to a
         loudspeaker. If it exhibits an efficiency of 70%, determine the input power
         required and the amount of power wasted.

                      = Pout × 100 %
                           P in

                      Pin = Pout  × 100%
                      Pin = 100 W 70 % × 100 %
                      Pin = 142.9 watts

         As 142.9 watts are drawn by the amplifier and only 100 watts are delivered
         to the loudspeaker, then the difference, or 42.9 watts, is wasted power (most
         likely just making the amplifier hot).

2.6 Energy Cost and Battery Life

As we have seen, knowing the voltage and current demands of a given device allows
us to determine its power rating and energy consumption. The next steps are to
determine the cost of operating a device and, if it's battery powered, how long the
device will last before needing new batteries.

Computing Energy Cost

Once we know the power drawn by the device and for how long it will be used, the
cost to operate a device can be determined given the per unit cost of energy. In spite
of the fact that many people refer to their local electricity supplier as "the power
company", we do not buy "power", per se. Rather, we are billed for energy.
Although it would be possible to determine the cost per joule (or more practically,
per megajoule), suppliers normally bill based on kilowatt-hours, or kWh, the product
of the power and time8. This unit is used because most residential and commercial
devices and appliances are rated in terms of power consumption in watts.
Multiplying the power consumption in watts by the length of time the device is used
in hours yields a watt-hour value. This is then scaled by a factor of one thousand to
arrive at kWh. For example, a 1500 watt toaster oven used for 30 minutes (i.e., 0.5
hours) yields 750 watt-hours, or 0.75 kWh. Finally, knowing the per kWh cost, a
simple multiplication yields the cost of electricity. Thus, if the utility charges 10

8 Remember, power is the rate of energy usage per unit time, and thus multiplying power
    by time yields energy. One kWh is approximately equal to 3.6 megajoules.

42
cents per kWh, then the cost to run that toaster oven is 7.5 cents. If it is used for a
full hour then it costs 15 cents, and so on.

To put usage in perspective, a typical home in the USA or Canada uses about 900
kWh per month while households in many countries in Europe might use one half to
one quarter of that amount. Global electricity generation is around 25 million
gigawatt hours per year. Typical electricity rates in the USA are between ten and
twenty cents per kWh, depending on geographic region and sector (e.g., residential
or commercial).

Example 2.8

         A 100 watt incandescent light bulb is left on for 24 hours. If the cost of
         electricity is 15 cents per kWh, determine the cost to run the light.

                     Cost = P× t × rate
                     Cost = 100 W × 24 hours × 0.15 $/kWh
                     Cost = $ 0.36

At this point, it should be obvious that the more efficient a device is, the less
expensive it will be to run. In fact, it is quite possible that in the long run, a device
that is more expensive than a similar, though less efficient, device may be
considerably less expensive to use over the course of its lifespan. A good example is
a comparison between an ordinary incandescent light bub and an LED light. LED
lighting can be an order of magnitude more efficient than incandescent lighting.
Indeed, incandescent bulbs may convert less than five percent of their input into
usable light output, the remaining 95 percent just turning into heat. While they are
less expensive to purchase initially, their operating cost is much higher. A proper
way to compare lights is to examine their light output in lumens, not their power
consumption. For example, a 60 watt incandescent light produces about 800 lumens
of illumination. That same level of illumination can be obtained with an LED
drawing just 9 watts. Further, typically LED lights last ten to twenty times longer
than incandescent bulbs.

This will be illustrated in the next example.

Example 2.9

         A certain 14 watt LED light produces the same illumination as a 75 watt
         incandescent light bulb. Assume the LED costs $11 and has an expected life
         of 15,000 hours. The incandescent costs 50 cents each and has an expected
         life of 1000 hours. If the cost of electricity is 12 cents per kWh, determine
         the cost to run each version for 15,000 hours.

43
    First, it should be noted that 15 incandescent bulbs will be needed. At 50
    cents each, that's $7.50 for the bulbs. The cost to run them is,

                Cost = P× t × rate
                Cost = 75W × 15000 hours × 0.12 $/kWh
                Cost = $135.00

    The total is $ 142.50. Now for the single LED required:

                Cost = P× t × rate
                Cost = 14W × 15000 hours × 0.12 $/kWh
                Cost = $ 25.20

    The total is $36.20, a considerable savings, not to mention other positive
    factors including only having to change the light once instead of fifteen
    times; a considerable reduction in wasted energy, thus lowering demand and
    environmental impact; and finally, a reduction in burned out light bulbs for a
    further lowering of environmental impact (waste stream reduction).

Batteries

A battery is a device used to store electrical energy, generally in the form of a
chemical cell. Ideally, it presents a constant voltage, its current varying according to
what it drives. In reality, as the battery is used, its voltage will begin to decrease.
Eventually, the energy stored in the battery will be exhausted and its voltage will
drop to zero. The storage capacity of a battery is measured in amp-hours, Ah (or
milliamp-hours, mAh, for smaller batteries). All other factors being equal, the
battery with the higher amp-hour rating will last longer before being depleted. This
is true for the same size of battery using different compositions (e.g., zinc-carbon
versus alkaline), as well as batteries of different physical sizes but having the same
voltage. For example, all AAA, AA, C and D cell batteries have a nominal voltage of
1.5 volts. If they are all of the same type, such as alkaline, then the immediate
practical difference is that the larger the physical size, the greater its energy storage,
and thus the longer it will last.

Over a modest range of currents, the expected lifespan of a battery can be computed
based on its amp-hour rating and the current drawn from it.

           Battery life  amp-hour rating / current draw  (2.9)

This equation is best used as a rough guide. If the current draw is considerably
higher than the current at which the battery was tested, the predicted lifespan will be
overly optimistic. On the other hand, if the current draw is considerably lower, it is
likely that the battery will last longer than predicted.

44
The maximum current output of a battery is likewise limited. If such were not the
case, we might expect even very small batteries to produce phenomenally large
currents for very shorts periods of time. This is not the case.
A graph of discharge curves at various load currents is shown in Figure 2.12. Notice
how the battery voltage begins at the rated 1.5 volts and then begins to fall. After a
certain point, the rate of decrease accelerates and "drops off of a cliff". The actual
service life will also be application dependent in that some devices can tolerate a
lower voltage than others. For example, an old-fashioned flashlight will still work
with largely depleted batteries, it simply won't be that bright. If we were to consider
75% of rated voltage as the useful lower limit (a little over 1.1 volts), we see that at
a 50 mA draw, the battery will last around 18 hours, achieving about 900 mAh. At
100 mA, it will last around 7 hours, yielding 700 mAh. If we used 1.0 volts as our
lower usable limit, we would arrive at 1.05 Ah and 910 mAh, respectively.

                                                                                                                   Figure 2.12
                                                                                                                   Battery discharge curves for
                                                                                                                   various load currents at room
                                                                                                                   temperature.
                                                                                                                                Courtesy of Duracell

Example 2.10

         A certain battery is rated at 10 Ah. Approximately how long will it last with
         a 0.5 amp draw?

                      Lifespan  AhI
                      Lifespan  10 Ah

                                    500 mA
                      Lifespan  20 hours

45
Remember, 20 hours is only an approximation. For a more accurate rendering,
consider the following example.
Example 2.11

         Using the graph of Figure 2.12, determine the expected lifespan with a 100
         milliamp draw for a lower voltage limit of 1.2 volts. Also determine the
         effective amp-hour rating at this point.
         The 50 mA curve (purple) passes through 1.2 volts at approximately 5 hours.
         This is the expected lifespan. The corresponding amp-hour rating is

                      Ah I ×t
                      Ah 50 mA×5 hours
                      Ah 250 mAh

Batteries also tend to show decreased performance with reductions in temperature.
This is shown in Figure 2.13. For this particular battery, the capacity at freezing
(0°C) is roughly half of what it is at room temperature (21°C). Peak current capacity
may also be reduced with temperature. This is true of many kinds of batteries,
including large 12 volt automotive batteries. This is a major reason why cars are
often much more difficult to start on very cold days; their current capacity is
reduced, thereby reducing the output of the starter motor.

                                                                                                                   Figure 2.13
                                                                                                                   Battery discharge curves for
                                                                                                                   different temperatures.
                                                                                                                                Courtesy of Duracell

46
A table of typical amp hour ratings for common battery sizes is shown in Figure
2.14. These values are appropriate for good quality alkaline batteries. Rechargeable
NiMH (nickel-metal hydride) would be around the same. Remember, these are just
approximations.

    Battery Size  Capacity (mAh)                                                           Figure 2.14
        AAA              1000                                                              Typical battery capacities.
          AA             2500
           C             5000
           D            10000
        9 Volt            500

2.7 Resistance and Conductance

We have seen that both current and voltage deal with the movement of charge.
Consequently, in any electrical system, voltage and current are interrelated. Let us
consider the most simple case. This would involve a single voltage source, such as a
battery, driving a single, homogeneous item such as a length of wire or a block of a
given material. The physical characteristics of this item will dictate how much
current will flow. In general terms,

    Effect = Cause Oppostion

In this case the cause is the voltage source and the effect is the resulting current. The
opposition is the characteristic of the item in question, in other words, its ability to
restrict current flow. We call this characteristic resistance. In other words, resistance
is a measure of how difficult it is to establish a flow of current (i.e., "resistance to
current flow") under a given set of circumstances. It is denoted by the letter R and
has units of ohms, in honor of Georg Ohm, a researcher from the early 1800s. The
unit is denoted by the capital Greek letter omega, .

Sometimes it is more convenient to use the inverse view of this phenomenon, and
instead of referring to how difficult it is to establish a current, we would be
interested in how easy it is to establish a current. This is called conductance and it is
the reciprocal of resistance. Conductance is denoted by the letter G and has units of
siemens, named after Werner von Siemens. The unit is abbreviated as S.

    R = 1G                        (2.10)
    G=1

         R

47
In this simple scenario, resistance is a function of the material the current is passing   Figure 2.15
through along with its shape. This is illustrated in Figure 2.15 where the arrow           Defining resistance.
shows the direction of current flow. An obvious question is "What is this block
made of?" It should come as no surprise that the material chosen has a great                                      l
impact on the current. We have already seen that metals such as copper are good                   w
conductors of electricity. Other materials, such as certain plastics and ceramics,         h
are not. These materials are referred to as insulators.

The measure of a material's inherent and general ability to restrict current flow is
called resistivity. Resistivity is denoted by the Greek letter  (rho). All other
factors being equal, the higher the resistivity, the greater will be the resistance.
Further, the greater the length of the material that the current must pass through, the
greater the resistance. Finally, as the surface area of the cross section (i.e, the face)
grows, the resistance decreases. Expressed as a formula

    R =l                                (2.11)
          A

    Where
    R is the resistance in ohms,
     is the resistivity,
    l is the length of the material,
    A is area of the face (h times w).

Resistivity is often specified in ohm-centimeters with the length and area similarly
specified in centimeters and square centimeters, respectively. A table of resistivity
values for a variety of materials is shown in Figure 2.16. Note that resistivity is not
necessarily constant across temperature. Indeed, this change can be exploited as a
means of measuring temperature. In other applications, we might need it to be as
stable as possible across temperature. This need led to the creation of the alloys
Constantan and Manganin in the late 1800s which exhibit very high stability across
temperature.

From this table we can see that silver has lower resistivity than copper which in turn
is lower than gold. This means that if we made identically sized wires of these three
materials, the silver version would have the least resistance and gold the highest.
Why then, do audio and video cables often feature gold plating? Certainly, it isn't
due to lower resistivity and enhanced conductivity. The reason is that gold is a noble
metal, meaning that it does not tarnish. In contrast, the surface of both silver and
copper will oxidize, creating a patina (the dark "stain" noticeable on old silver and
copper implements). The oxide will create a high resistance layer and reduce the
integrity of the connection.

It is important to note that Formula 2.11 does not include a term for the mass of the
material. It is only concerned with the shape of the item. This is an important
distinction. If we were to alter the mass but keep the ratio of the length versus the

48
area the same, the resulting resistance would be unchanged. In general, the increase
in mass by itself does not necessarily alter the resistance but it may have an impact
on the power handling capability of the device.

      Material            Resistivity   Temperature                                        Figure 2.16
                      (·cm) at 20 °C     coefficient                                       Resistivity values for various
        Silver                              (K-1)                                          materials.
        Copper            1.59×10-6         0.0038
         Gold             1.68×10-6        0.00404                                         Figure 2.17
     Aluminium            2.44×10-6         0.0034                                         Resistance will change due to
                          2.65×10-6         0.0039                                         to altering area and length
         Zinc             5.90×10-6         0.0037                                         with mass unchanged.
        Nickel            6.99×10-6          0.006
          Iron             9.7×10-6          0.005
       Platinum           1.06×10-5        0.00392
                          1.09×10-5         0.0045
          Tin             4.20×10-5         0.0038
       Titanium           4.82×10-5       0.000002
      Manganin            4.90×10-5       0.000008
     Constantan           6.90×10-5        0.00094
    Stainless steel       1.10×10-4         0.0004
      Nichrome        5×10-4 to 8×10-3     -0.0005
Carbon (amorphous)         6.4×104          -0.075
        Silicon       1×1013 to 1×1017

         Glass              1×1014
 Carbon (diamond)           1×1015
                         1011 to 1017
     Hard rubber            1×1023
          Air         1×1025 to 1×1027
         PET

        Teflon

In contrast, if we take that that original mass and reshape it, or just apply the current
to a difference face, such that the effective surface area and length change, then the
resulting resistance will also change. This is illustrated in Figure 2.17. Here we have
taken the item shown in Figure 2.15 and directed the current flow from top to
bottom rather than through the side. In this orientation, the surface area is much
increased and the length through which the current must travel is greatly reduced.

49
Consequently, the effective resistance in this orientation will be considerably less
than that seen in the original.

Example 2.12

         A certain material has a resistivity of 0.2 ohm-centimeters. Determine the
         resistance of a piece that is 0.3 cm wide, 0.5 cm high and 4 cm long.

                      A = h× w
                      A =0.5 cm×0.3 cm
                      A =0.15 cm2
                      R = l

                           A
                      R = 0.15cm2 0.2 cm×4 cm
                      R =5.333

For our next example, let's consider a spool of wire. In many cases we treat wire
ideally, as if it has no resistance. While this can be a good approximation in many
instances, especially with relatively short runs of wire, such is not always the case.

Example 2.13

         A certain gauge of copper wire has a diameter of 0.6 mm. Determine the
         resistance if the spool is 200 meters long.

         The table of Figure 2.16 indicates that the resistivity of copper is 1.68E-6
         ohm-centimeters. The trick here is that we must keep the units consistent. As
         there are 100 centimeters to the meter, the length is 200 meters times 100, or
         20,000 centimeters (i.e., 20E3). Given that there are 10 millimeters to the
         centimeter, the diameter must be decreased by a factor of ten, yielding a
         diameter of 0.06 cm and thus a radius of 0.03 cm.

                      A =  r2

                                                                    2

                      A =  (0.03cm)
                      A = 2.83E-3 cm2

                      R = l
                           A

                      R = 2.83E-3cm2 1.68E-6cm×20E3 cm
                      R =11.9 

50
The amount of resistance seen in Example 2.13 would be considered excessive if the
item to be connected is something as simple as a loudspeaker, which typically would
be around 8 . And while no one would likely need 200 meters of cable to connect a
loudspeaker in their home, that sort of distance would be unremarkable in a large
stadium or airport terminal. Don't forget, we'd need wire to and from the
loudspeaker, achieving a total separation of 100 meters at most.

Various thicknesses of cables and wires are used for a wide variety of purposes. To
make this easier, wire thicknesses have been standardized. The most common
standard in North America is the American Wire Gauge, or AWG. This is a non-
metric specification with origins in the mid nineteenth century. The larger the gauge
number, the smaller the wire diameter, and the less current it safely can carry. To put
the gauge numbers in perspective, typical small home appliances use 16 or 18 gauge
wire, basic home wiring uses 12 gauge (with a 20 amp circuit breaker), and hook-up
wire used in an electrical circuits or electronics laboratory solderless breadboard is
commonly 22 or 24 gauge.

For general purpose wiring, copper is by far the most common metal used because it
is highly conductive and relatively inexpensive. Some other metals are used in
special cases, for instance, aluminum is used for long distance power transmission
lines.

      AWG             Diameter   Resistance/length                                       Figure 2.18
                                                                                         AWG wire data for copper
    0000 (4/0)  (in)     (mm)    (/km) (/1000ft)                                         conductors.
     00 (2/0)
      0 (1/0)   0.4600   11.684  0.1608  0.04901

         2      0.3648   9.266   0.2557  0.07793
         4
         6      0.3249   8.251   0.3224  0.09827
         8
        10      0.2576   6.544   0.5127  0.1563
        12
        14      0.2043   5.189   0.8152  0.2485
        16
        18      0.1620   4.115   1.296   0.3951
        20
        22      0.1285   3.264   2.061   0.6282
        24
        26      0.1019   2.588   3.277   0.9989
        32
        40      0.0808   2.053   5.211   1.588

                0.0641   1.628   8.286   2.525

                0.0508   1.291   13.17   4.016

                0.0403   1.024   20.95   6.385

                0.0320   0.812   33.31   10.15

                0.0253   0.644   52.96   16.14

                0.0201   0.511   84.22   25.67

                0.0159   0.405   133.9   40.81

                0.00795  0.202   538.3   164.1

                0.00314 0.0799   3441    1049

51
A table of gauge sizes and associated parameters is shown in Figure 2.18. This table
assumes copper is being used for the wire. Note that as the diameter of the wire
decreases, the amount of resistance for a particular length increases, as expected
from Equation 2.11.

Using this table we can perform a quick crosscheck of Example 2.13. The wire
diameter used in that example was 0.6 mm which is just a little smaller than AWG 22
as listed in the table. Further, #22 wire is listed as having a resistance of
approximately 53  per km. For 200 meters, as used in the example problem, this
works out to 10.6 . As #22 wire is slightly larger in diameter, we expect it to show
slightly less resistance than the calculated value of 11.9 , which it does.

While it may not be immediately apparent, gauge numbers proceed in a logarithmic
fashion based on diameter. Stepping up one gauge number (e.g., from #10 to #11)
decreases the diameter by a factor of approximately 0.89. As resistance is inversely
proportional to the square of the diameter (i.e., the area), the resistance increases by
over 25%. Even numbered sizes are particularly common in use and a jump to the
next higher even gauge number (e.g., #18 to #20) produces a resistance increase of
nearly 60%.

Resistors and the Resistor Color Code

Resistors are devices used to control the currents and voltages in a circuit. They are
available in many shapes and sizes, and are normally designed to maintain stable
ohmic values in spite of environmental changes such as temperature and humidity. A
sample of different resistor styles is shown in Figure 2.19. As a general rule, the
larger the resistor, the more power it can handle. At the back of the figure is a large
ceramic power resistor using a rectangular aluminum housing. This device is rated
for 200 watts of dissipation. Immediately in front and to the right of it are several
smaller ceramic power resistors with ratings in the 5 to 20 watt range. Along the left
side is a set of carbon composition and carbon film resistors ranging from 1 watt
down to one-tenth watt in dissipation. Toward the center is a multi-lead chip resistor
that contains several resistors in one package. With few exceptions, all of these items
are classified as "through-hole" components, that is, their leads are designed to go
through pre-drilled holes in a printed circuit board. These are also the most
commonly used components in an electrical lab as the leads fit into solderless
breadboards and the components are a convenient size.

52
                                                                                        Figure 2.19
                                                                                        A variety of different resistors.

With the increasing desire to shrink components, modern production designs              Figure 2.20
use surface mounting techniques in place of through-hole construction. At the           Close up of a surface mount
bottom-center is a small dot which is, in fact, a surface mount resistor capable        resistor.
of ½ watt of power dissipation. A close-up is shown in Figure 2.20. Obviously,
these devices are too small to be practical to use without special equipment.           Figure 2.21
                                                                                        Current-voltage plot of two
Resistors are linear bilateral devices. Being linear, their current-voltage             resistors.
relation can be drawn as a straight line. Bilateral means that the polarity of
voltage or direction of current will not matter. In other words, unlike a battery,                  I
these devices cannot be inserted into a circuit backwards because either
orientation works the same way. If the horizontal axis is voltage and the vertical                                            V
is current, then the slope of the line yields the conductance. Thus, the steeper
the line, the lower its resistance. This is illustrated in Figure 2.21.                             -I

Not all electrical components are linear and bilateral. A good example is the

semiconductor diode, a commonly used device in electronic systems. The

current-voltage plot of a diode is shown in Figure 2.22 for comparison.

Note that the plot is not a simple straight line, thus it is not linear. Further,   -V

the first and third quadrant responses are wildly different, indicating that

polarity is of utmost importance. Clearly, it matters which way these kinds

of devices are inserted into a circuit.

53
Resistors are available in standardized ohmic values and at standardized power            Figure 2.22
ratings (see Appendix A). Along with their resistance value, resistors also have a        Current-voltage plot of a
specified tolerance. This specifies an allowable range of variation of the stated value.  diode: neither linear nor
For example, a 220 ohm resistor may have a tolerance of 10%. This means that the          bilateral.
actual value of any given specimen from a box of these resistors may be off of the
nameplate or nominal value by 10% or 22 ohms. Thus, any particular resistor                                    I
might be as high as 242 ohms or as low as 198 ohms.

General purpose resistors use a color code to denote their value and tolerance.                       V
Typically, this will involve four color stripes: two for the precision/mantissa, one -V   -I
for the power of ten, and the fourth to indicate the tolerance. For higher precision,
a five stripe version may be used with the first three denoting the precision/
mantissa. Alternately, high precision resistors may have their nominal value
printed directly on them. Refer to Figure 2.23 for an example of the basic variety.

The first two bands, here yellow and violet, indicate the precision or leading digits.    Figure 2.23
The third band, here orange, indicates the power of ten or "number of zeroes" to          Example of basic four stripe
add. The fourth band, silver in this example, indicates the tolerance. Note that the      resistor color code.
fourth band is spaced away from the others to avoid accidentally reversing the order.

The color code is shown in Figure 2.24. To assist in remembering the sequence, a
number of mnemonic aids have been used, the first letter of each word starting with
the same letter as the corresponding color. One example is the "Picnic Basket
Mnemonic" which is: Black Bears Robbed Our Yummy Goodies Beating Various
Gray Wolves. Another possibility is to note that the middle section follows a
rainbow with black and white at the extreme ends.

    Color        Numeral

    Black        0

    Brown        1

           Red   2                                                                        Figure 2.24
                                                                                          Resistor color code.
    Orange       3

    Yellow       4

    Green        5

           Blue  6

    Violet       7

           Gray  8

    White        9

          For small resistor values
    If the multiplier band is gold then
    divide by10; if silver, divide by 100.

54
The tolerance band colors are as follows: For basic parts silver is ±10% and gold is
±5%. If the fourth band is omitted, this indicates a tolerance of ±20%, although it is
seldom used in modern designs. For precision parts some colors are reused but
follow the color code numerals: Brown is ±1% tolerance and red is ±2% tolerance.
Tighter tolerances are also available. Sometimes an extra band is added that
indicates a reliability rating or temperature coefficient. In such cases, it is best to
refer to the manufacturer's data sheets for details. We will not pursue these further.

Example 2.14

         Determine the nominal, maximum and minimum acceptable resistance
         values for the resistor pictured in Figure 2.17.

         The colors are yellow-violet-orange. This translates to 4, 7 and 3. The value
         is "47 with 3 zeroes", or 47000 ohms. The silver fourth band indicates 10%
         tolerance. Thus, the resistor pictured is nominally 47 k with ±10%
         variation around the nominal value being acceptable. The tolerance yields
         ±4.7 k, so the acceptable range is from 42.3 k to 51.7 k.

Example 2.15

         A precision resistor has a color code of orange-blue-green-brown-brown.
         Determine its value and acceptable range.

         The final band indicates that this is a ±1% tolerance component. The first
         four colors translate to 3, 6, 5 and 1. The value is "365 with 1 zero", and
         thus 3650 ohms, or 3.65 k. The allowable range is 3.65 k ± 36.5 .

Example 2.16

         Determine the nominal value and tolerance of a resistor with the color code
         green-blue-gold-silver.

         The first two colors translate to 5 and 6. Gold in the third band means
         "multiply by 0.1". The final band indicates that this is a ±10% tolerance
         component. Therefore, nominal value is 5.6 . The allowable range is 5.6 
         ± 0.56 .

55
An example of a resistor data sheet is shown in Figure 2.25. This data sheet is for a    Figure 2.25
series of surface mount chip resistors. The available tolerance grades range from        Example resistor data sheet.
0.5% to 20%. Also, for each variant there are two temperature coefficients available     Courtesy of Stackpole Electronics
with the most stable being 100 ppm/°C (ppm is short for "parts per million", thus
100 ppm is equivalent to 0.01%). Note that these devices are too small to use the
resistor color code. Instead, a numeric code is printed directly on them that follows
the rules for color bands, meaning that the final digit is the multiplier. Thus "150"
is 15  (1-5 with no zeroes). The exception is very small values where the letter
"R" is used in place of a decimal point. Consequently, "2R4" is 2.4 .

A particularly important characteristic of most electronic devices is their power
handling capacity. For this series there are several variations with power handling
from 0.1 watts to 1.5 watts, and maximum working voltages up to 500 volts. Power
handling is also a function of ambient temperature. In general, devices have a
maximum internal temperature that they can reach before they are damaged. Control
of heat tends to be a major issue in many system designs. If the ambient temperature
increases, there is less "headroom" for the device's temperature rise, and thus the
device will not be able to dissipate as much power. This is illustrated in the graph of
Figure 2.26.

56
Note how the power dissipation is constant at temperatures at and below 70 °C. This
temperature is considered the maximum normal operating temperature for this
device and the power dissipation at this temperature is the one quoted in the data
sheet. If the device is operated in a warmer environment, the power dissipation is
derated by the percentage given in the graph. For example, at 100 °C the dissipation
is only about 65% of the nominal rating. Of particular importance, at 155 °C the
device can no longer dissipate any power, and therefore this temperature serves as
the absolute ceiling. After all, a resistor that cannot dissipate any power is a resistor
that cannot have any current through it or voltage across it without burning up. It is
essentially non-functional.

                                                                                                                   Figure 2.26
                                                                                                                   Resistor power derating graph.
                                                                                                                                Courtesy of Stackpole Electronics

Of course, just like a skillet on a stove, these devices do not heat up instantly, that is,
they exhibit a thermal time constant. They take a certain amount of time to heat (and
also to cool). For short periods, devices can handle considerably more power than
their long term rating. The graph of Figure 2.27, shows the power dissipation for
single pulses. In some cases, these resistors can handle powers of an order of
magnitude greater. For example, consider the type RPC0402 (bottom-most line).
From the data sheet of Figure 2.25 this device is specified as having a long term
rating of 0.2 watts. In contrast, the graph of Figure 2.27 shows it is capable of
withstanding a single pulse of greater than 20 watts for 100 microseconds, just under
10 watts for a millisecond pulse and roughly 2 watts for a one-tenth second pulse.

57
                                                                                         Figure 2.27
                                                                                         Pulse power dissipation.
                                                                                         Courtesy of Stackpole Electronics

Other Resistive Devices

Along with standard fixed resistors, there are several other kinds of resistive devices
that have been designed to be sensitive to changes in their environment. Thus, they
can serve as sensors because as their resistance changes, it impacts the flow of
current and the resulting voltage. We will look at examples of this in upcoming
work. Some of the environmental inputs include temperature, force and light levels.

Force Sensing Resistor (FSR)

The force sensing resistor consists of two layers of material with a nominal             Figure 2.28
separation distance. It is presented as a flat membrane that is usually round or         A force sensing resistor (FSR).
rectangular, and perhaps with an adhesive backing. An example of an FSR is shown
in Figure 2.28. With no force applied, the device shows an extremely high
resistance, well into the megohms. As force is applied to the surface, the two layers
come into better contact which decreases the net resistance. This is borne out in the
graph of Figure 2.29. The graph shows roughly a straight line response between
resistance and force when plotted on a log-log scale. At the highest force levels, the
resistance may drop to just a few hundred ohms.

58
                                                                                         Figure 2.29
                                                                                         FSR response curve.
                                                                                         Courtesy of Interlink Electronics

Photoresistor

As their name implies, photoresistors are sensitive to changes in light level. They      Figure 2.30
are also called LDRs, short for Light Dependent Resistor. Different materials may        A photoresitor, or LDR.
be used in their construction, but the most common is cadmium sulfide, CdS. As a
consequence, photoresistors are sometimes generically referred to as "CdS cells".

A photoresistor is shown in Figure 2.30 along with its corresponding resistance
graph in Figure 2.31. In total darkness the device exhibits a very high resistance. As
light levels increase, the resistance decreases. As with the FSR, we see an reverse
relation between the resistance and the environmental factor: as the environmental
input increases (force, light level), the resistance does the opposite and decreases.
And once again, we see a straight line when plotted with log-log scales. Technically,
we refer to this as a negative relation because the slope of the plot line is negative.

                                                                                         Figure 2.31
                                                                                         Photoresitor response curve.
                                                                                         Courtesy of Advanced Photonix

59
To put the brightness of the light into common terms, 0.01 foot-candles (roughly 0.1
lux) is equivalent to a clear moon-lit evening. At this level, the photoresistor is
showing over 1 megohm of resistance. In contrast, 100 foot-candles (roughly 1000
lux) is equivalent to an overcast day (for reference, direct sunlight is perhaps 100
times stronger). At this level, the photoresistor's value has dropped to about 1000
ohms.

A point worth noting is that the light that the photoresistor "sees" is not necessarily
the same as what a human sees. The sensitivity of the device at various wavelengths
(i.e., colors) may differ starkly from human vision. In fact, differing materials
exhibit different sensitivities at various wavelengths. Some of these may be
wavelengths that the unaided human eye cannot see at all (infrared or ultraviolet, for
example).

                                                                                                                   Figure 2.32
                                                                                                                   Photoresitor sensitivity curves.
                                                                                                                                Courtesy of Token Electronics

An example of sensitivity curves is shown in Figure 2.32. Note the variations
between the different materials, CdS being one of the three (left side). The peak
sensitivities vary as do the precise shapes. In practice, this means that some of these
units will be more or less sensitive to certain colors than other units. The CdS curve
indicates peak sensitivity of about 540 nm, which corresponds to green. In
comparison, the CdSe (cadmium selenide) cell exhibits a peak of just over 700 nm,
which corresponds to red. At some wavelengths, the relative response of one
material may be no more than 10% of the response of a different material.

It is important to note that the use of cadmium, such as in CdS cells and the like, is
severely restricted by the RoHS directive (see Chapter One).

Thermistor                                                                               Figure 2.33
                                                                                         NTC thermistor.
A thermistor is a device whose resistance is a function of temperature. These
devices are available in two basic types. Either PTC, for Positive Temperature
Coefficient; or NTC, for Negative Temperature Coefficient. PTC devices show an
increase in resistance as temperature increases and NTC devices show a decrease in
resistance as temperatures rise. Ideally, these are linear relationships with the plots
showing straight lines. The reality is that linearity can only be assumed across fairly

60
narrow ranges of temperature. For wider ranges, there will be noticeable deviation
from a straight line as the curve is logarithmic in nature. A basic NTC thermistor is
shown in Figure 2.33.

Generic thermistor performance graphs are shown in Figure 2.34 with the idealized                                                                       Figure 2.34
straight line response at top and the more realistic non-linear response below.                                                                         NTC thermistor response
Thermistors will be specified in terms of their room temperature resistance (usually                                                                    curves: Ideal (top) and real.
taken to be 25 °C) along with their sensitivity which is denoted as beta (). The

larger the value of beta, the steeper the curve and the greater the sensitivity. R (log)

The curves labeled Beta 2 show increased sensitivity, meaning that there will

be a greater change in resistance for a certain change in temperature.

                                                                                                                                                   R25          Beta 1
                                                                                                                                                        Beta 2
The following equation can be used to determine the resistance of a thermistor
at some other temperature of interest with greater accuracy than using a simple
linear approximation. All that is needed is a reference temperature and
corresponding resistance, the beta value and the new temperature of interest.
Using a reference temperature of 25 °C:

                 ( )  1 - 1                                                                        -25 0 25 50 75 T (C)
                                  T 298.15
                                                                        (2.12) R (log)
          RT =R25e

         Where                                                                         R25                                                                      Beta 1
         RT is the resistance at the new kelvin temperature, T,                                                                                         Beta 2
         R25 is the resistance at 25 °C,
         T is the temperature of interest in kelvin,                                                                                                    -25 0 25 50 75 T (C)
          is the device beta.

Note that the constant "298.15" in Equation 2.12 is equivalent to the reference
temperature of 25 °C (0 K is -273.15 °C). Consequently, if a different
reference point is used, simply insert the new reference temperature in its place
and use the corresponding resistance in place of R25.

Varistor

Varistors are used as limiting devices, primarily to suppress unwanted voltage spikes
in electronic equipment. The varistor is a unique device in that it has a highly non-
linear current-voltage characteristic. This is shown in Figure 2.35. Remember, when
plotted with the voltage on the horizontal axis, the slope of the line represents the
conductance. Consequently, the varistor shows a region of near zero conductance or
extremely high resistance (the horizontal section), and two sections that are nearly
vertical, which indicate extremely high conductance or near zero resistance. This
characteristic allows the varistor to act as a limiting device.

Imagine that a lightning strike effects a local power line. This will create a sudden
but short-lived spike in the voltage. A normal 120 volt wall outlet normally produces
regular peaks of approximately 170 volts. A lightning strike might add several

61
hundred volts to this. The resulting voltage could be so high that it would damage      Figure 2.35
electronic equipment attached to the outlet. To alleviate this problem, a varistor can  Current-voltage characteristic
be placed across the incoming voltage lines. The vertical break point voltages would    of a varistor.
be set for a value just over 170 volts, the normal maximum. Under typical
circumstances the varistor would see a voltage in its horizontal region and thus                        +
behave as a very high resistance. It would drain virtually no current from the                          I
outlet, and consequently it would have no impact on the rest of the circuitry. On
the other hand, if a large spike hits the line, the varistor will swing into the                                              V+
vertical region, show a much reduced resistance, and act as a shunting path for
the spike's current. It will effectively clamp the voltage to some maximum rated
value. Of course, the varistor has to absorb the energy presented by that spike,
and important parameters of a varistor include the amount of energy that it can -
absorb (in joules) and its maximum current capacity, along with the maximum
clamping voltage.

Strain gauge                                                                            -

The strain gauge is device used to measure mechanical strain on some item. Strain
occurs when an item is under compression (its length gets shortened or squished) or
when it's under tension (it gets elongated or stretched). Both of these things can
happen simultaneously, for example when a bar is experiencing bending or torque
(one side is under compression while the other is under tension). Engineering strain
is defined as the change in length over the initial length. If an item experiences too
much strain, it can become permanently deformed or fail (for example, the landing
gear in an aircraft or the suspension components in a car). Simply put, strain gauges
are used to measure this effect.

A strain gauge is made typically of very thin metal foil in a specific pattern. See     Figure 2.36
Figure 2.36 for example shapes. Typically, the shape is that of a series of fine lines  Strain guages.
connected in a back-and-forth pattern, the two ends terminating into larger pads for    Courtesy of Zemic
soldering on connecting leads. In operation, the strain gauge is glued to the
material being investigated, for example, a metal bar that is part of a
suspension system. As they are glued together, the strain gauge experiences
the same deformation as the metal bar. Any deformation will create changes in
the length of the strain gauge's foil wires as well as their frontal surface area.
For example, under tension, the length increases while the surface area
decreases (the surface area must decrease because the foil wire has finite
mass). Recalling the basic resistance relation, Equation 2.11, both of these
effects will cause the resistance to rise. The greater the strain under tension,
the greater the rise in resistance. The opposite will occur under compression and the
resistance will decrease. These changes in resistance are not large but they are
sufficient to alter the associated voltage or current which can then be calibrated to
determine the applied strain.

62
2.8 Instrumentation and Laboratory

At this point we need to shift gears and focus on a few practical aspects, the sort of
things we might deal with in an electrical laboratory. It is one thing to discuss
abstract concepts such as voltage and current, and quite another to deal with them in
the real world.

Sources

For starters, let's consider the idea of power sources, that is, devices that can produce
reliable, stable and constant voltages and/or currents. As mentioned previously, a
battery approximates an ideal voltage source. The problem, of course, is that
batteries only last a finite period of time and their voltage begins to sag after being
used for a while. Also, their voltage is fixed and not adjustable. An adjustable
voltage source would be much more flexible in a laboratory.

To address this problem, most electrical labs use a variable DC voltage supply in          Figure 2.37
place of simple batteries. These sources typically are adjustable from 0 to 25 volts       A multi-output adjustable DC
or higher and can produce one amp of current or more. An example is shown in               voltage supply.
Figure 2.37. This particular unit has two main outputs plus a third auxiliary
output. All outputs are independent, meaning that the voltage of each can be set
independent of the others. Further, the two main outputs offer programmable
current limiting. This feature can be thought of as a programmable fuse or
circuit breaker: it limits the amount of current a circuit can draw to some pre-
selected level. It is worth noting that even if a source is rated for, say, two amps,
that only refers to the maximum value that can be drawn; that is not the current
that it would produce by default.

Multiple output power supplies are usually wired in a "floating" form, meaning
that the negative terminal is not tied back to earth ground. A separate connector
is presented (usually green) that is tied back to earth ground if it is needed. Having
floating supplies gives the user much more flexibility. For example, two floating
supplies can be wired in sequence to create a single higher voltage. They can also be
wired to present a positive voltage and a negative voltage. The unit shown in Figure
2.37 also features twin LED displays for voltage and current for each of the main
outputs. It is worthwhile to point out that the color coding used for electronic
equipment is not the same as that used for residential wiring in North America. The
electronics standard is that the common or ground terminal is black while the "hot"
or positive terminal is red.

While there are a large number of makes and models of affordable laboratory DC
voltage sources available, the same is not true of DC current sources. This is not
usually a problem. As we shall see in upcoming work, it is possible to emulate a
constant current source using a voltage source and some attached components.

63
Schematic Symbols

Clearly, it would not be practical to create circuit drawings (schematics) using
pictures of the actual devices. Instead, we use simple schematic symbols to represent
them. There are two widely used schemes: ANSI (American National Standards
Institue) and IEC (International Electrotechnical Commission). For many electronic
components the ANSI and IEC versions are the same, but there are notable
differences. ANSI tends to dominate in North America (surprise!) while IEC tends to
dominate elsewhere.

Figure 2.38 shows the symbols for DC current and voltage sources. The long bar at        Figure 2.38
the top of the voltage source is the positive terminal while the shorter bar at the      Voltage (left) and current
bottom denotes the negative terminal. For the current source, the arrow points in the    source schematic symbols.
direction of conventional current flow. If the source is adjustable, it will often be
shown with a diagonal arrow drawn through it. In some schematics, a DC voltage
source will simply be drawn as a "connection dot" or node with the voltage labeled.
It is assumed that the other end of the source is tied back to the system common or
ground.

Speaking of ground, there are three different symbols used for a circuit's common        Figure 2.39
connection point. These are: earth ground, chassis ground and signal or digital          Schematic symbols for ground.
ground. These are shown in Figure 2.39. Earth ground is used when the circuit            (L-R) earth, chassis, signal.
common is tied back to true earth (e.g., to the third pin on an AC receptacle).
Chassis ground is a more generic term which would represent a common reference
point that did not go back to true earth (e.g., a portable device). Finally, digital or
signal ground is used to distinguish between common points where they might be
separated for noise or interference concerns (e.g., a sensitive analog signal common
separate from a digital logic common).

The symbols for resistors and other resistive devices vary considerably between
ANSI and IEC versions. ANSI uses a zig-zag line while IEC uses a simple rectangle.
These are illustrated in Figure 2.40. This text will focus on using the ANSI standard
symbols for resistors. One final note about component values: As decimal points are
easy to lose on photocopies or small display screens, engineering notation
multipliers are sometimes placed in the position of a decimal point. For example, a
4.7 k  resistor may be listed as simply 4k7.

                                                                                         Figure 2.40
                                                                                         Schematic symbols for resistive
                                                                                         devices. (L-R) resistor (ANSI),
                                                                                         resistor (IEC), photoresistor,
                                                                                         thermistor.

64
Measurement - The Digital Multimeter

Perhaps the most handy measurement device in the electrical laboratory is the                Figure 2.41
digital multimeter, or DMM for short. These handheld devices are used to measure             Digital Multimeters.
voltage, current and resistance; and depending on model may have other
measurement capabilities as well. A pair of typical units are shown in Figure 2.41.

Beyond the measurement functions of the DMM, perhaps the single most important
characteristic is its accuracy. It is important to remember that no measurement
device is perfect and there is always some uncertainly between what the device
indicates and the true value of the parameter being measured. As a DMM uses a
digital display, it has both finite range and resolution. As you might guess, the
more digits the meter can display, the greater its potential accuracy. DMMs are
commonly described as having 3 ½ digits, 3 ¾ digits, 4 ½ digits, and so on for their
displays. A fractional digit is simply a leading digit that cannot go up to nine. By
common use, the term "½ digit" means that the leading digit can be no more than
one. A ¾ digit specification typically means that the first digit can't be larger than
three (it might also be four or even five as this terminology is not standardized)9. To
clarify, a 3 ½ digit display is also referred to as a "2000 count" display. This is
because there are 2000 possible values, from 0000 to 1999. Similarly, a 4 ¾ digit
display is called a 40,000 count display because it has 40,000 possible values, from
00,000 to 39,999.

Using a 2000 count display as an example, the next question to ask is where to place
the decimal point. This display could be set up to read from 0 to 1999 volts. For
convenience, we would call that a "2000 volt scale", meaning that the maximum
voltage that can be displayed is approximately 2000 volts. With an otherwise perfect
meter, the error can be as large as 1 volt because we have no way of indicating
fractions of volts. To solve this limitation we could add other scales by shifting the
decimal point. For instance, we could make a nominal "20 volt scale" which would
range up to 19.99 volts, giving us resolution down to 10 millivolts. We could go
further and make a 2 volt scale with a maximum of 1.999 volts and 1 millivolt
resolution as well as a 200 millivolt scale with a maximum of 199.9 millivolts
yielding a resolution of one-tenth millivolt. We might need to measure very large as
well as very small voltages, so the scale setting is user adjustable.

It is important to use the lowest scale that can display the desired value otherwise a
loss of resolution and accuracy will occur. For example, if we need to measure a
voltage somewhere around five or six volts with this 2000 count meter, it should be
set for the 20 volt scale. A lower setting, such as a 2 volt or 200 millivolt scale, will
not be able to display the measurement and instead will indicate an overload
condition (usually by flashing an abbreviated error message such as "Err" or "OL").
On the other hand, if the higher 2000 volt scale is used, the meter will only be able

9 You might rightly ask how it is that having just one numeral out of nine counts as "half"
    and three out of nine counts as "three fourths". Well, that's marketing for you.

65
to resolve the measurement to the nearest volt. Indeed, this is so important that some
meters have auto-ranging, meaning that they will automatically choose the scale
setting to give the best result.

The accuracy specification for a DMM is in two parts. The first part is the percent
deviation around the measured value. The second part is the added number of
counts. The accuracy specification for a typical 3 ½ digit meter might be ± 2% of
reading plus 3 counts. To determine the range of possible values for a reading, first
determine the percentage of the reading and then add in the number of counts (i.e.,
one count represents the resolution of the meter on that particular scale). The
resulting value represents the uncertainty of the reading. It can also be visualized as
an "error envelope" surrounding the displayed value. Somewhere in that envelope is
the true value measured. This is shown in the following examples.

Example 2.17

         A 3 ½ digit (2000 count) DMM has an accuracy specification of ± 2% of
         reading plus 3 counts. On its 20 volt scale it measures 5.01 volts. Determine
         the uncertainty in this measurement.

         On its 20 volt scale this meter can display up to 19.99 volts. Therefore its
         resolution, or single count value, is 0.01 volts. Thus, 3 counts is 0.03 volts.
         To this we add 2% of the reading of 5.01 volts, or 0.1002 volts. The total is
         0.1302 volts or 130.2 millivolts. This represents the error envelope on either
         side of the reading. That is, the true value is within the range of 5.01 volts ±
         130.2 millivolts, or somewhere between 4.8798 volts and 5.1402 volts. In
         other words, the ambiguity is about 130 millivolts out of about 5 volts.

Example 2.18

         A 4 ¾ digit (40,000 count) DMM has an accuracy specification of ± 0.1% of
         reading plus 8 counts. On its 4 volt scale it measures 3.0035 volts.
         Determine the uncertainty in this measurement.

         On its 4 volt scale this meter can display up to 3.9999 volts. Therefore its
         resolution is 0.0001 volts or 0.1 millivolts. 8 counts is 0.8 millivolts. To this
         we add 0.1% of the reading of 3.0035 volts, or 3.0035 millivolts. The total is
         3.8035 millivolts. This represents the error envelope on either side of the
         reading and the true value is somewhere between 2.9996965 volts and
         3.0073035 volts. The ambiguity here is just a few millivolts out of about 3
         volts. Clearly, this meter's level of ambiguity is much reduced compared to
         the meter used in Example 2.17.

66
2.9 Summary

In this chapter we have examined the basic quantities that make up an electrical
circuit. Charge, measured in coulombs, is a characteristic of subatomic particles;
protons being positively charged and electrons being negatively charged. Like
charges repel and opposite charges attract. The Bohr model of an atom shows that
electrons are contained in energy shells and a single electron in the outermost shell is
only loosely bound to an atom. With an applied external energy source these
electrons (and thus their charge) can be moved from place to place. The rate of
charge movement over time is called current and is measured in amps. Energy is
defined as the ability to do work and is measured in joules. Voltage is defined as the
energy required to move a charge divided by that charge, with units of volts. Power
is the rate of energy usage over time and is measured in watts.

Some materials allow the easy flow of current and are called conductors. In contrast,
materials that inhibit the flow of electrical current are called insulators. The measure
of this inhibition is called resistance and has units of ohms. Its reciprocal is called
conductance and is measured in siemens.

Resistors are devices designed to restrict the flow of current. They are available in a
wide range of resistive values, power ratings, and physical sizes and configurations.
Common resistors use a series of colored stripes, or color code, to signify their
resistance value and tolerance.

Efficiency is the ratio of useful power output to applied power input, normally
expressed as a percentage. The higher a system's efficiency, the less energy it will
use, the less it will cost to run, and generally the less heat it will generate. If the
system is battery powered, higher efficiency leads to longer battery life. Battery
capacity is measured in amp-hours. All other factors being equal, the higher the
amp-hour rating, the longer the battery will last.

The digital multimeter, or DMM, is a versatile tool for measuring voltage, current,
resistance, and possibly other circuit or electrical device parameters. The accuracy of
a DMM is dependent on its resolution which is in turn set by the number of digits
used, or its total count. The count specification is added to a percent tolerance to
arrive at a worst case error value for some specific reading.

67
Review Questions

    1. Describe the Bohr atomic model.
    2. How does charge relate to current and voltage?
    3. What is the relationship between energy and power?
    4. What is the relationship between resistance and conductance?
    5. Define efficiency. How does it relate to operating cost?
    6. Define count in terms of a digital multimeter accuracy specification.
    7. Describe the resistor color code and its use.

2.10 Exercises

Analysis

    1. A 2000 count digital multimeter has an accuracy specification of ±1%. If it
         reads a voltage of 34.2 volts, what is the possible range of the true voltage?

    2. A 4000 count digital multimeter has an accuracy specification of ±0.5%. If it
         reads a current of 142.0 mA, what is the possible range of the true current?

    3. Determine the expected voltage scales for a standard "three and a half" digit
         meter between 1 and 1000 volts.

    4. Determine the expected current scales for a standard "three and a half" digit
         meter between 1 mA and 1 amp.

    5. A 2000 count digital multimeter has an accuracy specification of ±2% and
         ±5 counts. If it reads a voltage of 7.00 volts, what is the possible range of
         the true voltage?

    6. A 50000 count digital multimeter has an accuracy specification of ±0.1%
         and ±4 counts. If it reads a voltage of 7.00 volts, what is the possible range
         of the true voltage?

    7. What is the charge in coulombs of a million million (1012) electrons?
    8. What is the charge in coulombs of 1015 electrons?
    9. How many electrons would be needed for a charge of 20 coulombs?
    10. How many electrons would be needed for a charge of 1 microcoulomb?
    11. If a charge of 2 coulombs passes through a wire in 5 seconds, what is the

         current?
    12. If a charge of 300 millicoulombs passes through a wire in 0.1 seconds, what

         is the current?

68
    13. How much charge must be transferred in 0.1 seconds in order to achieve a
         current of 5 amps?

    14. How much charge must be transferred in 20 seconds in order to achieve a
         current of 10 microamps?

    15. Determine the resulting voltage if it takes 2 joules to move 10 coulombs of
         charge.

    16. Determine the voltage if 15 joules is used to move 0.5 coulombs of charge.
    17. How much energy is required to create a 10 volt potential difference with a

         2 coulomb charge?
    18. How much energy is required to create a 50 millivolt potential difference

         with a 0.1 coulomb charge?
    19. What is the wattage equivalent of two horsepower (2 hp)?
    20. What is the horsepower equivalent of 1000 watts?
    21. If a device draws 2 amps of current from a 12 volt battery, determine the

         power delivered.
    22. If a device draws 10 milliamps of current from a 1.5 volt battery, determine

         the power delivered.
    23. A 2 hp motor draws 1800 watts from its source. Determine its efficiency.
    24. A 5 hp motor draws 4.5 kw from its source. Determine its efficiency.
    25. An audio power amplifier is rated for 500 watts of maximum output at an

         efficiency of 80%. Determine the amount of wasted power.
    26. A compressor draws 10 amps of current from a 120 volt source. Its rated

         output is 1 hp. Determine the efficiency.
    27. An application requires a battery to deliver 15 mA for at least 200 hours.

         Determine the required amp-hour rating.
    28. Determine the required rating for a battery to deliver 0.8 A for at least 30

         hours.
    29. A certain 12 volt battery has a rating of 6 Ah. Determine the expected

         battery life using a 5 mA draw.
    30. A certain AA battery has a rating of 800 mAh. Determine the expected

         battery life using a 20 mA draw.
    31. Assume that a certain piece of material has a resistance of 80 ohms.

         Determine the new resistance if the length of the piece is doubled and no
         other parameters are changed.

69
    32. Assume that a certain piece of material has a resistance of 2 k ohms.
        Determine the new resistance if the width and height of the piece are
        doubled and no other parameters are changed.

    33. Assume that a certain piece of material has a resistance of 4 ohms.
        Determine the new resistance if the resistivity is doubled and no other
        parameters are changed.

    34. Assume that a certain piece of material has a resistance of 10 k ohms.
        Determine the new resistance if the length, width and height of the piece are
        all halved.

    35. A certain material has a resistivity of 100 ohm-centimeters. Determine the
        resistance of a piece that is 1 cm wide, 0.5 cm high and 6 cm long.

    36. A certain material has a resistivity of 2000 ohm-centimeters. Determine the
        resistance of a piece that is 2 mm wide, 4 mm high and 10 mm long.

    37. A 40 ohm resistor has dimension of 0.4 cm wide by 0.2 cm high by 1 cm
        long. Determine the resistivity in ohm-centimeters.

    38. A 5000 ohm resistor has dimension of 5 mm wide by 3 mm high by 6 mm
        long. Determine the resistivity in ohm-centimeters.

    39. A resistor with the color code yellow-violet-red-silver has a            Figure 2.42
        measured value of 4806 ohms. Is this resistor within tolerance? As a     a
        percentage, how far is it from the nominal value?

    40. A resistor with the color code orange-orange-yellow-gold has a
        measured value of 33.9 k ohms. Is this resistor within tolerance? As b
        a percentage, how far is it from the nominal value?

    41. A resistor with the color code brown-black-orange-silver has a measured value of 9980 ohms. Is this resistor within tolerance? As a c
        percentage, how far is it from the nominal value?

    42. A resistor with the color code green-blue-black-gold has a measured value
        of 50 ohms. Is this resistor within tolerance? As a percentage, how far is it
        from the nominal value?

    43. Determine the value of the resistors pictured in Figure 2.42 (left-to-   Figure 2.43
        right: red-black-yellow, blue-gray-orange, red-violet-red-silver).

    44. Determine the value of the resistors pictured in Figure 2.43 (left-to- a

    right: red-red-orange-gold, brown-black-red-gold, yellow-violet-

    orange-silver). b

    45. Determine the value of the resistors pictured in Figure 2.44 (left-to-

    right: orange-orange-green-silver, white-brown-black-silver, orange-

    white-brown-gold).                                                           c

70
    46. Determine the value of the resistors pictured in Figure 2.45 (left-to-right:
        silver-orange-violet-yellow, green-blue-yellow-gold, gold-black-orange-
        yellow).

    47. Determine the maximum and minimum allowed values of the                       Figure 2.44
        resistors pictured in Figure 2-42.                                            a

    48. Determine the maximum and minimum allowed values of the                       b
        resistors pictured in Figure 2-43.

    49. Determine the maximum and minimum allowed values of the
        resistors pictured in Figure 2-44.

    50. Determine the maximum and minimum allowed values of the                       c

    resistors pictured in Figure 2-45.

Design                                                                                Figure 2.45
                                                                                      a
    51. Determine the resistor color code for the following ohmic values              b
         using 10% tolerance: a) 56  b) 33 k c) 470 k d) 1.2 k                        c
         e) 750 

    52. Determine the resistor color code for the following ohmic values
         using 5% tolerance: a) 47  b) 22 k c) 390 k d) 2.2 k
         e) 560 

Challenge

    53. A radio transmitter is rated for 100 watts of maximum output at an
        efficiency of 90%. If it is fed from a 120 volt source, determine the current
        draw.

    54. A certain 75 watt incandescent bulb produces 71 watts worth of heat and the
        remainder in the form of light. Determine its efficiency as a lighting device
        and its efficiency as a heating device.

    55. Assume it takes an 1800 watt toaster 3 minutes to toast a bagel "just right".
        If you toast a bagel every morning for a year and electricity costs 15
        cents/kWh, how much will you have spent in that year to toast bagels?

71
    56. Assume that you can buy standard 60 watt incandescent light bulbs for 50
         cents each and that each has an expected life span of 1000 hours. In
         comparison, you can buy an LED light bulb that produces the same amount
         of light but only consumes 7 watts. The LED bulbs cost $5.50 each and have
         an expected life of 20,000 hours. Assuming electricity costs 14 cents/kWh,
         determine the total cost of running incandescent lights versus LEDs for
         40,000 hours.

    57. Given a 1.5 volt battery with a 500 mAh rating, how much current can it
         produce continuously for 25 hours?.

    58. Given a 9 volt battery with a 100 mAh rating, determine the total energy
         storage in joules.

    59. A 2000 count DMM with ±1% accuracy is used to measure the resistance of
         a spool of AWG 22 wire. If the measurement is 4.50 , determine the length
         of the wire and the possible inaccuracy (in feet or meters).

    60. A length of AWG 26 wire is attached to one end of a length of AWG 32 wire.
         The total length of the two wires is 200 meters. Determine the length and
         resistance of each piece if the total resistance is 75 .

72
Notes

                                                                                                                                 
73
3 Series Resistive Circuits

3.0 Chapter Learning Objectives

After completing this chapter, you should be able to:

    · Describe the differences between conventional current flow and electron flow.
    · Identify series resistive circuits that include one or more voltage sources or a single current source.
    · Compute equivalent resistance, and component and node voltages for series resistive circuits.
    · Compute circulating current and component powers for series resistive circuits.
    · Utilize Ohm's law, Kirchhoff's voltage law (KVL) and the voltage divider rule (VDR) to aid in the

         analysis of series resistive circuits.
    · Identify and describe the usage of potentiometers and rheostats.
    · Utilize computer simulation tools to investigate and verify basic electric circuit quantities such as

         component voltages.

3.1 Introduction

With the requisite background information of the first two chapters now behind us, in this chapter we shall begin
our analysis of electrical circuits. Here we will introduce the most simple configuration, the series loop. It can
contain any number of resistors and voltage sources, or in place of the voltage sources, a single current source.
We shall examine how to determine the current flow through each component, the voltage across each
component and the power either dissipated or generated by each component. Other practical issues will also be
examined, such as the effect of component tolerance on the circuit parameters.

3.2 Conventional Current Flow and Electron Flow

Before we dive into series circuits we need to consider an interesting question involving the direction of current
flow. Does it flow from positive to negative or from negative to positive? For that matter, does it even make a
difference as far as our analyses will be concerned?

Benjamin Franklin (pictured in Figure 3.1) began experimenting with the phenomenon of electricity in 1746. In
1752 he performed his famous kite experiment proving that lightning is a form of electricity by capturing charge
from storm clouds in a leyden jar (an early form of an electrical charge storage device)10. At this time the

10 It is worth noting that Franklin's kite was not struck by lightning. If it had been, he likely would have been killed. The
    hemp string that was used for the kite was sufficiently wet from rain that it was possible to transfer charge from the
    atmosphere to the leyden jar, and subsequently to a metal key which would emit a spark.

74
modern concept of an atomic model with electrons and protons did not exist and             Figure 3.1
electricity was conceived of as a sort of fluid. Franklin surmised that the "electrical    Benjamin Franklin:
flow" moved from positive to negative. This idea was accepted and became the               Technically incorrect but it
conventional view. Today we call this idea conventional current flow. In this model,       doesn't really matter.
current flows from a more positive voltage to a less positive voltage. We know now
that the electron is the charge carrier in metals and the electrons travel in the reverse
direction. Essentially, Franklin guessed wrong. Electrons move from a lower
potential to a higher potential. We call this model electron flow. For most work,
engineers and technicians use conventional flow, although in some cases, such as the
explanation of semiconductors, electron flow is easier to visualize for some people.
In short, conventional flow exists for historical reasons, and it is the model used for
most analyses, including this text.

You might think the current direction would make a big difference in an analysis;
after all, it certainly makes a big difference if you drive a car in the wrong direction.
It turns out that both forms will achieve the desired results, we just have to be
consistent with the usage.

To better understand this, consider that the movement of a net negative charge in          Figure 3.2
one direction can be thought of as a movement of a net positive charge in the other        Electron versus hole flow.
direction. That is, the movement of an electron creates a "hole" where it used to be
and that hole is net positive. This is illustrated in Figure 3.2. Here we start at the
top with a tube of identical marbles, all pushed to the right. In each step below it we
move a marble to the left, mimicking the flow of electrons in a circuit. When we
reach the bottom, each marble has been pushed left by one place. We can also arrive
at the bottom drawing by simply taking the right-most marble in the top drawing and
inserting it to the extreme left by jumping over the other three marbles. Here's the
important bit: instead of imagining the marbles moving left, we can also think in
terms of "negative space" and imagine the empty slot moving to the right. That's
hole flow. The two views are functionally identical as they lead to the same
outcome.

3.3 The Series Connection

The word circuit comes from the Latin root circ, meaning "ring" or "around". An            Figure 3.3
electrical circuit consists of at least one ring or loop through which current flows.      Battery and lamp circuit.
For example, if we have a battery attached to a lamp as in Figure 3.3, the current
exits the battery, flows through the lamp, and then returns to the other side of the
battery creating a loop or completed circuit. Without a path back to the battery,
current will not flow. Thus, if we cut one of the wires connecting the battery and
lamp, there is no path for current and no current flows. This is referred to as an open
circuit and is a common fault that occurs when electronic systems are dropped or
struck forcefully. Obviously, this will tend to render the circuit unusable. In this
example, the lamp will not illuminate. The opposite of the open circuit is the short

75
circuit. In a short circuit, an unintended alternate path for current flow exists and this
also can create a malfunction. In the case of our battery and lamp, a short circuit can
occur if a piece of wire or metal accidentally fell across the terminals of the lamp.
The current would then have a high conductance (i.e., low resistance) path around
the lamp. The vast majority of the current would take this low resistance path instead
of the higher resistance path presented by the lamp. The result would be that the
lamp would not light. In either the open or short case, the light does not function but
there is an important difference: for the short circuit, excessive current will flow out
of the battery because there is little to resist the flow of current. Thus, the battery
will be drained very quickly. For the open, no current flows and thus the battery is
not drained.

Series connections are not limited to just two components. In general, a series             Figure 3.4
connection is any connection of components configured such that the current                 A generic series configuration.
through each component must be the same. This is illustrated in Figure 3.4. Inside
each of the lettered boxes would be a component such as a resistor or a                     A     B  C
voltage source. Note that for each component, there is one entrance point and                                D
one exit point. No matter which box you pick, the current flowing through it
must be the same as the current flowing into the next box or out of the                        E
preceding box, and it doesn't matter if you follow this path in a clockwise or
counterclockwise fashion. Thus, this entire configuration is a series
connection. The idea that current is consistent throughout should be self-
evident. After all, the only way the current through, say, item B could be
different from that flowing through item C or D is if some of it somehow
"disappeared" along the way by magic. It is important to remember that consistent
current is the hallmark feature defining a series connection:

    The current is the same everywhere in a series connection. (2.1)

It is possible that only a portion of a circuit exhibits a series connection. Consider      Figure 3.5
                                                                                            A more complex configuration.
the more complex diagram presented in Figure 3.5. Some of these items are in
                                                                                                             C
series and some are not. For example, items A and B are in series with each other                                          D

but not in series with the remaining items. Why? Because if we imagine                        B
                                                                                                                                         E
the current flowing through A and then through B they must be the
                                                                                                                 F
same, however, once beyond B, the current could split and flow down

other branches: a portion entering C, a portion entering D and the            A

remainder flowing into E. On the other hand, items C and F are in series

with each other because whatever current is flowing through one of

them must be flowing through the other. Thus, items A and B are in

series with each other and items C and F are in series with each other,

although all four are not in series as a group.

It is possible that no two items in a circuit are strictly in series. We will see examples
of this in upcoming chapters. Further, just because the currents through two items
happen to be the same, that does not necessarily mean they are in series. Identical
currents could be just a by-product of the component values chosen. For example,

76
even if items D and E in Figure 3.5 have the same numeric value for current, we
would not say that they are in series, anymore than we would say that any two
people with the same last name would have to be siblings.

3.4 Combining Series Components

Typically, a series connection will include multiple resistors. Referring back to the
resistance equation presented in Chapter 2, Equation 2.11, we can see that resistors
in series add.

    R =l
          A

If we consider two identical resistors placed in series, one after the other as in        Figure 3.6
Figure 3.6, the effective length would double while keeping the resistivity and area      Resistors in series.
unchanged. The combined result would be a doubling of the resistance of just one
of them. If we then generalize this to two arbitrary resistors of identical resistivity                                B
and area, the lengths would dictate the resistance of each, and the combined lengths                       A
would then reflect the resistance of the pair. We can generalize this further for N
resistors. Thus we find that the equivalent resistance of a group of series resistors is
their sum:

    RTotal = R1+R2+R3+...+RN     (3.2)

Consequently, as resistors in series add, total resistance may be found by summing
the individual resistors.

Example 3.1                                                                               Figure 3.7
                                                                                          Resistor string for Example
         A string of resistors is placed in series as shown in Figure 3.7. Their values   3.1.
         are: 120 , 390 , 560  and 470 . Determine the equivalent series
         value.

    RT = R1+R2+R3+R4
    RT = 120 +390 +560+470
    RT =1540 

Multiple voltage sources in series may also be added, however, polarities must be
considered as opposing voltages partially cancel each other (i.e., adding a negative).
This concept is presented in the next example.

77
Example 3.2                                                                              Figure 3.8
                                                                                         Voltage sources in series.
         Determine the equivalent series value of the voltage sources presented in
         Figure 3.8.

    If we use point b as our reference, by inspection the top of the 12 volt source
    is 12 volts above point b (reminder, the long bar denotes the positive
    terminal). Also, by inspection, the right side of the 3 volt source (point a) is
    negative with respect to its left side. As the left side of this source is
    connected to the positive terminal of the 12 volt source, then it too must be
    12 volts above point b. As its right side is 3 volts less than this side, point a
    must be 3 volts less than 12 volts, or 9 volts above point b.
    Thus Vab = 9 volts.

    Chasing this further, if the 3 volt source had been flipped so that it had the
    same polarity as the 12 volt source (positive toward the right) then Vab = 15
    volts. If the 12 volt source had been flipped (positive toward bottom) with
    the 3 volt source as drawn originally, then Vab = -15 volts. If both sources
    had been flipped then Vab = -9 volts. Finally, if point a had been taken as the
    reference then these four potentials would have the opposite polarity
    because, by definition, Vba = -Vab.

In contrast to voltage sources, differing current sources are not placed in series as    Figure 3.9
they would each attempt to establish a different series current, a practical             Placing current sources in
impossibility. Refer to Figure 3.9 as a reminder!                                        series generally is evil.

3.5 Ohm's Law                                                                            Figure 3.10
                                                                                         Current-voltage plots for
In Chapter 2, the concept of resistance was introduced using the following               simple resistors.
generality:
                                                                                                                I
                      Effect = Cause Oppostion
                                                                                         -V                          V
To review, the cause is a voltage source, the opposition is the resistance, and the
effect is the resulting current. If the item the current passes through is linear, such
as the simple resistors depicted in Figure 3.10, then this relationship can be
rewritten as:

                      I = VR

                                                                                             -I

78
or more commonly, solved for the voltage and expressed as:

    V = I×R                                                 (3.3)

This is called Ohm's law, and is named in honor of Georg Ohm, a researcher from
the early nineteenth century. It is, along with Kirchhoff's laws that we shall see
shortly, one of the most important and useful equations available for the analysis of
DC electrical circuits. For the sake of completeness, Ohm's law can also be
visualized in terms of resistance:

    R = VI

All three forms of this equation are useful. For example, we can use the first version
if we have a known voltage applied across a resistor and we want to determine the
resulting current. Similarly, Equation 3.3 can be used to find the voltage drop across
a resistor if we know the current through it. Finally, we can use the last version if we
need to set the current to a certain value and have to find the resistance required to
do so.

Example 3.3                                                                               Figure 3.11
                                                                                          Circuit for Example 3.3.
         A 9 volt battery is used in series to power a 40  resistor as shown in
         Figure 3.11. Determine the circulating current. Also determine the
         minimum power rating for the resistor.

    I = VR
    I = 9V

         40 
    I =0.225amps

    From power law, Equation 2.7,

    P = I ×V
    P = 0.225 A×9 V
    P =2.025 watts

    Power could also be determined using V2/R or I2R. Try it. You should get the
    same result.

79
Computer Simulation

To verify the results of the preceding example, the circuit is entered into a simulator,
as shown in Figure 3.12. MultisimTM is used here, although any quality circuit
simulator will do. Virtual DMMs are used to measure the current and voltage.
Remember, current is the rate of charge flow and is measured at a single point; the
middle of a connecting wire if you will. Consequently, the ammeter is inserted
between the battery and resistor. In contrast, voltage is a potential difference which
implies two points for the measurement, and thus, the voltmeter is placed across the
resistor.
Note the voltage is exactly 9 volts as expected. The current is just shy of the
expected 225 milliamps. This is due to the fact that all real world ammeters exhibit
some finite internal resistance. This extra resistance, though very much smaller than
the resistor, adds to the total resistance and thus slightly decreases the current. The
simulator has been programmed to mimic this behavior and thus we see a very slight
decrease in the current in the simulation, which is precisely the effect we would see
in a proper physical lab.

                                                                                                                   Figure 3.12
                                                                                                                   The circuit of Example 3.3 in a
                                                                                                                   simulator.

This simulation uses virtual instruments because they echo the layout of a physical
lab and offer some familiarity. Unfortunately, they become cumbersome in larger
circuits. We shall look at other, more direct, simulation techniques later in this
chapter.

80
Example 3.4

         Refer to the battery and lamp circuit shown back in Figure 3.3. Determine
         the resistance of the lamp if the current flowing through it is 300 mA and the
         battery voltage is 6 volts. Also determine the power dissipated by the lamp.

                      R = VI
                      R= 6V

                            0.3 A
                      R =20

         From power law,

                      P = I 2×R
                      P = 0.3 A2×20
                      P =1.8 watts

Let's continue with a couple of examples utilizing current sources.

Example 3.5                                                                              Figure 3.13
                                                                                         Circuit for Example 3.5.
         Determine the voltage developed across the resistor in the circuit of
         Figure 3.13. Also determine the power dissipated.

    V = I×R
    V = 10 mA×2.2 k 
    V =22 volts

    From power law,

    P = I 2×R
    P = (10 mA)2×2.2 k 

    P =0.22 watts

    Computational hint: don't forget the "milli" part of the current (milli squared
    is micro).

81
Example 3.6                                                                                 Figure 3.14
                                                                                            Circuit for Example 3.6.
         Determine the resistor value required in the circuit of Figure 3.14 in order
         for the source to generate 24 watts of power.

First, note that power generated must equal power dissipated. Thus, the
power generated by the source must equal the power dissipated by the
resistor. From power law,

P = I 2×R
R = I 2 P
R = (2 A)2 24 W
R= 6

As a crosscheck, note that Ohm's law indicates that a 6  resistor would
produce a 12 volt drop given a 2 amp current, and that 12 volts times 2 amps
yields the expected 24 watts.

It is now time to move onto series circuits using multiple resistors and/or current
sources.

3.6 Kirchhoff's Voltage Law (KVL)

Along with Ohm's law, the key law governing series circuits is Kirchhoff's voltage
law, or KVL. Named after nineteenth century German physicist Gustav Kirchhoff,
this law states that the sum of voltage rises and voltage drops around a series loop
must equal zero (the rises and drops having opposite polarities). Alternately, it may
be reworded as the sum of voltage rises around a series loop must equal the sum of
voltage drops. As a pseudo formula:

 V =  V                            (3.4)

The Voltage Divider Rule (VDR)

An outgrowth of KVL is the voltage divider rule (VDR). In a series connection, the
current is the same through each component. Thus, the voltage drops in a series
connection must be directly proportional to the size of the resistances: the larger the
resistor, the larger its voltage, and the larger its share of the total voltage applied to
the series connection. Thus, the voltage across any resistor must equal the net

82
supplied voltage times the ratio of the resistor of interest to the total resistance:

    VRx = E  RX /RTOTAL  (3.5)

In fact, Equation 3.5 is just a combination of two Ohm's law calculations into a
single formula. The circulating current is equal to E/RTOTAL. This current is then
multiplied by the resistor of interest (RX) to arrive at the voltage across that resistor
(VRx). It is worth pointing out that "the resistor of interest" can, in fact, be the sum of
multiple resistors in series. While VDR is not required for any particular analysis, it
serves two purposes: first, it saves some time because it skips over the computation
of current, and second, it reinforces the ideal of a proportional division of voltage in
a series connection. For example, if there are two resistors in series and one of them
is twice the size of the other, then it must be the case that the larger resistor sees
twice the voltage of the smaller resistor.

3.7 Series Analysis

Ohm's law, Kirchhoff's voltage law, the voltage divider rule and series component
combinations are the tools we will use to solve general series circuit problems. There
are multiple techniques for analyzing these circuits:

    · If all voltage source and resistor values are given, the circulating current can
         be found by dividing the equivalent voltage by the sum of the resistances.
         Once the current is found, Ohm's law can be used to find the voltage drops
         across individual resistors. Alternately, the individual voltage drops can be
         found using the voltage divider rule. At that point, power law can be used to
         find the power dissipation in each resistor or the power developed by the
         source(s).

    · If the circuit uses a current source instead of a voltage source, then the
         circulating current is known and the voltage drop across any resistor may be
         determined directly using Ohm's law.

    · If the problem concerns determining resistance values, the basic idea will be
         to use these rules in reverse. For example, if a resistor value is needed to set
         a specific current, the total required resistance can be determined from this
         current and the given voltage supply. The values of the other series resistors
         can then be subtracted from the total, yielding the required resistor value.
         Similarly, if the voltages across two resistors are known, as long as one of
         the resistance values is known, the other resistance can be determined using
         either the voltage divider rule or Ohm's law.

83
Often, there will be more than one way to solve a given problem. We shall refer to
these as solution paths. No particular path is "more correct" than any other, although
some paths may be shorter or easier in a given case, as will be illustrated next.

Example 3.7                                                                             Figure 3.15
                                                                                        Circuit for Example 3.7.
         Determine the voltage Vb (i.e., the voltage across the 100  resistor) in
         the circuit of Figure 3.15. Also determine the circulating current.

    First, note that there is a single voltage source that will create a clockwise
    current flowing through the two resistors. KVL says that the combined drops
    across those resistors must equal the rise of the source, or 12 volts. One
    solution path involves first finding the total resistance. Dividing this into the
    source voltage will yield the current. Ohm's law can then be used to
    determine the resistor voltage.

    RT = R1+R2

    RT = 200 +100 
    RT = 300 

    I= E
          RT

    I = 12 V 300
    I = 40 mA

    V b = I ×R2
    V b = 40 mA×100
    V b = 4 volts

    A second solution path involves first finding the resistor voltage via the
    voltage divider rule. The current can then be found via Ohm's law.

    V b = E R2
              RT

    V b = 12V 100  300
    V b = 4 volts

    I = Vb
          R2

    I = 4 V 100 
    I = 40 mA

84
Computer Simulation

Let's verify the preceding example using a computer simulation. Instead of using
virtual instruments, we shall use a more direct route, namely a listing of node
voltages. A node voltage is the voltage at a given point with respect to some other
point, normally ground, as in Vb in the prior example. Note that as we treat
connecting wires ideally (having no resistance), a node is the entire connection wire,
not a specific location on it. Normally, simulators will automatically number each
node in a circuit with ground being node 0. This method skips the entire business of
inserting virtual meters in the circuit and reduces schematic clutter.

                                                                                                                   Figure 3.16
                                                                                                                   The circuit of Example 3.7 in
                                                                                                                   the simulator.

Note that ground is node 0, the power supply connection to the first resistor is node
1 and the connection between the two resistors is node 2. Thus, node 2 is Vb. A DC
operating point analysis is performed. The results are shown in a separate output
window, as depicted in Figure 3.17. The values are as expected and with no loading
effects as might be seen with virtual instruments.

                                                                                                                   Figure 3.17
                                                                                                                   Simulation results for the
                                                                                                                   circuit of Figure 3.16.

85
Example 3.8                                                                             Figure 3.18
                                                                                        Circuit for Example 3.8.
         Determine the voltage Va (i.e., the voltage across the current source) in the
         circuit of Figure 3.18.

    Given the direction of the current source, the current will flow
    counterclockwise. This produces voltage drops (plus to minus) left to right
    across the 10 , bottom to top across the 3 , and right to left across the 1 
    resistor. This means that node a is negative with respect to ground (i.e., the
    voltage keeps dropping across the resistors as we travel counterclockwise
    from ground, indicating that the resulting potential keeps getting more and
    more negative with respect to ground). To find Va, we may simply sum the
    resistors and then use Ohm's law to determine their combined voltage drop,
    which of course, must equal the voltage rise from the current source.

    RT = R1+R2+R3
    RT = 1 +3 +10
    RT = 14

    V a =-I × RT
    V a =-5 A×14 
    V a =-70 volts

One practical point when designing circuits is to appreciate the variations in current
and voltage produced by component tolerances. For example, in the preceding
problem, we determined that there will be 70 volts across the current source, but this
assumes that the resistor values are exactly as stated. In the previous chapter we
discovered that all resistor values will vary somewhat, and we grade this variation as
a percent tolerance. Thus, if the true resistor values are off a bit, we would expect
this to impact the associated voltages. Often, we would like to determine worst case
values such as a maximum voltage or a minimum current. Sometimes these
conditions occur when all resistors are at their maximum or minimum value. For
example, the maximum value of source voltage in the previous problem occurs when
all of the resistor values are at their maximum. This is not always the case, though.
Sometimes the minima and maxima are achieved with odd combinations, such as
one resistor being at maximum and another being at minimum. For instance, in the
circuit used for Example 3.7, Vb will be at minimum when R2 is at minimum and
when R1 is at maximum. This can be verified easily using VDR.

Computer Simulation

Along with worst case, we might also like to know the sort of typical spread we get
on a particular parameter using normal component variations. This can be performed

86
in a simulator and it is usually called Monte Carlo Analysis or something similar.
Basically, the simulator computes a series of simulation runs, each with component
values chosen randomly within the specified tolerances of the chosen components,
mimicking the effect of pulling the components out of a parts bins. To illustrate the
Monte Carlo technique, the circuit of Example 3.8 is entered in a simulator as shown
in Figure 3.19.

                                                                                                                   Figure 3.19
                                                                                                                   The circuit of Example 3.8 in
                                                                                                                   the simulator.

The resistors are given 10% tolerances. Five runs are specified for node voltage 1
which is equivalent to Va in the original circuit. The results are shown in Figure 3.20.
Note that the nominal value run indicates -70 volts as expected. The other runs
show variations on this voltage, some above and some below the nominal result.

                                                                                                                   Figure 3.20
                                                                                                                   Simulation results for the
                                                                                                                   circuit of Figure 3.19.

87
The Importance of Polarity

A key item of importance when analyzing series circuits, or indeed any electrical
circuit, is noting the polarity of the voltages. This was apparent in Example 3.8.
Determining polarity for voltage sources is easy as their polarity is fixed (positive is
always at the "long bar" and negative at the "short bar"). The polarity of any resistor
will depend on the direction of current flow. To avoid confusion we will use the
following standard:

    · Where conventional current enters a resistor, we label this point with a plus
        sign, and where the current leaves, a minus sign.

    · During analysis, moving from plus to minus is a voltage drop. That is, we
        are moving from a more positive or higher potential to a less positive or
        lower potential, thus "dropping" voltage.

    · Similarly, traversing from minus to plus is a voltage rise.

Remember, Kirchhoff's voltage law states that the sum of voltage rises around a
series loop must equal the sum of voltage drops.

Along with determining the voltage across single resistors, we are often interested           Figure 3.21
in determining the voltage between arbitrary points in a circuit. These may span              A multi-source, multi-resistor
several components. It is imperative that we know the polarities of the individual            series circuit.
voltages in order to determine the voltage between any two circuit points. The
foregoing is illustrated using the series circuit schematic of Figure 3.21.

Here, the two voltage sources, E1 and E2, aid each other because they are both trying
to establish a clockwise current. This produces a net voltage of E1+E2. Their
polarities are fixed. The current direction will be as drawn because conventional
current flows out of the positive terminal of a voltage source. The value of this
current will be (E1+E2) / (R1+R2) via Ohm's law. Knowing the direction of current,
the polarities of the voltage drops across the two resistors may be found. The point
where the current enters the resistor is positive, and negative where it exits. Once
these are labeled, either Ohm's law or the voltage divider rule can be used to
determine the voltages developed across the two resistors. Note that KVL states that
the sum of these two resistor voltages must equal the net supplied voltage, or E1+E2
in this case.

To determine the voltage from point a to point c, or Vac, we start at point a and sum
the voltage drops and rises until we get to point c. Here, the voltage across R1 shows
up as a drop (+ to - and taken as positive) and the voltage across E2 shows up as a
rise (- to +, and thus negative). The result is the voltage across R1 minus the voltage
across E2. Depending on the specific values, the sum may wind up being either a
positive or negative value. If it's positive, this signifies that point a is at a higher
potential than is point c. Conversely, if it's negative, this signifies that point a is at a
lower potential than is point c. If we reverse the order, starting at point c and moving

88
to point a, or Vca, we will wind up with the same voltage magnitude but the sign           Figure 3.22
will flip. In the laboratory, the first point letter (the a in Vac) is where the red lead  Series circuit with altered
of the voltmeter is connected and the second letter is where the black lead is             polarity.
connected. As a reminder, if a single connection point is used, as in Va, the second
letter is assumed to be ground. Thus, Va is the voltage from point a to ground.

To illustrate the importance of voltage source polarity, consider the series circuit
shown in Figure 3.22. This circuit is identical to the previous circuit with the
exception that the polarity of source E2 has been flipped. This can have a drastic
change on the resulting current and voltage drops. For example, if E2 is larger than
E1, the net supplied voltage will be E2-E1 and the direction of conventional current
will be as drawn. Effectively, E2 will be charging E1. Note that this is opposite to the
prior circuit. Because both the direction and the magnitude of the current have
changed, the voltage drops and polarities of R1 and R2 will change. Consequently,
any point-to-point voltage, such as Vac, will also change.

Example 3.9                                                                                Figure 3.23
         Determine the voltages Vb and Vca in the circuit of Figure 3.23.                  Circuit for Example 3.9.

    The first step here would be to note that the two sources are in opposition.
    The result is an effective source of 10.5 volts with the same polarity as the
    12 volt source, meaning it creates a clockwise current (rather the opposite of
    Figure 3.22). The total resistance will be the sum of the resistors, or 500 .
    From this we can compute the current and then the voltage drops across each
    resistor. The polarity across the 100  will be + to - left to right, and across
    the 400  it will be + to - right to left. The polarities for both sources are
    top to bottom + to -. This is shown in Figure 3.24.

    I = ETotal                                                                             Figure 3.24
          R Total                                                                          Circuit for Example 3.9 with
                                                                                           current direction and voltage
    I = 10.5 V 500                                                                         polarities shown.
    I = 21 mA

    V 100 = I × R100
    V 100 = 21 mA×100
    V 100 = 2.1 volts

    V 400 = I × R400
    V 400 = 21 mA×400
    V 400 = 8.4 volts

    To find Vb we start at node b and work our way to ground, summing the
    potentials as we go. First we see the 1.5 volt source. Even though this is a

89
    source, it is still considered a voltage drop because the polarity is + to -. The
    polarity on the 400  resistor is the same, so we add in its 8.4 volts for 9.9
    volts total. That is, node b is 9.9 volts above ground.

    For Vca we proceed similarly. Starting at node c we move through the 1.5
    volt source, but this time the polarity is - to +, or a rise of 1.5 volts (i.e.,
    taken as negative). Now at node b, we continue through the 100  resistor,
    also seeing a - to + polarity, or a rise of 2.1 volts. That adds up to 3.6 volts
    in magnitude, however, the starting node is lower than the ending node, thus
    Vca = -3.6 volts. We could also say Vac = 3.6 volts.

Back in Chapter 2 the height analogy for voltage was presented. This can be applied
nicely in the prior example. You can think of ground as literally ground: the earth
under your feet. Voltage rises would be like climbing up a ladder and voltage drops
would be like climbing down a ladder. Think of each volt as being analogous to one
foot or one meter. Thus, for Vb, you climb up the ladder 8.4 feet for the 400  and
another 1.5 feet for the 1.5 volt source, leaving you 9.9 feet (volts) above the
ground. Therefore, Vb must be positive with respect to ground by 9.9 volts. This
analogy works for voltages below ground as well: just think in terms of digging a
hole. For voltages that are not referenced to ground, think of climbing up and down
ladders, and then comparing the height of where you stopped to the height of where
you started.

Precisely labeling every voltage polarity may seem like unnecessary work, but as
circuit complexity increases so does the opportunity for polarity errors. This
important step should not be omitted. Consider the following example which is only
slightly more complex than the one preceding.

Example 3.10                                                                           Figure 3.25
         Determine the voltage Vbe in the circuit of Figure 3.25.                      Circuit for Example 3.10.

    The 24 volt and 6 volt sources are aiding each other while the 4 volt
    source is in opposition. The result is an effective supplied potential of
    26 volts with a current circulating counterclockwise. The current
    direction and voltage polarities are shown in Figure 3.26.

    First, find the circulating current and then find the voltage drops across
    the resistors of interest. The total resistance is the sum of the three, or
    13 k.

90
    I = ETotal                                                                         Figure 3.26
         R Total                                                                       Circuit for Example 3.10 with
                                                                                       current direction and voltage
    I = 26 V 13 k                                                                      polarities shown.
    I = 2 mA

    V 10k = I × R1
    V 10k = 2 mA×10 k 
    V 10k = 20 volts

    Similarly, V2k = 4 volts and V1k = 2 volts with the polarities shown. To
    determine Vbe, we can start at node b and move to node e by either
    going to the left or right side. We shall do both and compare the results.

    Going to the left, we see + to - 20 volts across the 10 k, - to + 24 across
    the left side source, and then + to - 4 volts across the 2 k. This adds up to
    0 volts, meaning that nodes b and e are at the same potential! Double
    checking by going down the right side we see + to - 6 volts for the top
    source, - to + 4 volts for the right side source, and finally - to + 2 volts for
    the 1 k. This is also 0 volts, as expected.

    It is important to understand that saying Vbe = 0 volts does not imply that Vb
    or Ve are 0 volts. In fact, we can see that Ve is below ground by the voltage
    dropped across the 2 k, or -4 volts. Similarly, Vb is above node a by 20
    volts, and node a itself is 24 volts below ground given the polarity of the left
    side source. The result, once again, is -4 volts.

One more example to better illustrate the voltage divider rule in a larger circuit.

Example 3.11                                                                           Figure 3.27
         Determine the voltages, Vb, Vd, and Vbd in the circuit of Figure 3.27.        Circuit for Example 3.11.

    While we could find the circulating current, then use Ohm's law to find the
    individual voltage drops, and finally add these pieces to find the potentials
    we're looking for, we shall instead focus on using VDR which may be faster.

    The voltage divider rule states that the voltage across any resistor or group
    of resistors in a series loop is proportional to their resistance compared to the
    total resistance in that loop. The total resistance in this circuit is 12 k. To
    find the voltage across any resistor or group of resistors, we simply make a
    ratio of the resistance of interest to the total resistance and multiply by the
    applied source voltage. Numbering the resistors R1 at top to R4 at bottom:

91
                      V d = E R4
                                 RT

                     V d = 36 V 4.5 k  12 k 
                     V d = 13.5 volts

                     V b = E R2+R3+R4
                                     RT

                      V b = 36V 8 k  12 k 
                     V b = 24 volts

                     V bd = E R2 +R3
                                   RT

                     V bd = 36 V 3.5 k  12 k 
                     V bd = 10.5 volts

         There is another way to find Vbd here, and that's to notice that by definition
         Vbd = Vb - Vd. Therefore, Vbd = 24 volts - 13.5 volts, or 10.5 volts.

3.8 Potentiometers and Rheostats

Some applications require the use of variable resistances. One example is a basic
volume control, but other examples include equipment calibration and user
adjustable parameters such as the bass, treble and balance controls on a home audio
system. Adjustable resistances fall under two categories, potentiometers and
rheostats. Generally, these would be the same physical device, with the application
and usage determining its name.

A potentiometer is a resistor with three leads. Along with the typical end leads, there
is a third lead referred to as the wiper or tap. This third lead is connected to a small
metallic arm that makes contact with the resistive material and which can be moved
along the length of the material. Potentiometers, or pots for short, often are formed
in a circular shape (rotary travel) but they can also be in the form of a straight line
(linear travel). Several different types are shown in Figure 3.28. The larger circular
units with shafts and the straight unit at the top are designed to be adjusted by the
end user (appropriately stylish knobs being attached to said shafts, of course), while
the smaller units are intended to be adjusted only by a technician (note the small
adjustment screw slots intended to receive fine screwdrivers). The smaller units are
designed to be mounted directly on a printed circuit board while the user adjustable
units are mounted on a front panel, and have wiring lugs instead of straight leads.

92
                                                                                                  Figure 3.28
                                                                                                  A variety of potentiometers.

A cutaway view of a rotary panel mount pot with its back casing removed is shown
in Figure 3.29.

Most circular potentiometers utilize a 270° rotation from end to end, also known                  Figure 3.29
as "3/4 turn". Some precision pots used for calibration may use an internal worm                  Cutaway view of a rotary
gear to move the wiper and achieve 20 or more turns to shuttle the wiper from                     potentiometer.
one end to the other. This results in the ability to make very fine
adjustments. The rectangular units in the right-center of Figure 3.28 are
examples of this type.

The schematic symbol for a basic potentiometer is shown in Figure 3.30.
For convenience, its terminals are labeled A and B for the two ends, and W
for the wiper arm.

A pot can be visualized as two resistors in sequence with a tap between
them. The total resistance never changes. What does change is the ratio of
the two pieces.

    RAB = RAW + RWB  (3.6)

At the extreme left of travel, RAW will be 0 and RWB will be equal to RAB. At the
extreme right, RAW will equal RAB and RWB will be 0. If the wiper is precisely in the
middle, then RAW = RWB = RAB/2, and so on11.

11 This 50/50 division is true if the pot has a linear taper, meaning that the resistance change
    is proportional to the wiper position. While this is typical, it is possible to have a taper
    that is not linear for special applications, such as audio taper. In these devices the
    resistance ratio at mid-position might be something like 10/90 instead of 50/50. This
    would be desired for a volume control because the human ear responds to changes in
    sound pressure in a logarithmic fashion. Using a linear taper pot would result in a volume
    control that is too sensitive at one end and yet produces hardly no change at the other end.

93
As a result, potentiometers are very useful as controllable voltage dividers (hence        Figure 3.30
the name). Sometimes it is desirable to control two signals simultaneously from a          Schematic symbol for a
single knob (e.g., one volume knob for a hi-fi stereo controls both the left and           potentiometer, with labels.
right channels). For this application, multiple resistive elements can be stacked
and use a common shaft to control all of the wiper arms in tandem. These are known
as ganged potentiometers. The tall, round unit in the left-center of Figure 3.28 is a
dual gang pot. Note that it has a total of six solder lugs, three for the top element and
three for the back element. Finally, unlike fixed resistors, pots are available in
limited sizes. Typical values use multiples of 1 or 5 for the total resistance (for
example, 1 k, 5 k, 10 k, etc.) although a limited selection of other sizes are also
available.

If only the wiper and only one of the two end terminals is used, then the device is        Figure 3.31
referred to as a rheostat. Rheostats are often used to limit current. The value of the     Schematic symbols for a
rheostat ranges from 0 up to the nominal value of the potentiometer. The schematic         rheostat: ANSI (right) and IEC
symbols for a rheostat are shown in Figure 3.31. The ANSI symbol is shown at the           (left).
left and the IEC version at the right.

Time for a couple of examples.

Example 3.12                                                                               Figure 3.32
                                                                                           Circuit for Example 3.12.
         For the circuit depicted in Figure 3.32, determine the maximum and
         minimum voltages for Vc, as well as its value when the pot is adjusted to
         midway (assume linear taper).

    The voltage divider rule states that the voltage across any resistor or group
    of resistors in a series loop is proportional to their resistance compared to the
    total resistance in that loop. The total resistance in this circuit is 8 k. The
    voltage at node c will depend on the setting of the pot. The maximum
    voltage occurs when the wiper is all the way up, contacting node b.

                V c(max) = E Ri
                                  RT

                V c(max ) = 16 V 6 k  8 k 
                V c(max ) = 12 volts

    For the minimum case, the wiper is set all the way down, contacting node d.

94
                V c(min) = E Ri
                                 RT

                V c(min) = 16V 1 k  8 k 
                V c(min) = 2 volts

    For the midway case, the pot can be treated as two 2.5 k resistors.

                V c(mid ) = E Ri
                                  RT

                V c(mid ) = 16 V 3.5 k  8 k 
                V c(mid ) = 7 volts

    Note that the mid-position achieves a voltage midway between the extremes.

    Thus the pot allows a range of voltage adjustment between a minimum of 2
    volts and a maximum of 12 volts. The upper and lower fixed resistors serve
    to set these limits. The larger the values of these resistors compared to the
    value of the pot, the more narrow the range of adjustment. If these two
    resistors were excluded, the pot would allow the entire range of adjustment,
    from ground (0 volts) up to the power supply value of 16 volts.

Example 3.13                                                                          Figure 3.33
                                                                                      Circuit for Example 3.13.
         The potentiometer in the circuit of Figure 3.33 is connected as a rheostat.
         Determine the maximum and minimum current in the circuit.

    The rheostat will present a resistance value between 0  and 10 k. The
    maximum current case occurs when the wiper is set to the extreme left,
    producing 0 .

    I (max) = E
                 RT

    I (max) = 50 V 1 k 
    I (max) = 50 mA

    For the minimum case, the wiper is set all the way to the right, producing the
    full 10 k.

95
                      I (min) = E
                                   RT

                      I (min) = 50 V 11 k 
                      I (min) = 4.545 mA

3.9 Summary

Electrons are the charge carrier in metals. Their direction of travel, called electron
flow, runs from the negative terminal of a voltage source to the positive terminal.
The more commonly used conventional current flow runs from the positive terminal
to the negative terminal. As conventional current enters a resistor, we mark this point
as positive, and where it exits, negative. Thus, any voltage with a + to - polarity is
deemed a voltage drop (which dissipates energy in a resistor). A polarity of - to + is
deemed a voltage rise.

A series connection is any connection in which the current through one component
must be identical to the current flowing through any other component in that
connection. In other words, the current exiting any component must be the only
current flowing into the next component in line; there can no intervening
connections for current flow to or from other parts of the circuit. The equivalent
resistance of a string of resistors placed in series is simply the sum of their resistance
values. Consequently, the larger resistors dominate the equivalent value.

Ohm's law states that the voltage across a resistor must equal the product of its
resistance and the current flowing through it.

Kirchhoff's voltage law (KVL) states that the sum of voltage rises around any series
loop must equal the sum of voltage drops around that loop. Alternately, it may be
stated as the sum of voltage rises and drops around a series loop must be zero, as the
rises and drops have opposite polarity.

The voltage divider rule (VDR) is a convenient computational shortcut based on
Ohm's law and KVL. It states that the voltage across any given resistor or group of
resistors in a series connection is proportional to their resistance as a percentage of
the total resistance. For example, if a resistor makes up one quarter of the total
resistance in a series string of resistors, then that resistor will get one quarter of the
total voltage applied to that string.

A potentiometer, or pot, is a three terminal variable resistance. The resistance of the
entire device is fixed, however, a third lead is attached internally to an adjustable
wiper, effectively creating two resistors. The sum of the two parts always equals the
nominal value of the pot with the values of each piece being determined by the
position of the wiper. Pots may be either rotary or linear (straight line) in motion and

96
are used typically to adjust a voltage level. If the wiper and only one of the end
terminals is used, the device is called a rheostat. A common application for a
rheostat is the control of current.
Finally, computer simulation tools may be used to build virtual circuits and
determine various parameters such as voltages and currents. They may use virtual
instruments that echo real world instruments or they may use more direct means,
offering results in the form of tables.

Review Questions

    1. Describe the differences between electron flow and conventional current
         flow.

    2. Define the term series connection.
    3. How is the equivalent resistance for a string of series connected resistors

         computed? Is the process identical for series connected voltage sources?
    4. Why are current sources generally not placed in series?
    5. Define Ohm's law.
    6. Define Kirchhoff's voltage law.
    7. Define the voltage divider rule.
    8. What is meant by a Monte Carlo analysis?
    9. What is the difference between a potentiometer and a rheostat?

3.10 Exercises

Analysis

    1. For the circuit of Figure 3.34, determine the circulating current.

                                                                                Figure 3.34

    2. For the circuit of Figure 3.35, determine the circulating current.

                                                                                Figure 3.35

97
    3. For the circuit of Figure 3.34, determine the power dissipated in the resistor.
    4. For the circuit of Figure 3.35, determine the power dissipated in the resistor.
    5. Determine the voltage at the open terminals of Figure 3.36.

                                                                                Figure 3.36

    6. Determine the voltage at the open terminals of Figure 3.37.
                                                                                Figure 3.37

    7. Determine the voltage at the open terminals of Figure 3.38.
                                                                                Figure 3.38

    8. Determine the equivalent resistance of circuit shown in Figure 3.39.
                                                                                Figure 3.39

98
    9. Determine the equivalent resistance of circuit shown in Figure 3.40.
                                                                                Figure 3.40

    10. Determine the equivalent resistance of circuit shown in Figure 3.41.
                                                                                Figure 3.41

    11. For the circuit of Figure 3.42, determine the circulating current.
                                                                                Figure 3.42

    12. For the circuit of Figure 3.42, determine the voltages across each resistor
         and find Vab.

    13. Given the circuit of Figure 3.42, determine the power dissipated by each
         resistor and the power delivered by the source.

99
    14. For the circuit of Figure 3.43, determine the circulating current.
                                                                                Figure 3.43

    15. Given the circuit of Figure 3.43, determine the voltages across each resistor
         and find Vba.

    16. For the circuit of Figure 3.43, determine the power dissipated by each
         resistor and the power delivered by the source.

    17. For the circuit of Figure 3.44, determine the circulating current.
                                                                                Figure 3.44

    18. For the circuit of Figure 3.44, determine the voltages across each resistor
         and find Va.

    19. For the circuit of Figure 3.45, determine the circulating current and indicate
         all voltage polarities.
                                                                                Figure 3.45

    20. Given the circuit of Figure 3.45, determine the voltages across each resistor
         and find Vb, Vbc, and Vca.

    21. For the circuit of Figure 3.45, determine the power delivered by the source.

100
    22. For the circuit of Figure 3.46, determine the circulating current and indicate
         all voltage polarities.
                                                                                Figure 3.46

    23. Given the circuit of Figure 3.46, determine the voltages across each resistor
         and find Vc, Vac, and Va.

    24. For the circuit of Figure 3.46, determine the power dissipated by the 10 
         resistor.

    25. For the circuit of Figure 3.47, determine the circulating current and indicate
         all voltage polarities.
                                                                                Figure 3.47

    26. For the circuit of Figure 3.47, determine the voltages across each resistor
         and find Vb, Vc, and Vca.

    27. Referring to the circuit of 3.48, determine the voltages across each resistor
         and find Vb, Vc, and Vac.
                                                                                Figure 3.48

    28. Referring to the circuit of Figure 3.48, determine the circulating current and
         indicate all voltage polarities.

101
    29. Given the circuit of 3.49, determine the voltages across each resistor and
         find Vb, Vc, and Vac.
                                                                                Figure 3.49

    30. Referring to the circuit of Figure 3.49, determine the circulating current and
         indicate all voltage polarities.

    31. Given the circuit of 3.50, determine the circulating current and indicate all
         voltage polarities.
                                                                                Figure 3.50

    32. Referring to the circuit of Figure 3.50, determine the voltages across each
         resistor and find Vb, Vc, and Vac.

    33. Given the circuit of 3.51, determine the circulating current and indicate all
         voltage polarities.
                                                                                Figure 3.51

    34. Referring to the circuit of Figure 3.51, determine the voltages across each
         resistor and find Vb, Vc, and Vac.

102
    35. Using the voltage divider rule, determine the voltages Vb, Vc and Vac for the
         circuit shown in Figure 3.52.
                                                                                Figure 3.52

    36. Using the voltage divider rule, determine the voltages Vb, Vc and Vbd for the
         circuit shown in Figure 3.53.
                                                                                Figure 3.53

    37. For the circuit of Figure 3.53, determine Vb if the 4 k resistor is
         accidentally shorted. How does this compare to the original circuit?

    38. For the circuit of Figure 3.53, determine Vb if the 4 k resistor is
         accidentally opened. How does this compare to the original circuit?

103
    39. Given the circuit shown in Figure 3.54, find the voltage drop across the
         resistor.
                                                                                Figure 3.54

    40. Given the circuit shown in Figure 3.55, find the voltage drops across the
         resistor.
                                                                                Figure 3.55

    41. Find the voltage drops across the resistors in the circuit of Figure 3.56.
                                                                                Figure 3.56

    42. Find the voltage drops across the resistors in the circuit of Figure 3.57.
                                                                                Figure 3.57

104
    43. Find the voltage drops across the resistors in the circuit of Figure 3.58.
                                                                                Figure 3.58

    44. Find the voltage drops across the resistors in the circuit of Figure 3.59.
                                                                                Figure 3.59

    45. The circuit of Figure 3.60 uses a linear taper potentiometer. Determine Vb
         when the wiper arm is at position a, position b, and at the halfway point.
                                                                                Figure 3.60

    46. What is the maximum current flowing through the potentiometer of Figure
         3.60? At what position(s) does this occur?

Design

    47. Redesign the circuit of Figure 3.34 using a new resistor such that the current
         from the 12 volt battery is 0.1 A.

    48. Redesign the circuit of Figure 3.35 using a new resistor such that the current
         from the 9 volt battery is 2 mA.

    49. For the circuit of Figure 3.39, find the value of a series voltage source that
         would generate 1 mA of current if it was connected across the terminals.

105
    50. For the circuit of Figure 3.41, find the value of a series voltage source that
         would generate 1 mA of current if it was connected across the terminals.

    51. Determine values for the resistors in Figure 3.61 such that R1 is four times
         the size of R2 and R2 is three times the size of R3, with the total resistance
         equaling 8 k.
                                                                                Figure 3.61

    52. For the circuit shown in Figure 3.62, determine values for R1 and R2 such
         that Vab is 6 volts if E is a 9 volt battery and the total current draw is 20 mA.
                                                                                Figure 3.62

    53. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 3.63. If all resistors have the same
         value, determine that value if E, a 24 volt source, generates a total power of
         10 watts.
                                                                                Figure 3.63

106
    54. For the circuit shown in Figure 3.64, determine values for R1 and R2 such
         that Vab is 6 volts if I is a 2 mA source and the total voltage drop is 24 volts.
                                                                                Figure 3.64

    55. Consider the circuit of Figure 3.53. Is it possible to add a fifth resistor such
         that the circulating current is 0.1 mA? If so, what is that resistor value?

    56. Consider the circuit of Figure 3.53. Is it possible to add a fifth resistor such
         that the circulating current is 2 mA? If so, what is that resistor value?

Challenge

    57. Assume that two AA cells, E1 and E2, rated at 900 mAh each are used to
         drive a 2 watt lamp as shown in Figure 3.65. Determine the expected life of
         the batteries.
                                                                                Figure 3.65

    58. Given the circuit of Figure 3.66, determine the required values of E, R1, R2
         and R3 if there is one volt across R3, the total current draw is 10 mA, the
         voltage across R1 is twice the size of voltage across R2 and the power
         dissipation in R2 is 100 mW.
                                                                                Figure 3.66

107
    59. Given the circuit of Figure 3.66, determine the required source voltage if R1
         is 1 k, R2 is 1 k, the power dissipation in R1 is 4 mW and the power
         dissipation in R3 is 2 mW.

    60. Given the circuit of Figure 3.67, determine Vc, Vdb and Vce.

                                                                                Figure 3.67

    61. Given the circuit of Figure 3.67, determine Vac, Veb and Vd.
    62. Refer to the circuit of Figure 3.53. Assuming each resistor has a 10%

         tolerance, determine the maximum and minimum values for Vc.

Simulation

    63. Simulate the solution of design problem 43 and determine if the values
         produce the required results.

    64. Perform a DC simulation on the circuit of Figure 3.46 and find all of the
         node voltages along with the circulating current.

    65. Perform a DC simulation on the circuit of Figure 3.47 and find all of the
         node voltages along with the circulating current.

    66. Perform a DC simulation on the circuit of Figure 3.59 and find all of the
         node voltages.

    67. Perform a DC simulation on the circuit of Problem 34 and find all of the
         node voltages.

    68. Perform a DC simulation on the circuit of Problem 36 and find all of the
         node voltages.

    69. Simulate the solution of Challenge problem 58 and determine if the values
         produce the required results.

    70. Simulate the circuit of Figure 3.67 (Challenge problems 60 and 61) and
         determine if the node voltages produced match the expected results.

    71. Perform a Monte Carlo simulation on the circuit of Figure 3.52. Set each
         resistor to 5% tolerance and run at least ten variations for Vb to determine a
         typical spread of values.

108
      Source: www.xkcd.com
                                    This page intentionally left not blank.

109
4 Parallel Resistive Circuits

4.0 Chapter Learning Objectives

After completing this chapter, you should be able to:

    · Identify parallel resistive circuits that include a single voltage source or one or more current sources.
    · Compute equivalent resistance of parallel resistive networks.
    · Determine the equivalent of multiple parallel current sources.
    · Compute component and total current for parallel resistive networks.
    · Compute system voltage and component powers for parallel resistive networks.
    · Utilize Ohm's law, Kirchhoff's current law (KCL) and the current divider rule (CDR) to aid in the

         analysis of parallel resistive circuits.
    · Describe the function of fuses and circuit breakers.

4.1 Introduction

In the preceding chapter we examined series circuits, starting with series configurations of resistors and voltage
sources. In this chapter we shall examine the "mirror twin" of series circuits, namely parallel circuits. Again, we
shall begin by defining the parallel configuration, and explore how to combine sources and resistors in parallel.
From there we shall introduce new laws and rules unique to parallel configurations. For everything said about
series circuits, there are corresponding statements regarding parallel circuits. Just as there were specific laws and
techniques useful in the series case, such as Kirchhoff's voltage law and the voltage divider rule, there are
corresponding laws and techniques useful in the series case (e.g., Kirchhoff's current law and the current divider
rule).

A parallel circuit may contain any number of resistors and current sources, or in place of the current sources, a
single voltage source. We shall examine how to determine the current flow through each component, the voltage
across each component and the power either dissipated or generated by each component. As usual, other
practical issues will also be examined along with appropriate computer simulations.

Parallel circuits are in many ways the complement of series circuits. The hallmark of a series connection is that
all components in that connection see the same current. Similarly, the most notable characteristic of a parallel
connection is that all components see the same voltage. This implies that parallel connections have only two
nodes, or two points of connection upon which everything is connected. Just as a series connection can be
envisioned as a sort of chain with every element a link in that chain, a parallel connection can be envisioned as a
sort of ladder with every element a rung on that ladder.

110
4.2 The Parallel Connection

Consider the generic layout of Figure 4.1, each component represented by a box.                     Figure 4.1
Although it may be drawn oddly, there are only two common connection nodes in                       A parallel configuration.
this configuration: one along the top and the other along the bottom (if you're
having difficulty seeing the bottom node, simply slide box E to the right and then                           C
rotate it counterclockwise 180 degrees so that its bottom winds up on top). Each of
these blocks is like a rung on a ladder. If we were to take a voltmeter and place it                                           D
across any of these blocks, the meter would read the same voltage across each
because the probes are always contacting the same two nodes (remember, ideally the                  A  B
connecting wires have negligible resistance). Thus, we come to the first observation
of parallel circuits:                                                                                           E

In a parallel connection the voltage is the same across each component. (4.1)

A more complex configuration is shown in Figure 4.2. In this layout some                            Figure 4.2
elements are in series and some are in parallel. Only elements D and E are strictly                 A more complex configuration.
in parallel here as they are the only two that connect to the same two nodes, and
thus must see the same voltage. Items C and F might at first appear to be in                              C
parallel with them but upon closer inspection it should be noted that C and F are in
series with each other. That is, C and F will split the voltage that D or E sees, in                A  B           D
accordance with the voltage divider rule. In other words, it is not true that the                                               E
voltage across C or across F must be the same as the voltage across D or E. The
same can be said for items A and B.12                                                                        F

4.3 Combining Parallel Components

Our first step is to determine how to combine parallel components in order to create
a single equivalent component. Unlike series connections, this can be a little more
time consuming.

Sources in Parallel

First, voltage sources are not placed in parallel as a general rule, see Figure 4.3.                Figure 4.3
The reason is because a parallel connection requires the same voltage across each                   Do not place voltage sources
component. This would be impossible to achieve with each source trying to                           in parallel.
maintain a different voltage across the same two nodes. This may result in
damage to the sources (e.g., exploding batteries). The main exception to this rule is
if the sources have the same potential and the goal is to extend operational life (e.g.,
multiple D cell batteries in parallel).

12 What can be said is that the series combination of C and F together is in parallel with D
    which is, in turn, in parallel with E. This is the basic idea behind series-parallel networks,
    the theme of the next chapter.

111
When it comes to current sources, they may simply be added together, however,              Figure 4.4
like series voltage sources, polarity is important. Referring to the three parallel        Current sources in parallel.
current sources in Figure 4.4, the middle and right sources are pumping current
into the top node while the left source is feeding the bottom node. You can also
think of the left source as draining the top node. Thus, these three sources together
behave like a single source of five amps feeding the top node (eight amps in, three
amps out).

Resistors in Parallel

When placed in parallel, resistor values do not add they way they do in series             Figure 4.5
connections. The reason for this is obvious if we look at the basic resistance             Resistors in parallel.
equation from Chapter 2, Equation 2.11:
                                                                                                                  A
                      R =l                                                                                               B
                            A

If we consider two identical resistors placed in parallel, side by side as in Figure 4.5,
the effective area would double while keeping the resistivity and length unchanged.
The combined result would be a halving of the resistance of just one of them. Thus
we see that placing resistors in parallel results in a decrease in net resistance, the
opposite of the series case.

This situation is simplified if we consider conductance instead of resistance.
Recalling that conductance, G, is the reciprocal of resistance, we can rewrite the
resistance equation:

     G = A l

Now we can see that the increase in area creates a proportional increase in
conductivity. If we generalize this for N resistors we find that the equivalent
conductance of a group of parallel resistors is their sum:

     GTotal = G 1+G 2+G3 +...+G N     (4.2)

As we deal normally with component resistance values instead of conductance
values, Equation 4.2 may be rewritten in terms of equivalent resistance:

     1 = 1 + 1 + 1 +...+ 1
     R Parallel R1 R 2 R3         RN

     RParallel = 1 1 1 1 1            (4.3)

                       + + +...+
                       R1 R2 R3   RN

112
Among other things, Equation 4.3 tells us that the equivalent resistance of a group of
parallel resistances will always be smaller than the smallest resistance in that group.
It also indicates that if we have N identical resistors of value R, the equivalent will
be R/N (e.g., 3 parallel 3.6 k resistors are equivalent to a single 1.2 k resistor). As
a convenience, it is common to use two parallel lines, ||, as a shortcut way of saying
"in parallel with", as in R1 || R2. Also, || has higher operational precedence than +.

Product-Sum Rule

A handy shortcut for two parallel resistors may be created from Equation 4.3. We
start by writing the version for just two parallel resistors,

     RParallel =     1
                  1 +1
                  R1 R2

Multiply the fraction through by R1 R2 and simplify:

     RParallel = R1 R 2                               (4.4)
                R1 +R 2

For obvious reasons, Equation 4.4 is referred to as the product-sum rule. It is only
applicable to two resistors, however, it can be used repeatedly on pairs of resistors
within larger groups instead of using Equation 4.3. For example, a group of four
resistors can be reduced to two pairs, and then those two equivalents can be reduced
as a third pair. This can be a handy technique for obtaining quick estimates.

We can take the product-sum rule a step further by writing R2 as a multiple of R1:

     R2 = N R1

Substituting this into Equation 4.4 yields:

     RParallel = R1 N R1
                 R1+N R1

     RParallel = N R12
                ( N +1) R1

     RParallel = N N +1 R1                            (4.5)

Equation 4.5 is useful for quick estimates of parallel resistor pairs. For example, if
we have a 24 k resistor in parallel with an 8 k resistor, that's a ratio (N) of 3:1.

113
Thus the equivalent will be N/(N+1), or 3/4ths, of the smaller resistor, yielding 6 k.
Similarly, a 180  in parallel with a 90  would yield 2/3rds of 90 , or 60 .

Example 4.1                                                                             Figure 4.6
                                                                                        Resistor arrangement for
         A group of resistors is placed in parallel as shown in Figure 4.6. Determine   Example 4.1.
         the equivalent parallel value.

     There are several solution paths. We'll try them all and compare. First, let's
     try the conductance form:

     RParallel = 1 1 1 1 1
     + + +...+
     R1 R2 R3                        RN

     RParallel = 1 1 1 1
                2 k +6 k +12 k 

     RParallel  1.333 k 

     We could also use the product-sum rule twice. We'll use the middle and
     right-most resistor first (although any pairing would do, but this pairing is
     convenient):

     R23 = R2 R3
             R2+R3

     R23 = 6 k 12 k  6 k +12k 
     R23 = 4 k 

     RParallel = R1 R 23
                R1+R23

     RParallel = 2 k 4 k  2 k +4 k 
     RParallel  1.333 k 

     Finally, we could use the ratio technique. First, consider the 6 k and 12 k
     resistor pair. That's a 2:1 ratio, so the result will be 2/3rds of the smaller
     resistor, and 2/3rds of 6 k is 4 k. The ratio between this and the 2 k
     resistor is also 2:1, and 2/3rds of 2 k is approximately 1.333 k.

     The ratio technique happened to work out well here because of the
     convenient resistor values with perfect integer ratios. That will not always be
     the case.

114
4.4 Kirchhoff's Current Law (KCL)

Just as Kirchhoff's voltage law is a key element in understanding series circuits,
Kirchhoff's current law (KCL) is the operative rule for parallel circuits. It states that
the sum of all currents entering and exiting a node must sum to zero. Alternately, it
can be stated as the sum of currents entering a node must equal the sum of currents
exiting that node. As a pseudo formula:

 I =  I                            (4.6)

Recalling that a node is a connection area wherein the voltage is the same                   Figure 4.7
(ignoring the resistance of connecting wires), we see that there are two nodes in a          A simple parallel circuit.
parallel configuration. For each of these nodes, whatever currents flow in must be
balanced by the same total current flowing out. For example, referring to the
circuit shown in Figure 4.7, there is a current source feeding the top node. At the
three-way connection with R1 and R2, KCL along with Ohm's law dictate that the
incoming current from the source must split with one portion exiting by flowing
down through R1 and the remainder exiting by flowing down through R2. At the
bottom node (ground) these two resistor currents must combine and equal the
current that is being drawn back into the current source, which must be the same as
the current originally produced by the source. This is perfectly sensible because it
would be impossible for the current source to establish two different currents; one at
its input and the other at its output. To assert otherwise would be a little like saying
you're two different heights depending on whether you measure from your toes up to
your head versus from your head down to your toes. Thus, a simplistic way of
stating KCL is "What goes in must come out".13

The Current Divider Rule (CDR)

Just as series circuits follow the voltage divider rule (voltage dividing in proportion
to resistance), parallel circuits follow the current divider rule which states that
current divides in reverse proportion to resistance (i.e., in direct proportion to
conductance). This can be reduced to a simple formula when only two resistors are
involved. Consider two parallel resistors, R1 and R2, fed by a current, ITotal, as in
Figure 4.7. First, we note that the voltage across the pair must equal the entering
current times the effective resistance of the pair.

                     V = I Total R1 R2
                                  R1+R2

13 For details on this corollary to Fudd's First Law of Opposition, see Firesign Theatre, I
    Think We're All Bozos On This Bus. Remember, the future can't wait.

115
The current through each of the resistors must be this voltage divided by the
corresponding resistance. For the current through R1:

     I R1 = V
             R1

     I R1 = I Total R1 R2
                  R1( R1+R2)

     I R1 = I Total R2
                  R 1 +R 2

Similarly, for the current through R2:

     I R2 = V
             R2

     I R2 = I Total R1 R2
                  R2( R1+R2)

     I R2 = I Total R1
                  R1 +R 2

Thus, the current through one of the resistors will equal the total current times the
ratio of the opposite resistor over the sum of the two resistors. In general:

     I X = I Total RY                   (4.7)
                  R X +RY

This rule is convenient in that you don't have to compute the parallel equivalent
resistance, but remember, it is valid only when there are just two resistors involved.
A more general version that can be used for any number of resistors is Ii = ITotal 
RP/Ri, where RP is the total equivalent parallel resistance and Ri is the resistor of
interest. This is, in essence, merely a rewriting of the fact that all components must
see the same voltage: Ii  Ri = ITotal  RP. This is not as much of a shortcut as the two
resistor version because the parallel resistance still must be calculated.

Example 4.2                                                                              Figure 4.8
                                                                                         Circuit for Example 4.2.
         A simple parallel network is shown in Figure 4.8. Determine the current
         through each resistor.

     The current divider rule can be used to find the currents through the two
     resistors. At the top node the total entering current is 10 amps.

116
     I R1 = I Total R2                                                                   Figure 4.9
                  R 1 +R 2                                                               Polarities and directions for
                                                                                         Example 4.2.
     I 15 = 10 A 5  15+5 
     I 15 = 2.5 A

     I R2 = I Total R1
                   R1+R2

     I 5 = 10 A 15 15+5
     I 5 = 7.5 A

     At this point it is worth taking a moment to verify the voltage polarities and
     current directions. Given the direction of the source, the currents through the
     two resistors must be flowing from top to bottom. Consequently, the voltage
     polarities must be + to - from top to bottom. This is illustrated in Figure 4.9.
     At the top node, entering current is in red with exiting current in blue. Note
     that KCL is satisfied as 10 amps enters while a total of 10 amps (2.5 amps
     plus 7.5 amps) exits.

4.5 Parallel Analysis

Keeping in mind that the voltage across each element in a parallel configuration is
constant, Ohm's law dictates that currents divide among parallel resistors in
proportion to their conductance (i.e., in inverse proportion to their resistance). As a
consequence, Ohm's law, Kirchhoff's current law, the current divider rule and
parallel component combinations are the tools we will use to solve general parallel
circuit problems. There are multiple techniques for analyzing these circuits:

    · If the circuit uses a voltage source and its value along with the resistor
         values are given, the resistor currents can be found by dividing the source
         voltage by each resistance. Once these currents are found, KCL can be used
         to determine the source current. At that point, power law can be used to find
         the power dissipation in each resistor or the power developed by the source,
         as needed.

    · If the circuit uses current sources, then the total circulating current can be
         found by combining their values (taking into account the current directions,
         of course). The individual resistor branch currents then can be found using
         the current divider rule (repeatedly, if needed). Alternately, the effective
         parallel resistance may be found first. Multiplying this by the total source
         current via Ohm's law will determine the system voltage, and from there the
         individual resistor branch currents may be found using Ohm's law.

117
     · If the problem concerns determining resistance values, the basic idea will be
         to use these rules in reverse. For example, if a resistor value is needed to set
         a specific voltage, the equivalent parallel resistance can be determined from
         this voltage and the given current source. The conductance values of the
         other parallel resistors can then be subtracted from the total conductance
         (i.e., the reciprocal of the equivalent parallel resistance), yielding the
         remaining required conductance value, the reciprocal being the required
         resistance. Similarly, if the currents through two parallel resistors are
         known, as long as one of the resistance values is known, the other resistance
         can be determined using either the current divider rule in reverse (i.e., the
         currents divide in inverse proportion to the resistances) or via Ohm's law.

Example 4.3                                                                                Figure 4.10
                                                                                           Circuit for Example 4.3.
         A simple parallel network is shown in Figure 4.10. Determine the current
         through each resistor as well as the total current exiting the voltage source.

     The most direct solution is to use Ohm's law to determine each of the
     resistor branch currents. KCL can then be used to determine the current
     flowing from the source. Recalling the voltage is the same across parallel
     branches:

     I 600 = E
             R1

     I 600 = 12 V 600 
     I 600 = 20 mA

     I 400 = E
             R2

     I 400 = 12 V 400
     I 400 = 30 mA

     KCL dictates that the entering current must equal the sum of the exiting
     currents, or 50 mA.

     An alternate technique would be to determine the parallel resistance and
     divide this into the source voltage to determine the exiting source current.

     RParallel = R1 R 2
                 R1+R2

     RParallel = 400 600 400 +600 
     RParallel = 240

118
     I Total = E
               R Parallel

     I Total = 12 V 240 
     I Total = 50 mA

     Now CDR can be used to find the currents through the two resistors.               Figure 4.11
                                                                                       Polarities and directions for
                  I R1 = I Total R2                                                    Example 4.3.
                               R1 +R 2

                 I 400 = 50 mA 600 400 +600 
                 I 400 = 30 mA

     I R2 = I Total R1
                   R1+R2

     I 600 = 50 mA 400 400 +600 
     I 600 = 20 mA

     The voltage polarities and current directions are illustrated in Figure 4.11.
     The voltage polarity is + to - from top to bottom, as set by the voltage
     source. With these polarities, the currents through the two resistors must be
     flowing from top to bottom and the current from the source is flowing right,
     from the positive terminal. At the top node, entering current is in red with
     exiting current in blue.

Computer Simulation

The circuit of Example 4.3 is entered into a simulator as shown in Figure 4.12. In
this example, virtual instruments are used. Three ammeters are inserted in line to
measure the current exiting the voltage source as well as the currents flowing
through the two resistors. The polarities of the ammeters are set to match those
illustrated in Figure 4.11. As a consequence, we expect to see all positive currents.

The result is pretty much as expected. The current through the 600  resistor is
precisely 20 mA and the source current is precisely the sum of the two resistor
currents. The only wrinkle is that the current through the 400  resistor is very
slightly less than expected, 29.999 mA versus 30 mA calculated. This is due to meter
loading effects. In Chapter 3 we saw that ammeters present a very low internal
resistance, but this cannot always be ignored, especially when measuring in series
with resistors having very small values. This slight increase in resistance forces a
slight decrease in current due to Ohm's law.

119
                                                                                            Figure 4.12
                                                                                            The circuit of Example 4.3 in a
                                                                                            simulator.

It turns out that a similar situation exists for voltmeters. Ideally, voltmeters present a
very high internal resistance which, when placed across a resistor, has minimal
impact. This effect cannot always be ignored, especially when measuring across
resistors having large values, as the current divider rule will come into play.
Fortunately, the internal resistance of many virtual instruments is adjustable and can
be set to extreme values to minimize any impact on measurements. In the world of
physical instruments this is not possible so the internal resistance of any real world
meter is something that must always be kept in mind.

Example 4.4                                                                                 Figure 4.13
                                                                                            Circuit for Example 4.4.
         A parallel network is shown in Figure 4.13. Determine the current through
         each resistor.

     The current divider rule can be used to find the currents through the two
     resistors. At the bottom node (ground) the total entering current is 2 mA.

     I R1 = I Total R2
                  R 1 +R 2

     I 12k = 2 mA 100 k  12 k +100 k 
     I 12k  1.7857 mA

     The current through the 100 k can be found via KCL as follows:

120
 I R2 = I Total - I R1                                                                    Figure 4.14
I 100k = 2 mA -1.7857 mA                                                                  Polarities and directions for
I 100k  0.2143 mA                                                                         Example 4.4.

The polarities and directions are shown in Figure 4.14. Note that the currents
are flowing up through the resistors producing voltage drops of + to - from
ground up to the top. This means that the voltage of the top node is negative
with respect to ground.

Computer Simulation

In order to get a better handle on the idea of meter loading, the circuit shown in
Example 4.4 is entered into a simulator. This is shown in Figure 4.15 with the
simulation using virtual instruments. Using Ohm's law, the voltage drop across the
system should be 100 k times its current, or approximately 21.4286 volts if we
carry the digits out a little further.

                                                                                                                   Figure 4.15
                                                                                                                   The circuit of Example 4.4 in a
                                                                                                                   simulator.

The virtual voltmeter has been set for an internal resistance of 1 G. The results are
nearly the same as those calculated previously. To test the impact of the voltmeter's
internal resistance the simulation is run a second time with the internal resistance set
to 1 M, a value seen commonly in general purpose digital multimeters. The result
is shown in Figure 4.16. The voltage magnitude has dropped more than 200 mV,
entirely due to meter loading.

121
                                                                                           Figure 4.16
                                                                                           Simulation repeated using a
                                                                                           voltmeter internal resistance of
                                                                                           1 M.

Depending on component values, the results could be much worse or hardly
noticeable at all. As a general rule, make sure the voltmeter's internal resistance is at
least 10 times (and preferably, 100 times) larger than any resistance it is placed
across in order to avoid loading errors caused by unwanted current division. In the
case of an ammeter, its internal resistance should be at least 10 times (and
preferably, 100 times) smaller than any resistance with which it is placed in series.

Example 4.5                                                                                Figure 4.17
                                                                                           Circuit for Example 4.5.
         A parallel network is shown in Figure 4.17. Determine the current through
         the 200  resistor.

     The first step is to simplify the circuit. The two current sources
     aid each other as they both feed current into the top node. Thus
     they are equivalent to a single 1.4 amp current source with the
     same direction. Further, the 60  and 120  resistors are in
     parallel and can be treated as a single unit. Note this is a 2:1
     ratio, and thus the result will be 2/3rds of 60 , or 40 . The
     basic product-sum rule or conductance formula could also be used.

     We have simplified the circuit down to a single 1.4 amp source feeding a
     200  resistor in parallel with a 40  resistor. The current divider rule can
     be used to find the current through the 200  resistor as follows:

122
                      I R1 = I Total R2
                                   R 1 +R 2

                      I 200 = 1.4 A 40  200+40
                      I 200  233.33 mA

         As a crosscheck, Ohm's law indicates the system voltage must be 200 
         times 233.33 mA, or approximately 46.667 volts. Via Ohm's law, the current
         through the 60  must be 46.667 volts divided by 60 , or approximately
         777.78 mA. Similarly, the current through the 120  can be determined to
         be approximately 388.89 mA. Via KCL, these three currents should add up
         to the total supplied current of 1.4 amps, which they do.

         An alternate solution path would be to find the equivalent of the three
         parallel resistors, or 200 || 60 || 120, which is 33.333 . This is fed by the
         combined sources yielding 1.4 amps. Ohm's law is then used to find the
         system voltage of approximately 46.667 volts (1.4 amps times 33.333 ).
         From there Ohm's law is used again to find the current flowing through the
         200  (46.667 volts divided by 200 , or approximately 233.33 mA).

Let's continue with the prior example, this time with a design twist.

Example 4.6

         Using the circuit of Figure 4.17, determine the value of an additional fourth
         parallel resistor such that the system voltage will drop to 42 volts.

         The total source current in this circuit is fixed at 1.4 amps. If the resistance it
         feeds is reduced, then by Ohm's law, the system voltage must also be
         reduced. One way to solve this problem is to first determine the required
         parallel equivalent resistance. Then the conductances of the three known
         resistors can be subtracted out, leaving the conductance of the new resistor,
         from which we determine its resistance.

                      RParallel = VI
                      RParallel = 42 V 1.4 A
                      RParallel = 30 

                     G4 = GParallel -G1 -G2 -G3
                     G4 = 1 30  - 1 200  - 1 60  - 1 120
                     G4  3.333 mS

123
     And finally, R4 = 1/G4, thus R4 = 300 .

     The smaller the value of this fourth resistor, the more current it will siphon
     off from the other three resistors, thus reducing the system voltage further.

Time for an example involving power.

Example 4.7                                                                           Figure 4.18
                                                                                      Circuit for Example 4.7.
         A parallel network is shown in Figure 4.18. Determine the total power
         dissipated by the four resistors.

     While the powers for each resistor can be calculated
     individually and then added, it is worthwhile to note that the
     total power dissipated must be equal to the power generated.
     The power generated by the battery is dictated by power law,
     in other words, the battery voltage times its output current. To
     find this current, we can determine the effective resistance and
     then apply Ohm's law.

     The total resistance can be found directly by using the conductance formula,
     however, the values can be divided into convenient pairs first. The pair of
     200  resistors is equivalent to a single 100 . Similarly, the two 600 
     resistors are equivalent to a single 300 . Product-sum rule may be used
     next or 100 || 300 can be determined using the ratio rule. This is a 3:1 ratio,
     so the result will 3/4ths of the smaller resistor, or 75 .

     I Total = E
              RTotal

     I Total = 9 V 75 
     I Total = 120 mA

     P = E×I
     P = 9 V ×120 mA
     P = 1.08 W

     Slightly quicker, we could also use the following approach:

     P = E2
            R

     P = (9 V)2
            75 

     P = 1.08 W

124
4.6 Current Limiting: Fuses and Circuit Breakers

Most electrical and electronic devices are designed to run off of a constant voltage
source. Examples include battery powered devices and the numerous items that
connect to standard residential and commercial electrical systems (e.g., the 120 VAC
system in North America). As such, parallel connections are ideal when a variable
number of devices are to be powered because, unlike a series connection, each
device will see the same voltage rather than having that voltage split among them.
There is another advantage to a parallel connection. Consider the two lighting
schemes presented in Figure 4.19; one utilizing a series configuration and the other a
parallel configuration.

                                                                                          Figure 4.19
                                                                                          Lamp connections:
                                                                                          Series (left) and parallel
                                                                                          (right).

Typically, when a lamp fails, it fails creating an open. If any of the lamps in the
series connection fails, current in the loop is interrupted and all of the lamps go out.
In contrast, if one of the lamps in the parallel connection fails, the remaining lights
will stay on. Further, in the series connection, there is no immediate way to
determine which lamp has failed as none of them will be lit. Each lamp has to be
tested in turn to determine the faulty unit. In the parallel system, it is obvious which
lamp has failed because that's the one that's out.

In a home, school or commercial setting, any number of devices may be plugged             Figure 4.20
into wall sockets with the expectation that each unit will receive the same voltage       Various styles of fuses.
and operate correctly due to the parallel nature of the system. As convenient as this
is, there is a practical problem. Every device that is added to the system
presents another path for current flow. Due to KCL, this means that the
total current drawn from the source must increase. This creates a
potential problem because if too much current is drawn, there can be an
appreciable voltage drop across the wires feeding the outlets as they
can no longer be assumed to be zero ohms. This lowered voltage may
present a problem for the attached devices, but more importantly, the
large current results in unexpected heating of the wires because of the
power dissipation in them (I2R) and creates a possible fire hazard.
Consequently, we must include some method to limit the current to a
safe maximum value.

125
While some electronic systems use active current limiting schemes14, the more
common approach is a fuse or circuit breaker. These devices are placed between the
voltage source and the various loads, and see their combined current. If this current
becomes too great, the device interrupts the current flow by opening the circuit.
Nothing will operate but nothing catches fire, either.

Fuses are used typically in electronic systems, motors, automotive subsystems and           Figure 4.21
the like. An array of various types of fuses is shown in Figure 4.20. Whether they're       Schematic symbols for fuses:
the cylindrical type found in electronic instrumentation or the blade type common           IEC (top and middle), ANSI
in automobiles, fuses are one-shot devices. They consist of a fine wire or metal link       (bottom).
that will heat up and melt if it experiences too high of a current. Upon melting,
circuit continuity is lost and current flow stops. This is called a "blown" fuse. The
fuse will then need to be replaced once the problem has been fixed (i.e., whatever it
was that caused excessive current to flow in the first place).

Fuses have a nominal current rating, for example, two amps. This does not mean that         Figure 4.22
as soon as two amps is reached, the fuse blows. It will take some time for the fuse to      Residential circuit breakers
heat up. The higher the current is above the nominal rating, the faster the fuse will       including cutaway view.
blow. For example, it might take this nominal two amp fuse several seconds before it
blows if the current is, say, 2.5 amps, but less than a second if the current is five
amps. Fuses are also available in fast-blow and slow-blow forms. Fast-blow fuses
will activate many times faster than standard fuses while slow-blow types will
require much long to activate (this prevents the fuse from activating accidentally
with certain kinds of loads that exhibit a high initial startup current but that falls
back to a more modest level once running smoothly, such as a motor). The
schematic symbols for the fuse are shown in Figure 4.21. The top two are IEC
standard and the bottom version is the ANSI (North American) standard.

Fuses are generally inexpensive and effective. The obvious downside to a fuse is
that they need to be replaced once they do their job. A circuit breaker solves this
problem. A circuit breaker, or just breaker for short, can be thought of as a
resettable fuse. Breakers do not have a melting link that interrupts current flow.
Instead, a breaker operates like an intelligent switch: if the current is too large,
the switch is thrown open. The operator can then fix the problem and reset the
breaker (i.e., return the switch to the operating position). A selection of breakers
is shown in Figure 4.22. Circuit breakers are available in a variety of sizes. For
residential wiring, 15 and 20 amp sizes are common for general use although
higher sizes such as 30 and 50 amps are available for circuits feeding high power
appliances such as electric stoves, water heaters and clothes dryers.

14 For details, see Fiore, J., Semiconductor Devices as well as Operational Amplifiers and
    Linear Integrated Circuits, both OER titles.

126
4.7 Summary

In this chapter we have introduced and examined parallel circuits using either one or
more current sources or a single voltage source, along with two or more resistors.
The hallmark of a parallel configuration is that all components are connected to just
two nodes. This means that all elements in a parallel configuration see the same
voltage. If multiple current sources are present, they may be combined into a single
equivalent current source by adding their values, taking care to watch for the
directions of source currents; like directions add while opposing directions subtract,
in much the same manner as series-connected voltage sources. Voltage sources
generally are not placed in parallel as it would be a practical impossibility to
establish different voltages across the same two nodes. The major exception to this
rule is if the sources use the same voltage and the goal is to extend battery life.
Dissimilar parallel voltage sources will most likely cause excessive heat and an
unstable voltage.

The equivalent resistance of a group of parallel resistors will always be smaller than
the smallest resistor in the group because each resistor adds another path for current
flow, thus enhancing conductivity and reducing resistance. In general, the effective
resistance is found by summing the individual conductances to find the total
conductance of the group and then taking the reciprocal of this value. Two shortcut
techniques when just two resistors are involved are the product-sum rule and the
ratio rule (which is particularly handy when one resistor is the integer multiple of the
other).

Kirchhoff's current law (KCL) states that the sum of currents entering a node must
equal the sum of currents leaving that node. Another way of stating this is that the
sum of all currents entering and exiting a node must be zero (obeying polarities).
The current divider rule (CDR) is useful for determining the division of current
between two parallel resistors. It states that the current through one resistor must
equal the current entering the pair times the ratio of the other resistance value to the
summed resistance of the pair.

To determine individual branch currents in a circuit driven by a voltage source,
Ohm's law may be used by dividing the source voltage by the individual resistor
values. These branch currents must sum to the total current delivered by the voltage
source due to KCL. If the parallel network is driven by current sources, the
individual branch currents can be found by determining the effective parallel
resistance and then using Ohm's law to find the system voltage. Once the voltage is
known, Ohm's law is used again on each resistor to find the associated branch
current. Alternately, the resistors can be simplified into successive pairings and then
CDR can be applied repeatedly.

Real world ammeters and voltmeters exhibit internal resistances that can load down
circuit elements and cause errors in measurement. It is best if voltmeters have an

127
internal resistance that is lat east an order of magnitude (preferably two) larger than
the resistors they are placed across in order to limit undesired current divider effects.
Similarly, ammeters should have an internal resistance at least an order of magnitude
(preferably two) smaller than the resistors with which they are placed in-line to limit
undesired Ohm's law effects.
Fuses and circuit breakers are used to limit potentially damaging current in a system.
Both devices will activate by opening the circuit if the current passing through them
exceeds their rated value for a specified period of time. This results in zero current
flow. Fuses are one-shot devices that must be replaced after being activated. In
contrast, circuit breakers can be activated numerous times and are simply reset via a
switch or button after being tripped.

Review Questions

    1. Define the term parallel connection.
    2. How is the equivalent resistance for a group of parallel connected resistors

         computed?
    3. How is the equivalent value for parallel connected current sources

         computed?
    4. Why are voltage sources generally not placed in parallel?
    5. Define the product-sum rule and its use.
    6. Define Kirchhoff's current law.
    7. Define the current divider rule.
    8. Explain the basic operation and usage of fuses and circuit breakers.

4.8 Exercises

Analysis

    1. Determine the effective resistance of the network shown in Figure 4.23.

                                                                                Figure 4.23

128
    2. Determine the effective resistance of the network shown in Figure 4.24.
                                                                                Figure 4.24

    3. Determine the effective resistance of the network shown in Figure 4.25.
                                                                                Figure 4.25

    4. Find the effective source current of the network shown in Figure 4.26.
                                                                                Figure 4.26

    5. Determine the effective source current of the network shown in Figure 4.27.
                                                                                Figure 4.27

129
    6. Find the source and resistor currents for the circuit of Figure 4.28.
                                                                                Figure 4.28

    7. Determine the source and resistor currents for the circuit of Figure 4.29.
                                                                                Figure 4.29

    8. Find the source and resistor currents for the circuit of Figure 4.30.
                                                                                Figure 4.30

    9. For the circuit of Figure 4.31, determine the source and resistor currents.
                                                                                Figure 4.31

130
    10. Determine the current through each resistor in the circuit of Figure 4.32.
         Also determine the total power generated by the source.
                                                                                Figure 4.32

    11. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.32. Assume that the 100 k is
         replaced with another resistor ten times as large. Will this have a major
         impact on the current exiting source? Why/why not?

    12. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.32. Assume that the 1 k is replaced
         with another resistor ten times smaller. Will this have a major impact on the
         current exiting source? Why/why not?

    13. Find the current through each resistor in the circuit of Figure 4.33.
                                                                                Figure 4.33

    14. Determine the current through each resistor in the circuit of Figure 4.34.
         Also determine the total current exiting by the source.
                                                                                Figure 4.34

131
    15. Determine the current through each resistor in the circuit of Figure 4.35.
                                                                                Figure 4.35

    16. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.36, determine the current through each
         resistor and the source voltage.
                                                                                Figure 4.36

    17. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.37, determine the current through each
         resistor and the source voltage.
                                                                                Figure 4.37

    18. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.38, determine the current through each
         resistor and the source voltage.
                                                                                Figure 4.38

132
    19. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.39, determine the current through each
         resistor and the source voltage.
                                                                                Figure 4.39

    20. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.40, determine the current through each
         resistor and the source voltage.
                                                                                Figure 4.40

    21. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.41, determine the current through each
         resistor and the source voltage.
                                                                                Figure 4.41

    22. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.42, determine the current through each
         resistor and the source voltage.
                                                                                Figure 4.42

133
    23. Referring to the circuit of Figure 4.42, determine the resistor currents if the
         right-most 75 k resistor is accidentally opened (i.e., unconnected). How do
         these results compare to those of problem 22?

    24. Referring to the circuit of Figure 4.42, determine the resistor currents if the
         right-most 75 k resistor is accidentally shorted. How do these results
         compare to those of problems 22 and 23?

    25. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.43, determine the current through each
         resistor and the source voltage.
                                                                                Figure 4.43

    26. Given the circuit of Figure 4.44, find the currents through the two resistors.
                                                                                Figure 4.44

    27. If the 5 mA current source shown in Figure 4.44 is accidentally wired in
         upside down, does the voltage across the 12 k  resistor become more
         positive or more negative with respect to ground?

    28. Given the circuit of Figure 4.45, find the voltages across the three resistors.

                                                                                Figure 4.45

    29. Find the currents through the three resistors in Figure 4.45.

134
Design

    30. For the network shown in Figure 4.46, determine a for values for R1 given
         that R2 is 12 k and the equivalent combination is 8 k.

                                                                                Figure 4.46

    31. Add a third parallel resistor to the circuit of Figure 4.30 such that the source
         current is 10 mA.

    32. Add a fourth parallel resistor to the circuit of Figure 4.32 such that the
         source current is 20 mA.

    33. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.36. Determine a new value for the
         current source such that the source voltage equals 10 volts.

    34. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.38. Determine a new value for the
         current source such that the source voltage equals 20 volts.

    35. Given the circuit of Figure 4.47, if the source is 6 volts and R1 is 2 k, what
         must be the value of R2 if the total current exiting the source is 10 mA?

                                                                                Figure 4.47

    36. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.48, determine values for resistors R2 and
         R3 such that the current through R2 is twice the current through R1 and the
         current through R3 is half the current through R1. The source is 6 volts and
         R1 is 2 k.
                                                                                Figure 4.48

135
    37. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.49, determine values for resistors R1 and
         R2 such that the current through R2 is twice the current through R1. The
         source is 10 mA and R1 is 6 k.

                                                                                Figure 4.49

Challenge

    38. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.34, determine a new value for the 11 k
         resistor such that the supply current is 50 mA.

    39. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.36, determine a new value for the 2 k
         resistor such that the voltage drop across the 6 k is 15 volts.

    40. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.43. If the current source was replaced
         with a voltage source, what value is needed so that the same currents flow
         through the resistors as in the original circuit?

    41. For the network shown in Figure 4.46, determine values for R1 and R2 such
         that R2 is twice the size of R1 and the equivalent combination is 6 k.

    42. Given the network of Figure 4.25, is it possible to replace the 60  resistor
         with another value such that the equivalent combination of the three
         resistors is 25 ? If so, what is that value?

    43. Given the network of Figure 4.33, is it possible to add a fifth parallel resistor
         such that the source current is 1 mA? If so, what is that value?

    44. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.48, determine values for the three resistors
         such that the current through R1 is twice the current through R2 and four
         times the current through R3. The source is 12 volts and should produce a
         total of 9 mA of current.

    45. For the circuit shown in Figure 4.49 determine values for the two resistors
         such that the current through R1 is half the current through R2. The source is
         24 mA and should produce a drop of 16 volts across R1.

136
    46. Given three current sources with values of 1 mA, 2 mA and 7 mA; how
         would they need to be connected in order to deliver 4 volts across a 1 k
         load resistor?

                                                                                Figure 4.50

    47. Consider the circuit of Figure 4.50. Assume I is a 4 mA source. Using only
         5% standard resistor values (see Appendix A), pick values for the three
         resistors such that the voltage across R1 is within 10% of 10 volts as long as
         the resistors are within tolerance.

Simulation

    48. Verify the currents found in problem 11 via a DC simulation.
    49. Verify the currents found in problem 15 via a DC simulation.
    50. Verify the currents and voltages found in problem 17 via a DC simulation.
    51. Verify the results found in problem 25 via a DC simulation.
    52. Verify the results found in problem 27 via a DC simulation.
    53. Perform a DC simulation on the design of problem 44 to verify its

         performance.
    54. Perform a DC simulation on the design of problem 45 to verify its

         performance.
    55. Perform a DC simulation on the design of problem 46 to verify its

         performance.
    56. Perform a Monte Carlo or worst-case simulation on the design of problem

         47 to verify its performance.

137
5 Series-Parallel Resistive Circuits

5.0 Chapter Learning Objectives

After completing this chapter, you should be able to:

    · Identify series-parallel resistive circuits that include a single effective voltage or current source.
    · Compute component and node voltages for single-source series-parallel resistive networks.
    · Compute branch currents for single-source series-parallel resistive networks.
    · Break down series-parallel networks into smaller series-only and parallel-only sub-units, and utilize

         KVL, KCL and other previously established techniques to aid in the analysis of these circuits.

5.1 Introduction

In the preceding two chapters, series circuits and parallel circuits were examined. Each offered unique laws and
rules for their configuration, such as Kirchhoff's voltage law and the current divider rule. Distinct techniques of
analysis were offered to determine system current and voltage, and the currents and voltages associated with
individual components. This almost mechanical approach was successful mainly because there are so few
variations on the theme. In the case of a series circuit, more resistors might be added in the "daisy chain", and
likewise multiple voltage sources, but once you have experience with a few of these types of circuits, there is
not much concern when simply adding more of the same because a pattern becomes apparent. The same holds
true with parallel circuits: more resistors might be added as further "rungs on the ladder", as well as multiple
current sources similarly arranged, but again, once familiarity has been gained, obvious patterns emerge. This is
not the case with series-parallel circuits, and thus, there are no simple recipes for our solution paths. Fortunately,
laws and rules such as Ohm's law, KCL and KVL still hold true for these circuits, thus the focus shifts to their
appropriate application.

To begin with, there are infinite variations of series-parallel circuits. This chapter deals with a subset, namely
those that are driven by a single current or voltage source (after reducing trivial combinations), and which may
be simplified using series and parallel resistor combinations. More complex configurations using multiple
sources await in subsequent chapters. The key to analyzing basic series-parallel circuits is in recognizing
portions of the circuit, or sub-circuits, that exhibit a series or parallel configuration by themselves, and then
applying the series and parallel analysis rules to those sections. Ohm's law, KVL and KCL may be used in turn to
"chip away" at the problem until all currents and voltages are found. As individual voltages and currents are
determined, this makes it easier to apply these rules to determine other values. Given this observation, the
number of potential solution paths tends to grow exponentially as the number of components increases. As a
consequence, when faced with the same circuit, six people may solve it six different ways, no particular way
being more or less correct than any other. The only thing we can say is that some solution paths might be more
computationally efficient than others, meaning they take less work. Do not let this bother you. The fact that these

138
circuits can be solved in a diverse number of ways is a strength, not a weakness.
After all, you only need to recognize one of those ways, not all of them, in order to
be successful. In this chapter's examples, various competing methods will be
explored, but not every solution path will be spelled out for each one. Flexibility of
thought and view will prove to be an asset.

5.2 Series-Parallel Connections

A basic series-parallel system is shown in Figure 5.1. It should be obvious that             Figure 5.1
this system is neither a simple series connection nor a simple parallel connection,          A series-parallel
but rather some combination of the two. In order for it to be series, the current            configuration.
through each component would have to be the same. This does not have to be true

here. Consider the connection node directly above block C. This also

connects to items B, D and E. All we really know about that node is that                        C

there are four paths leading to it and that the four associated currents must           A    B                  D
sum to zero, thanks to KCL. There is nothing that requires the current                                                       E

through, say, block D to be the same as that through block E. Similarly, there                     F

is nothing that stipulates that the voltage across block C must be the same as

that across block F. After all, that is the hallmark of a parallel configuration,

and that would require those two blocks to be connected to the same two nodes,

which they aren't.

What we can say about the configuration of Figure 5.1 is that some of the
components are in series among themselves, and some are in parallel among
themselves. We might recognize these groupings as sub-circuits. For example, it is
true that blocks A and B are in series with each other because the current through
one of them must be the same as the current through the other. The same is true of
blocks C and F; they are in series with each other. Similarly, we can say that blocks
D and E are in parallel with each other because they must see the same voltage as
they are each connected to the same two nodes.

5.3 Simplifying Series-Parallel Components

We can go beyond the simple observations presented above. Precisely how we
approach this will depend on the components represented by the blocks (most often
resistors, but possibly a voltage source or a current source) and how they are wired
together. For starters, if all of the items in a sub-circuit are of the same type, they can
just be combined using the techniques discussed in the previous chapters. Resistors
in series are added, as are voltage sources in series-being wary of polarity. Resistors
in parallel are combined using conductance or the product-sum rule while parallel
current sources are added, again being wary of polarity. Things get a little trickier
when there is a mix, such as two resistors in series with a voltage source, or a
resistor in parallel with a couple of current sources. Precisely how this sort of

139
situation is handled will become apparent shortly.

To illustrate, let us consider the resistor configuration presented in Figure 5.2.     Figure 5.2
Imagine that an ohmmeter is connected to the two open terminals. What would it         A simple series-parallel
read? The ohmmeter would apply a small current to the circuit to determine the         resistor network.
effective resistance of the group. The three resistors pictured here are not a simple
series configuration because we can identify a current split at the 40  and 80 
resistors. Similarly, it is not a parallel network because the 40  and 160  resistors
are not both tied to the same two nodes. What we can say is that the 40  and 160 
resistors are in series with each other as they must each see the same current. Thus,
we can combine the two into a single equivalent resistance of 200 . This equivalent
is in parallel with the 80  resistor and 80 || 200 is approximately 57.14 . That's
what the ohmmeter should read. Indeed, wherever we see this configuration with
these precise values, we can replace it with a single resistor of 57.14 .

The simplification technique can be outlined as follows:

     · Identify subgroups of resistors that exhibit series or parallel configurations
         within themselves.

     · Replace the subgroups with a single equivalent resistance.
     · Repeat the above steps until the circuit is reduced to a single resistance, or

         alternately, a simple series-only or parallel-only configuration.

The looping nature of the technique outlined above may need to be invoked many
times, depending on the complexity of the network. In simpler networks, a single
pass may be sufficient. Initially, it may be wise to redraw the circuit for each
iteration of the loop. Eventually, with practice, this will not be needed except with
the most complex networks. Let's look at a somewhat more involved example.

Example 5.1                                                                            Figure 5.3
                                                                                       Network for Example 5.1.
         A series-parallel resistor network is shown in Figure 5.3. Determine its
         equivalent resistance.

     The first step is to recognize those subgroups that are in series or in
     parallel with themselves. One obvious candidate is that the two 100 
     resistors are in parallel with each other. Two resistors of equal value in
     parallel are equivalent to half the resistance, or 50  in this case.

     The other candidate is the 40 , 200  pair. These are in series. The
     equivalent resistance of the pair is the series combination, or 240 .

     There are no other subsets of resistors that can be reduced (yet). The
     network is redrawn in Figure 5.4 with the equivalent resistances. The
     process is now repeated.

140
In the newly reduced network, the 50  and 30  resistances are in series,                   Figure 5.4
yielding 80 .                                                                              Partially simplified network.

Without redrawing, the process may be repeated again, this time the 240 
being in parallel with the new 80  equivalent. 240 || 80 is equal to 60 .
This sequence has reduced the three right-most resistances down to one: the
new 60  equivalent.

Finally, the 60  equivalent is in series with the 10  resistor, yielding a
final equivalent resistance of 70 .

Ladders

A ladder is a unique series-parallel configuration. It is arranged in a cascade of series
and parallel connections. Ladders are used in a variety of applications, one of which
will be examined in the next section.

The name is obvious based on the appearance of the network. An example resistive
ladder network is shown in Figure 5.5. The main thing to note is that the ladder
network consists of "sections loading sections" repeatedly. By loading, we mean that
this element (the load) draws off current and power from the prior section. As a
result, simple two-resistor voltage dividers cannot be used. For example, it is a
common error to assume that R1 and R2 create a voltage divider which can be used to
determine Vbf if Vaf is known. Similarly, the uninitiated may believe incorrectly that
R3 and R4, or R5 and R6 create voltage dividers.

                                                                                           Figure 5.5
                                                                                           A resistive ladder network.

In fact, the only proper voltage divider in this configuration is between R7 and R8.
The reason for this becomes apparent if we imagine determining the equivalent
resistance of the network by placing an ohmmeter at terminals a and f. The
ohmmeter will apply a current to node a which passes through R1. At node b this
current splits, part going down R2 and part continuing through R3. Clearly then, R1
and R2 are not in series as they do not see the same current. Further, the current that
flows through R3 enters node c where it splits again, part down R4 with the remainder
flowing through R5. Thus, R3 and R4 are not in series, either. The same sort of thing
happens again at node d. This would continue for as many rungs as are on the ladder,
the sole exception being the final two resistors which are in series (R7 and R8 here).

141
How then do we find the equivalent resistance of this network? We begin at the end
farthest from the open terminals. We have already noted that R7 and R8 are in series.
This pair, if treated as a single resistance, is in parallel with R6, or R6||(R7+R8). This
group of three is in series with R5, yielding R5+R6||(R7+R8)15. This new group of four
is in parallel with R4, yielding R4||(R5+R6||(R7+R8)). This group is in series with R3,
and that new group is in turn in parallel with R2. Finally, that penultimate grouping is
in series with R1. Therefore, the equivalent resistance of the network is
R1+R2||(R3+ R4||(R5+R6||(R7+R8))). Surely, it is a tad tedious to compute the value, but
particularly difficult. A word to the wise: if the goal is determine the voltages at the
various nodes or the myriad branch currents, it will be helpful to keep track of the
equivalent resistances of the various groupings. For example, if Vcf is known and the
goal is to find Vdf, the voltage divider would be R6||(R7+R8) / (R5+R6||(R7+R8)).

Example 5.2                                                                                        Figure 5.6
                                                                                                   Network for Example 5.2.
         A resistive ladder network is shown in Figure 5.6. Determine its equivalent
         resistance.

Starting at the far end from the open terminals, we note that the 7 k
and 5 k resistors are in series, yielding 12 k. This is in parallel with
the 8 k. 12 k || 8 k is 4.8 k. This is in series with the 1.2 k yielding
6 k. The 6 k equivalent is in parallel with the 1.5 k which yields
1.2 k.

Finally, the 1.2 k equivalent is in series with the 3 k, yielding a final
equivalent resistance of 4.2 k.

Remember, always start at the far end and work toward the open terminals, i.e., the
terminals into which you are trying to find the equivalent resistance.

Example 5.3                                                                                        Figure 5.7
                                                                                                   Network for Example 5.3.
         A resistive ladder network is shown in Figure 5.7. Determine its equivalent
         resistance.

The far end from the open terminals is the extreme left.
First, the 6 k and 4 k resistors are in series, yielding
10 k. This is in parallel with the 8 k, achieving
approximately 4.444 k. In turn, this is in series with the
2 k yielding 6.444 k. That result is in parallel with
the 12 k which yields 4.193 k. Placing this in series

15 Recall that || has higher precedence than + or -, therefore || is performed first, rather like
    multiplication when mixed with addition and subtraction.

142
     with the 10 k resistor yields 14.193 k. This is in parallel with the 20 k
     yielding 8.302 k.

     Finally, the 8.302 k equivalent is in series with the 5 k, yielding a final
     equivalent resistance of approximately 13.3 k.

5.4 Series-Parallel Analysis

Analysis of series-parallel networks involves recognizing those sub-circuits that are         Figure 5.8
in series or that are in parallel among themselves, performing simplifications as             A simple series-parallel
needed, and winding up with a simple series-only or parallel-only equivalent. Then            circuit.
the various laws such as Ohm's law, KVL, KCL, VDR and CDR are applied to the
various simplified networks to determine the parameters of interest. There is no
single solution technique, each circuit being unique.

Let's begin by considering the circuit of Figure 5.8. To review, this is neither just
a series circuit nor just a parallel circuit. If it was a series circuit then the current
through all components would have to be same, that is, there would no nodes
where the current could divide. This is clearly not the case as the current
flowing through R1 can divide at node b, with one portion flowing down
through R2 and the remainder through R3. On the other hand, if it was strictly
parallel, then all of the components would have to exhibit the same voltage and
therefore there would be only two connection points in the circuit. This is also
not the case as there are three such points: a, b and ground.

What is true is that resistors R2 and R3 are in parallel. We know this because both
components are attached to the same two nodes, b and ground, and must exhibit the
same voltage, Vb. As such, we can find the equivalent resistance of this pair and treat
the result as a single resistance, let's call it Rx. In this newly simplified circuit, Rx is
in series with R1 and the source, E. We have reduced the original circuit down to a
simple series circuit and thus the series analysis rules may be applied.

There are many solution paths at this point. For example, we could find the total
resistance, Rt, by adding R1 to Rx. Dividing this by E yields the total current flowing
out of the source, Itotal. This current must flow through R1 so Ohm's law can be used
to find the voltage drop across R1. This same current must be flowing through Rx, so
Ohm's law can be used to find the associated voltage (Vb). The currents through R2
and R3 may then be found using Ohm's law for each resistor (e.g., the current
through R2 must be Vb/R2). Alternately, these currents may be found by using the
current divider rule between R2 and R3 (e.g., the current through R2 must be
Itotal  R1/(R1 + R2); remember, the current divider rule uses the ratio of the opposite
resistor over the sum).

143
Another solution path would be to apply the voltage divider rule to R1 and Rx in
order to derive the two voltage drops (or the rule can be applied to find just one of
the drops and the other voltage may be found by subtracting that from the source, an
application of KVL). Once the voltages are determined, Ohm's law can be used to
find the currents. If powers are needed, they are easily determined once the voltages
and currents are found.

Example 5.4                                                                            Figure 5.9
         A series-parallel circuit is shown in Figure 5.9. Determine Vb.               Circuit for Example 5.4.

     As we are only interested in finding one voltage, the voltage divider
     rule is a good candidate. The 1 k is in parallel with the 3 k, yielding
     an equivalent resistance of 750 . From here we apply VDR.

     V b = E Req
               R1 +R eq

     V b = 6 V 750  250+750
     V b = 4.5 V

     To clarify the current directions and voltage polarities, the circuit is          Figure 5.10
     redrawn and appropriately labeled in Figure 5.10. We can crosscheck the           Circuit for Example 5.4 with
     answer in a variety of ways. For example, Figure 5.10 indicates, via KVL,         polarities and directions
     that the voltage drop across the 250  resistor plus Vb must equal the             included.
     source voltage of 6 volts. Consequently, V250 must be 6 volts minus 4.5
     volts, or 1.5 volts. Ohm's law then indicates that the current through the
     250  must be 1.5 V/250 , or 6 milliamps. Based on the earlier
     resistive equivalence, the total resistance as seen by the source must be
     250  in series with 750 , or 1 k. This indicates the source current
     must be 6 V/1 k, or 6 milliamps. As the source and the 250  are in
     series, they must see the same current. This crosscheck shows that they
     do: happy happy joy joy.

     We can go further and verify the currents via KCL. For the first parallel
     resistor we find:

      I 1k = V b 1 k 
     I 1k = 4.5 V 1 k 
     I 1k = 4.5 mA

144
     And for the second resistor we see:

                  I 3k = V b 1 k 
                  I 3k = 4.5 V 3 k 
                 I 3k = 1.5 mA

     Obviously, these sum to the entering current of 6 mA.

Example 5.5                                                                         Figure 5.11
         Determine Vb and the source current in the circuit of Figure 5.11.         Circuit for Example 5.5.

     In this circuit the 3 k resistor is in parallel with the series combination
     of the 2 k and 1 k. This leads to an equivalent resistance of 3 k in
     parallel with 3 k, or 1.5 k. From here we can find the source current.

     Is = E
           RTotal

     I s = 30 V 1.5 k 
     I s = 20 mA

     This current should split evenly down the two vertical paths as they each
     present 3 k of resistance (10 mA each achieves 30 volts for Va, which is the
     source).

     The voltage divider rule is a good choice for Vb as we know the applied        Figure 5.12
     voltage.                                                                       Circuit for Example 5.5 with
                                                                                    polarities and directions
                 V b = E Req                                                        included.
                           R1 +R eq

                 V b = 30 V 1 k  1 k +2 k 
                 V b = 10 V

     For clarity, the circuit is redrawn and relabeled with current directions and
     voltage polarities in Figure 5.12. As a further exercise, try to verify the
     answers above using alternate means, as illustrated in Exercise 5.4.

145
As the circuit grows, more and more solution paths exist. Consider the circuit of        Figure 5.13
Figure 5.13. In this case, R3 and R4 are in parallel. This parallel combination is in    A slightly more complex
series with R2. Finally, this set of three resistors is in parallel with R1 and E,       series-parallel circuit.
reducing to a parallel circuit. Consequently, we know that the voltage across
R1 must be equal to E. Also, the currents through R1 and R2 must add up to the
current exiting the source (KCL). Further, the currents through R3 and R4 must
add up to the current flowing through R2 (KCL). Also, the voltages across R3
and R4 must be the same (they are in parallel) and that this voltage plus the
voltage across R2 must equal E (KVL). One solution path would be to find the
total resistance as seen by the source, R1 || (R2 + (R3 || R4)), and use this to find
the total current flowing out of the source. The current divider rule can then be used
between R1 and the equivalent resistance (R2 + (R3 || R4)). Ohm's law can be used
subsequently to find various voltage drops. Alternately, the voltage divider rule can
be used between R2 and the parallel equivalent (R3 || R4) as this combination is driven
by E. Knowing the voltages, the currents may be determined. With so many possible
solution paths for large circuits, it is often worthwhile to take a moment to map out a
strategy rather than just "diving in" and hoping it will all work out.

Example 5.6                                                                              Figure 5.14
                                                                                         Circuit for Example 5.6.
         The circuit of Figure 5.14 is the same as the resistive network presented in
         Example 5.1 but with the addition of a voltage source.
         Determine Vb, Vc, Vd, the source current Is, and the current
         flowing through the 40  resistor, I40.

     Thanks to Example 5.1, the equivalent resistances of various
     portions have already been determined, saving some time. To
     reiterate, the pair of 100  resistors are in parallel for 50 .
     That's in series with the 30  for 80 . In the middle path, the
     200  and 40  are in series, yielding 240 . 240 || 80 = 60 .
     This is in series with the 10 , yielding a total resistance loading
     the source of 70 .

     Is= E
           RTotal

     I s = 16V 70
     I s  228.6 mA

     The three voltages can be quickly found via VDR as we know all of the
     associated sub-circuit resistances.

146
                 V b = E Rx                                                            Figure 5.15
                           R x +R y                                                    Circuit for Example 5.6 with
                                                                                       directions and polarities.
                 V b = 16V 60  60+10
                 V b  13.71V

                 V c = Vb Rx
                            R x +R y

                 V c = 13.71 V 50 50 +30
                 V c  8.57 V

                 V d = Vb Rx
                            R x +R y

                 V d = 13.71 V 200  200 +40 
                 V d  11.43 V

     Lastly, the current through the 40  resistor can be found by dividing its
     voltage by its resistance. Its voltage is Vb - Vd. A quicker method is to note
     that because it is in series with the 240 , their currents are the same.

                 I 40 = V b
                        R Series

                 I 40 = 13.71 V 240 
                 I 40  57.1 mA

     Once again the circuit is redrawn in Figure 5.15 to illustrate the
     current directions and voltage polarities. The usefulness of this will
     become even more apparent in the next example.

Example 5.6                                                                            Figure 5.16
                                                                                       Circuit for Example 5.6.
         Determine Vac and the voltages across each resistor in the circuit of Figure
         5.16.

         This circuit is perhaps the most complex offered so far. It may
         not be immediately apparent what the voltage polarities are for
         the various resistors or the proper current directions. Without
         these data, it will be impossible to determine Vac. To complicate
         matters, the voltage of interest is not ground referenced, but
         instead refers to two nodes located in arbitrary points of the
         circuit. It is worth recognizing that, by definition, Vac = Va - Vc,

147
     but how are those voltages determined?

     To assist with this minor quandary, the circuit has been redrawn in Figure
     5.17. Note that the current source and associated 1 k resistor have been
     flipped to the side, essentially trading places with the 2 k and 7 k series
     combination. This is entirely acceptable as both subgroups share node b and
     ground, meaning they are in parallel. Of course, the order of parallel
     elements in a situation like this does not matter. This orientation, having the
     source at one end of the circuit, tends to make visualization of current flows
     a little easier.

     In any case, the current exits the source and then splits at node b, some          Figure 5.17
     heading through the 10 k with the rest flowing down the 7 k with 2 k               Circuit for Example 5.6
     series combo. At node c the current that entered the 10 k splits again,            redrawn and with polarities
     flowing down into the parallel subgroup of the 12 k and 24 k. Knowing              and current directions added.
     the current directions, the voltage polarities are determined directly.

     Now that the circuit has been redrawn, several solution
     paths might come to mind. For starters, the voltage drop
     across the 1 k is trivial as both its current and resistance
     are known. From there, a current divider can be used to find
     the current flowing down into the series 7 k plus 2 k
     combo. Ohm's law could then be used to find their voltages.
     Following that, KCL can be used to find the current through
     the 10 k (and thus its voltage), and then Ohm's law can be
     applied to find Vc by treating the two right-most parallel
     resistors as a single unit.

     Another solution path would be to determine the equivalent resistance that
     loads the current source. This allows the source voltage to be determined,
     after which a voltage divider may be applied between the 1 k and the
     remaining five resistors to find Vb. From there, two more voltage dividers
     can be used to find Va and Vc which will allow determination of the
     remaining resistor voltages via KVL. There are other possible paths as well
     but for lack of a better reason, we shall chase the first path that was outlined.

     Before getting too deep, it would be wise to determine the equivalent
     resistances of a few subgroups. First, the 12 k || 24 k combo reduces
     down to 8 k. This is in series with the 10 k, leaving 18 k for the three
     right-most resistors. In the middle branch, the 2 k + 7 k series combo is
     equivalent to 9 k. The parallel combination of 9 k || 18 k yields 6 k.
     Finally, this last bit is in series with the 1 k producing 7 k for the
     equivalent resistance of all resistors.

148
     The source voltage and the voltage across the 1 k resistor are determined
     via Ohm's law:

     V source = I source× Requivalent
     V source = 10 mA×7 k 
     V source = 70 V

     V 1k = I source× R
     V 1k = 10 mA×1 k 
     V 1k = 10 V

     As the source produces 70 volts and the drop on the 1 k is 10 volts, then by
     KVL, Vb must be 70 volts - 10 volts, or 60 volts (which will be useful for a
     crosscheck in a moment). Using a current divider, the 10 mA source splits
     between the middle and right branches. The equivalent resistances of those
     branches are 9 k and 18 k, as found earlier.

     I middle = I source  R right

                          R right+Rmiddle

     I middle = 10 mA 18k  18 k +9 k 

     I middle  6.667 mA

     Via KCL, the right branch current must be 10 mA - 6.667 mA, or
     approximately 3.333 mA. As a crosscheck, if 6.667 mA passes through a
     total of 9 k, that produces a voltage drop of 60 volts, exactly as expected
     from the earlier calculation for node b. At this point, the current through
     each resistor is known (treating the 12 k || 24 k combo as a unit) and
     therefore Ohm's law may be used to determine their voltage drops. They are
     summarized below.

     V7k  46.67 V
     V2k  13.33 V
     V10k  33.33 V
     V12k = V24k  26.67 V

     Finally, to determine Vac we know that Vac = Va - Vc, and by observation Va is
     the drop across the 2 k while Vc is the drop across the 12 k || 24 k
     combo.

     V ac = V a-V c

     V ac  13.33 V-26.67 V
     V ac  -13.33 V

149
         Do not let the negative sign be bothersome. All it indicates is that node a is
         at a lower potential than node c, i.e., that node a is 13.33 volts below node c.
         It is also purely coincidental that Vac and Va have the same magnitude. In the
         lab, if a voltmeter is connected such that the red (positive) lead is attached to
         node a and the black (negative or reference) lead is attached to node c, the
         meter will show a negative value. If the leads are connected in reverse, thus
         measuring Vca, the voltage will show up as positive (meaning that node c is
         higher in potential than node a, the reverse way of looking at the situation)16.

Any Route Works

In the example just completed it was noted that, by definition, Vac = Va - Vc, and this
dictated the method employed to find said voltage. It turns out that this is just one of
many ways of determining a voltage from one point to another. In general:

         To find some voltage VXY, start at point X and proceed along any convenient
         route to Y, subtracting voltage rises (polarities of - to +) and adding voltage
         drops (polarities of + to -) along the way.

In the prior example, an obvious route for Vac would be to go down the 2 k and
then up the 12 k. That gives a drop of approximately13.33 volts (positive). Going
up the 12 k produces a rise of approximately 26.67 volts (negative). The result is
approximately -13.33 volts, as previously calculated. The technique states that any
route may be used, no matter how inefficient or wacky it might be. To verify this,
one odd route might be to go up the 7 k, down through the 1 k and source, and
then up through the 24 k. The summation would be - 46.67 - 10 + 70 - 26.67, or
approximately -13.33 volts once again. An easy way to remember whether the
potential is added or subtracted is to just look at the polarity sign where the
component is entered along your chosen route.

R-2R Ladder

As promised earlier in the chapter, it's time to look at a ladder network. While
ladders can use any resistance values desired, certain ratios turn out to be eminently
practical. Of particular note is the R-2R ladder, an example of which is shown in
Figure 5.18, and which is being driven by a current source. In this configuration,
only two different resistor values are used; some initial value and a second value of
precisely twice that size. As drawn in Figure 5.18, all horizontal resistors use value
R (6 k here) while all of the vertical resistors use 2R (12 k here) with the
exception of the very last, or terminating, resistor which uses R.

16 Or, if you prefer this situation posed as a question: When standing normally, is your head
    above your feet or are your feet below your head? Answer: Yes!

150
                                                                                                                   Figure 5.18
                                                                                                                   An R-2R ladder network.

It turns out that this arrangement offers something very unique: a halving of
successive node voltages and branch currents. This is extremely useful in digital to
analog conversion circuits; the sort of hardware that would turn the digital bits of an
MP3 or WAV file into listenable analog signals to feed loudspeakers or headphones.

Here is how it works. Starting at the far right end, it should be obvious that the last
two 6 k resistors comprise a 50% voltage divider, and thus Ve will half of Vd. The
combination of the final three resistors works out to 12 k || (6 k + 6 k), or 6 k
again. Thus, the divider from c to d is also 50%. This process repeats as we move to
the left, each equivalent working out to R and resulting in a 50% voltage divider. It
will not matter what value is chosen for R. As long as 2R is used for the other set of
resistors, the result will always be successive 50% voltage dividers.

Example 5.7

         Determine all lettered node voltages in the circuit of Figure 5.18.

         Continuing the prior analysis, the entire resistor network presents an
         equivalent resistance of 12 k. The node a voltage is determined by Ohm's
         law:

                     Va = I×R
                     V a = 24 mA×12 k 
                     V a = 288 V

         The prior analysis indicated that the subsequent node voltages should be,
         from left to right, 144 volts, 72 volts, 36 volts and 18 volts. A quick check
         follows. The source of 24 mA flows into the left-most 6 k, producing a
         drop of 144 volts by Ohm's law. This can be subtracted from Va (288 V) to
         arrive at Vb, or 144 volts, or half of the prior node voltage, as expected. The
         current through the left-most vertical resistor must be Vb/12 k, or 12 mA.
         That's half of the entering current, as expected. KCL indicates that the
         remaining current, 24 mA - 12 mA, or 12 mA, must be flowing into the
         second 6 k between nodes b and c. This will produce a voltage drop of 72
         volts across that resistor. In other words, Vc must be 72 volts less than Vb
         (144 volts), or 72 volts. This is half of Vb, as expected. Likewise, the current

151
         flowing down through the second 12 k must be Vc/12 k, or 6 mA, once
         again half of the preceding current, as expected. The process continues as we
         move to the right, each subsequent node seeing half the voltage of the prior
         node and each current getting cut in half as well.

Computer Simulation

In order to verify the results of Example 5.7, the R-2R ladder circuit is entered into a
simulator, as shown in Figure 5.19. The numbered nodes 1 through 5 in the
simulation schematic correspond to the lettered nodes of the original circuit, a
through e, respectively. This is one example where the use of virtual instruments
would result in a very cluttered display with five multimeters. Consequently, the
simulation uses a DC operating point analysis with a single output window, as shown
in Figure 5.20.
Although the node numbers are not in ascending order, the voltages are a perfect
match to the results computed previously. Each successive node sees half the voltage
of the prior node. Although not explicitly listed here, it should be obvious that the
currents will also be cut in half when progressing from left to right, via a quick
application of Ohm's law.

                                                                                                                   Figure 5.19
                                                                                                                   The circuit of Example 5.6 in a
                                                                                                                   simulator.

152
                                                                                           Figure 5.20
                                                                                           Simulation results of the circuit
                                                                                           of Example 5.7.

Bridges

A bridge is a particular series-parallel configuration consisting of two pairs of series
connected elements placed in parallel. An example of a resistive bridge being driven
by a voltage source is shown in Figure 5.21. In this circuit, R1 and R2 create one
series connection while R2 and R3 create the other. The two pairs are then placed in
parallel. While this circuit is shown with a voltage source, it could also be driven by
a current source. Other elements might also be added.

A typical use for a bridge is the measurement of some environmental quantity. As           Figure 5.21
stated in Chapter 2, there are certain resistive devices that are sensitive to             A resistive bridge network.
environmental change. Examples include photoresistors, whose resistance is a
function of light level; and thermistors, whose resistance is a function of
temperature.

To understand the operation, the voltages Vb and Vc are established by the voltage
dividers comprised of R1 and R2; and R3 and R4, respectively. With ordinary
resistors, these voltages would be unchanging and therefore Vbc would also be a
fixed value. We shall set it up such that Vb and Vc are the same voltage, and thus Vbc
will be zero. Now assume that we replace R1 with a photoresistor. As the light level
increases, its resistance decreases. This will cause Vb to rise which will cause Vbc to
go positive. If the light level decreases, the resistance of R1 will increase, forcing Vb
to drop which will cause Vbc to go negative. The greater the change in light, the
larger Vbc will be, and its sign indicates whether the light level has increased or
decreased compared to the original set point. By simply placing some manner of
voltmeter between points b and c, we can create a display that indicates light levels.

153
If we want to flip the sign, we would place the photoresistor in the position of R2
instead of R1. Further, it is possible to increase the sensitivity by using sensors at
opposite corners (e.g., R1 and R4), and comparative or differential measurements are
possible by using both sides (e.g., R1 with R3).

Example 5.8                                                                             Figure 5.22
         Determine Vbc in the circuit of Figure 5.22.                                   Circuit for Example 5.8.

     Perhaps the most straightforward way to do this is to treat each half as a
     voltage divider and then subtract Vc from Vb.

     V b = E R2
               R2+R1

     V b = 12V 2 k  2 k +1 k 
     Vb = 8V

     V c = E R4
               R 4 +R 3

     V c = 12 V 4 k  4 k +3 k 
     V c  6.857 V

     Thus, Vbc is 8 volts minus 6.857 volts, or 1.143 volts.

Computer Simulation

In order to verify the results of Example 5.8, the bridge network of Figure 5.22 is
entered into a simulator, as depicted in Figure 5.23.

                                                                                        Figure 5.23
                                                                                        The circuit of Example 5.8 in a
                                                                                        simulator.

154
A DC operating point analysis is run and the results are shown in Figure 5.24. The
voltages are precisely as expected.

                                                                                                                   Figure 5.24
                                                                                                                   Simulation results for the
                                                                                                                   bridge circuit of Example 5.8.

Final Comments

Series-parallel simplification techniques will not work for all circuits. Complex
multi-source circuits and some resistive networks such as delta configurations or
five-element bridge configurations require other techniques that will be addressed in
later chapters.

5.5 Summary

In this chapter we have determined how to identify basic series-parallel networks
driven by a single effective voltage or current source. A key element here is to
identify sub-circuits or subgroups of resistors that are comprised of either series-only
or parallel-only configurations within themselves. These groupings can then be
reduced to equivalent resistances using series and parallel combination techniques
examined in earlier chapters. This process may be repeated until the entire circuit is
simplified down to either a single series loop or parallel arrangement of resistors
driven by a voltage or current source.
Once a circuit has been simplified, series and parallel analysis techniques, and laws
such as Ohm's law, KVL, KCL, VDR and CDR, may be employed to determine
various voltages and currents in the simplified equivalent. Given these results, the
circuit may be expanded back into its original form in stages, reapplying these rules
and techniques to determine voltages and currents within the sub-circuits. The
process may be iterated until every current and voltage in the original circuit is

155
discovered, if desired. Once these values are determined, power calculations are
trivial.

There is an infinite variety of series-parallel configurations and consequently no
single solution technique will work for all of them. Indeed, the more complex the
circuit, the more solution paths there are for that circuit. It is therefore wise to plan
some strategy for a solution instead of randomly "diving in" in order to ease the
ultimate effort.

Two series-parallel configurations of note are the ladder network and the bridge
network. A resistive ladder may be used to derive several different currents or
voltages from a single source; the R-2R variation being particularly useful in that it
divides the source down by powers of two. A basic resistive bridge is comprised of
four elements arranged as a pair of series resistors in parallel with another pair of
series resistors. Bridges can be used as part of a measurement scheme. For example,
one or more of the resistors could be environmentally sensitive, such as a
photoresistor, force sensing resistor or thermistor. As the associated variable
changes, the resistance of the sensor changes which unbalances the bridge, and the
resulting voltage indicates both the magnitude and sign of said environmental
change.

Review Questions

    1. In general, describe the process of reducing a series-parallel resistive
         network down to a single equivalent resistance.

    2. Do Ohm's law, KVL and KCL still apply in series-parallel networks? Why?
    3. Is there a finite number of variations of series-parallel networks? Why/why

         not?
    4. Describe the primary functional characteristic of an R-2R ladder network.
    5. What is meant by the terms "load" and "loading", as in "R1 loads R2"?
    6. How might a bridge network be used to sense changes in temperature?
    7. Describe a general procedure to find the voltage between two arbitrary

         points in a series-parallel circuit.

156
5.6 Exercises

Analysis

    1. In the circuit of Figure 5.1, which individual resistors are strictly in series
         and which are in parallel?
                                                                                Figure 5.1

    2. In the circuit of Figure 5.2, which individual resistors are strictly in series
         and which are in parallel?
                                                                                Figure 5.2

    3. In the circuit of Figure 5.3, which individual resistors are strictly in series
         and which are in parallel?
                                                                                Figure 5.3

157
    4. In the circuit of Figure 5.4, which individual resistors are strictly in series
         and which are in parallel?
                                                                                Figure 5.4

    5. In the circuit of Figure 5.5, which individual resistors are strictly in series
         and which are in parallel?
                                                                                Figure 5.5

    6. In the circuit of Figure 5.6, which individual resistors are strictly in series
         and which are in parallel?
                                                                                Figure 5.6

    7. In the circuit of Figure 5.7, which individual resistors are strictly in series
         and which are in parallel?
                                                                                Figure 5.7

158
    8. In the circuit of Figure 5.8, which individual resistors are strictly in series
         and which are in parallel?
                                                                                Figure 5.8

    9. Determine the equivalent resistance of the network shown in Figure 5.1 (i.e.,
         as if an ohmmeter is connected to the two terminals).

    10. Determine the equivalent resistance of the network shown in Figure 5.2.
    11. Determine the equivalent resistance of the network shown in Figure 5.3.
    12. Determine the equivalent resistance of the network shown in Figure 5.4.
    13. Determine the equivalent resistance of the network shown in Figure 5.5.
    14. Determine the equivalent resistance of the network shown in Figure 5.6.
    15. Determine the equivalent resistance of the network shown in Figure 5.7.
    16. Determine the equivalent resistance of the network shown in Figure 5.8.
    17. For the circuit of Figure 5.9, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.

                                                                                Figure 5.9

    18. For the circuit of Figure 5.9, find the current through each resistor.
    19. For the circuit of Figure 5.10, find the current through each resistor.

                                                                                Figure 5.10

    20. For the circuit of Figure 5.10, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.
159
    21. For the circuit of Figure 5.11, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.
                                                                                Figure 5.11

    22. For the circuit of Figure 5.11, find the current through each resistor.
    23. For the circuit of Figure 5.12, find the current through each resistor.

                                                                                Figure 5.12

    24. For the circuit of Figure 5.12, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.
    25. In the circuit of Figure 5.13, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.

                                                                                Figure 5.13

    26. In the circuit of Figure 5.13, find the current through each resistor.
    27. In the circuit of Figure 5.14, find the current through each resistor.

160
    28. In the circuit of Figure 5.14, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.
                                                                                Figure 5.14

    29. For the circuit of Figure 5.15, find voltages Vb, Vc and Vcb.
                                                                                Figure 5.15

    30. For the circuit of Figure 5.15, find the current through the 470  and 3.6 k
         resistors along with the source current.

    31. For the circuit of Figure 5.16, find the current through the 2 k and 5.1 k
         resistors along with the source current.
                                                                                Figure 5.16

    32. For the circuit of Figure 5.16, find voltages Vc, Vb, Vbc and Vab.

161
    33. For the circuit of Figure 5.17, find voltages Va and Vb.
                                                                                Figure 5.17

    34. For the circuit of Figure 5.17, find the current through the 10 k and 4 k
         resistors along with the source current.

    35. For the circuit of Figure 5.18, find the current through the 30 k and the
         left-most 36 k resistors along with the source current.
                                                                                Figure 5.18

    36. For the circuit of Figure 5.18, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.
    37. In the circuit of Figure 5.18, must the currents through the two 36 k

         resistors be the same? Why/why not?
    38. In the circuit of Figure 5.18, must the currents through the two 48 k

         resistors be the same? Further, must these currents be the same as the
         currents through the two 36 k resistors Why/why not?
    39. For the circuit of Figure 5.19, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.

                                                                                Figure 5.19

    40. For the circuit of Figure 5.19, find the current through the 3 k, 11 k, and
         both 9 k resistors.

162
    41. Given the circuit of Figure 5.20, find the current through the 47 k, 5.1 k,
         and 3.9 k resistors.
                                                                                Figure 5.20

    42. Given the circuit of Figure 5.20, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.
    43. For the circuit of Figure 5.21, find voltages Vb, Vc and Vd.

                                                                                Figure 5.21

    44. For the circuit of Figure 5.21, find the current through the 6.8 k, 8.5 k,
         and 20 k resistors.

    45. The circuit of Figure 5.22 is called an R-2R ladder. Find the current through
         each of the 60 k resistors.
                                                                                Figure 5.22

    46. Given the circuit of Figure 5.22, find voltages Vb, Vc, Vd and Ve. What is
         unique about this configuration?

163
    47. For the circuit of Figure 5.23, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.
                                                                                Figure 5.23

    48. For the circuit of Figure 5.23, find the current through each of the resistors.
    49. For the circuit of Figure 5.24, find the current through each of the resistors.

                                                                                Figure 5.24

    50. For the circuit of Figure 5.24, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.
    51. Given the circuit of Figure 5.25, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.

                                                                                Figure 5.25

    52. Given the circuit of Figure 5.25, find the current through each of the
         resistors.

    53. For the circuit of Figure 5.26, find the current through the 200 , 400 ,
         and 100  resistors.
                                                                                Figure 5.26

164
    54. For the circuit of Figure 5.26, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.
    55. Given the circuit of Figure 5.27, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.

                                                                                Figure 5.27

    56. Given the circuit of Figure 5.27, find the current through the 5 k, and 6 k
         resistors.

    57. For the circuit of Figure 5.28, find the current through the 9 k and right-
         most 82 k resistors.
                                                                                Figure 5.28

    58. For the circuit of Figure 5.28, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.
    59. Must the current through the 82 k resistors be identical in the circuit of

         4.28? Why/why not?
    60. Must the current through the 25 k resistors be identical in the circuit of

         4.28? Must they be the same as the currents through the 82 k resistors?
         Why/why not?
    61. For the circuit of Figure 5.29, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.

                                                                                Figure 5.29

    62. For the circuit of Figure 5.29, find the current through the 30 k, 5 k, and
         1 k resistors.

165
    63. For the circuit of Figure 5.30, find the current through the 1 k, 2.2 k, and
         18 k resistors.
                                                                                Figure 5.30

    64. For the circuit of Figure 5.30, find voltages Va, Vb and Vc.
    65. Given the circuit of Figure 5.31, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab.

                                                                                Figure 5.31

    66. Given the circuit of Figure 5.31, find the current through the 20 k, 15 k,
         and 3.3 k resistors.

    67. The circuit of Figure 5.32 is referred to as an R-2R ladder network. Find the
         current through each of the 4 k resistors.
                                                                                Figure 5.32

    68. For the circuit of Figure 5.32, find voltages Va, Vb and Vab. What is the unique
         characteristic of this configuration?

166
Design

    69. Determine a new value for the 33  resistor in Figure 5.9 such that the
         source current is 10 mA.

    70. Determine a new value for the 20 k resistor in Figure 5.12 such that Vb is 4
         volts.

    71. Determine a new value for the 470  resistor in Figure 5.15 such that Vb is 6
         volts.

    72. Determine a new value for the 1 k resistor in Figure 5.14 such that the
         source current is 20 mA.

    73. Determine a new value for the 12 k resistor in Figure 5.16 such that Vbc is
         0 volts.

    74. Given the circuit of Figure 5.24, determine a new value for the 100 k 
         resistor such that Va is 75 volts.

    75. Given the circuit of Figure 5.23, determine a new value for the current
         source such that Vb is 8 volts.

    76. Determine a new value for the 2.2 k resistor in Figure 5.30 such that Vbc is
         0 volts.

    77. Given the circuit of Figure 5.32, determine a new value for the current
         source such that Ve is 1 volt.

Challenge

    78. Utilizing only 1 k resistors, create a series-parallel combination that
         achieves 1.25 k of total resistance.

    79. Utilizing only 12 k resistors, create a series-parallel combination that
         achieves 9 k of total resistance.

    80. Consider the circuit of Figure 5.22. Alter the values of the two right-most 30
         k resistors such that Ve is 1.2 volts. The remaining node voltages should be
         unchanged from the original circuit.

    81. Alter the circuit shown in Figure 5.22 such that another "wrung" is added to
         the ladder creating a new right-most node f. If the former terminating 30 k
         resistor (i.e., the vertical one) is reset to 60 k, determine the values of the
         resistors on the new wrung such that Vf is 0.5 volts.

167
    82. Given the circuit of Figure 5.25, determine a new value for the 2 k 
         resistor such that Vb is 12 volts.

    83. Given the circuit of Figure 5.32, determine new values for the resistors such
         that all of the node voltages are twice the value of the original circuit's node
         voltages.

Simulation

    84. Perform a DC simulation on the result of problem 24 to verify the node
         voltages.

    85. Perform a DC simulation on the result of problem 25 to verify the node
         voltages.

    86. Perform a DC simulation on the result of problem 43 to verify the node
         voltages.

    87. Perform a DC simulation on the result of problem 46 to verify the node
         voltages.

    88. Perform a DC simulation on the result of problem 51 to verify the node
         voltages.

    89. Perform a DC simulation on the result of problem 68 to verify the node
         voltages.

    90. Perform a DC simulation on the proposed solution to problem 69 to verify
         the new design.

    91. Perform a DC simulation of the alteration presented in Challenge problem
         80. Does the new design meet all of the requirements?

    92. Perform a DC simulation of the alteration requested in Challenge problem
         83. Does the new design meet all of the requirements?

168
Notes

                                                                                                                                 
169
6 Analysis Theorems and Techniques

6.0 Chapter Learning Objectives

After completing this chapter, you should be able to:

    · Define whether or not a circuit is a linear bilateral network.
    · Find the voltage source equivalent of a current source and vice versa.
    · Compute voltages and currents in multi-source networks using superposition.
    · Simplify networks using Thévenin's and Norton's theorems.
    · Determine conditions for maximum power transfer and compute the maximum power.
    · Utilize delta-Y and Y-delta conversions for circuit simplification and analysis.

6.1 Introduction

As presented in the previous chapter, series-parallel analysis broadened our ability to analyze circuits beyond
simple series and parallel networks, and leveraged the laws and techniques learned in earlier chapters. In this
chapter we shall examine a number of theorems and techniques to help us analyze yet more complex circuits and
address specialized applications. Specifically, we will address a method of analyzing circuits that contain
multiple current and/or voltage sources that are connected in a non-trivial fashion (i.e., not just series voltage
sources or parallel current sources). It is called the superposition theorem and can be applied to any circuit or
parameter that meets certain requirements, including circuits that have both current sources and voltage sources
together.

We shall also examine several ways of simplifying circuits or making functional equivalents for them. These are
more tools to aid in the process of circuit simplification and analysis. The first item in this category is to make
more accurate models of our idealized constant voltage and current sources. Once this is completed, it will be
possible to convert from one type of source to another, such as creating a current source that is the functional
equivalent of a voltage source. By this we mean that if we swap one for the other in any circuit, the remainder of
the circuit will behave identically, producing the same component voltage drops and branch currents. This
technique is useful in a number of ways, not the least of which is that it can help reduce more complex circuits
to ease analysis.

The concept of equivalence can be extended beyond just a single source to an entire network. For this we will
explore Thévenin's and Norton's theorems. Using these theorems, entire circuits utilizing dozens of components
can be modeled as a single source with an associated resistance. When coupled with the maximum power
transfer theorem, these theorems will allow us to determine component values that produce the maximum
amount of load power.

170
Finally, we will examine how to find equivalent circuits for certain resistor
arrangements that use three connecting points, in other words, resistor arrangements
shaped like the letter Y or like a triangle. These are known as delta and Y
configurations. These configurations are difficult to address with basic series-
parallel simplification techniques but the conversion equivalences will help solve
that issue.

6.2 Source Conversions

We begin by considering a more realistic model for constant voltage and constant
current sources. The ideal voltage source produces a stated potential forever, and
without regard to what it is connected to. The ideal current source behaves similarly;
it will always produce the same current regardless of its load. These expectations are
not realistic. For example, if we were to place a solid bar of copper across the
terminals of a voltage source, the bar may exhibit a resistance of mere milliohms,
implying an output current of thousands of amps. Similarly, if we were to disconnect
a current source from any load, its effective load would be the resistance of the air
between its terminals and Ohm's law would dictate an output voltage of perhaps
thousands or even millions of volts. Real world sources do not behave like this.

Realistic Models for Sources

A highly precise model for any voltage source or current source could be fairly
complex but for general purpose work, we can greatly improve our ideal sources by
simply adding a resistor to them. This resistance is referred to as the internal
resistance of the source. It is important to understand that this is not a resistor, as in
an internal component that can be altered, but rather a mathematical addition to the
source that better predicts how it will behave. Further, the value of this effective
resistance can be deduced in a laboratory via proper measurements.

The model for a voltage source adds a resistance in series, as shown in Figure 6.1.         Figure 6.1
This resistance sets an upper limit on the source's current output. Even if the output      Practical voltage source
terminals are shorted, the maximum current will be dictated via Ohm's law to be             model.
the source voltage divided by the internal resistance, or E/R. Obviously, this
internal resistance will create some voltage divider effect with the attached load. To
minimize this effect, the internal resistance should be as small as practicably
possible. Thus,

     The ideal internal resistance of a voltage source is zero ohms (a short).

Given a zero ohm internal resistance, this improved model reverts back to the
original ideal source. In the case of a lab power supply, the internal resistance
typically will be a small fraction of an ohm.

171
For a current source, the improved model adds a resistance in parallel, as shown in      Figure 6.2
Figure 6.2. This resistance sets an upper limit on the source's voltage output. If the   Practical current source
output terminals are opened, the maximum voltage will no longer produce a huge           model.
voltage. Instead, it is dictated by Ohm's law to be the source current times the
internal resistance, or IR. This internal resistance will create some current divider
effect with the attached load. To minimize this effect, the internal resistance should
be as large as practicably possible. Thus,

     The ideal internal resistance of a current source is infinite ohms.

Given an infinite ohm internal resistance (i.e., an open), this improved model reverts
back to the original ideal source. From here on, whenever we deal with practical
voltage and current sources, we understand that these sources have some associated
internal resistance, even if they're not shown explicitly in a schematic diagram.
Further, whenever we talk about ideal sources, we simply use a short for the internal
resistance of a voltage source and an open for the internal resistance of a current
source.

Source Equivalences

For any simple voltage source consisting of an ideal voltage source with a series
internal resistance, an equivalent current source may be created. Similarly, for any
simple current source consisting of an ideal current source with a parallel internal
resistance, an equivalent voltage source may be created. By "equivalent", we mean
the load currents must be identical for both circuits given any value of load
resistance. (Note that if the currents are the same then the voltages must also be the
same due to Ohm's Law.) Consider the simple voltage source of Figure 6.1. Its
equivalent current source would be that shown in Figure 6.2. The opposite is also
true.

For reasons that will become apparent under the section on Thévenin's theorem
following, the internal resistances of these two circuits must be identical if they are
to behave identically. Knowing that, it is a straightforward process to find the
required value of the other source. As the current/voltage characteristic is linear for
these circuits, a plot line can be defined by just two points. The two obvious points
to use are the opened and shorted load cases. In other words, if it's equivalent for
these two situations, it must work for any load. The shorted load case produces the
maximum load current with zero load voltage, while in contrast, the opened load
case produces the maximum load voltage with zero load current.

Given a voltage source, the maximum current is developed when the load is shorted
producing a current of E/R. Under that same load condition, all of the current from
the current source version must be flowing through the load. Therefore, the value of
the equivalent current source must be the maximum current of E/R. It would be
nonsensical to use a current source that was larger or smaller than this value.

172
To continue, if we look at the open load case, for the voltage source the load current
would be zero and the load voltage would be the entire source voltage of E. For the
current source, the load would also see no current and its voltage would be the
voltage appearing across its internal resistance which is R times the current E/R, or
just E. Thus, the two behave identically at the load limits.

Similarly, if we start with a current source, an open load produces the maximum
load voltage of IR. Therefore, the equivalent voltage source must have a value of
IR. For the current source, a shorted load would produce a load current equal to the
source value, or I. The voltage source version would produce a current of E/R, where
the value of E was just found to be equal to IR, and thus the load current would be
IR/R, or just I. Once again, the two versions behave identically at the load limits.

To summarize the process of source conversion:

     · The internal resistance will be the same for both versions.

     · If converting from a voltage source to a current source, the value of the
         current source will be the maximum current available from the voltage
         source (shorted load case), and is equal to E/R.

     · If converting from a current source to a voltage source, the value of the
         voltage source will be the maximum voltage available from the current
         source (opened load case), and is equal to IR.

If a multi-source is being converted (i.e., voltage sources in series or current sources
in parallel), first combine the sources to arrive at the simplest source and then do the
conversion. Do not convert the sources first and then combine them as you will wind
up with series-parallel configurations rather than simple sources.

Judicious use of source conversions can sometimes simplify multi-source circuits by
allowing converted sources to be combined, resulting in a single source.

Example 6.1                                                                               Figure 6.3
         Determine the current source equivalent for the source of Figure 6.3.            Source for Example 6.1.

     First off, the resistance value is simply copied over, therefore the internal
     resistance of the current source is 50 . The value of the current source is
     computed using Ohm's law based on the maximum current produced under
     the shorted load case. Thus, all 15 volts drops across the 50  resistance.

     Is = E
           Rs

     I s = 15V 50
     I s = 0.3 A

173
     The equivalent current source is shown in Figure 6.4. We know that this         Figure 6.4
     will work for the shorted an opened cases, but if any doubt is left as to its   Equivalent current source for
     universal nature, simply substitute any other resistance value and compare      the source of Figure 6.3.
     the outcomes of the two circuits. For no particular reason, let's try using a
     load of 200  and see if the load currents are identical.

     For the original voltage source we can use Ohm's law:

     IL= E
           R s +R L

     I L = 15 V 50+200
     I L = 60 mA

     For the equivalent current source we can use CDR:

     IL = Is Rs
              R s +R L

     I L = 0.3 A 50  50+200
     I L = 60 mA

     Try this with any other load resistor. The results should always be identical.

Now let's try one going the other way.

Example 6.2                                                                          Figure 6.5
         Determine the voltage source equivalent for the source of Figure 6.5.       Source for Example 6.2.

     Once again, the resistance value is simply copied over, therefore the internal
     resistance of the voltage source is 22 k. The value of the voltage source is
     based on the maximum voltage produced under the opened load case and is
     computed using Ohm's law. For the open case, all 15 milliamps flows
     through the 22 k resistance.

     Es = I×Rs
     Es = 15 mA×22k 
     Es = 330 V

     The equivalent voltage source is shown in Figure 6.6. Again, let's try using
     another value of load resistor to see if the load current and voltage results
     are identical between the two sources. This time, we'll match the load to the
     internal resistance of 22 k.

174
     For a voltage source with matched resistances we wind up with a simple               Figure 6.6
     50% voltage divider, thus the load voltage will be half the source voltage,          Equivalent current source for
     or 165 volts. The original current source sees the current split in half due to      the source of Figure 6.5.
     the current divider rule. Thus, the load current should be 7.5 mA. Given
     this current, the load voltage will be,

     V L = I×Rs
     V L = 7.5 mA×22 k 
     V L = 165 V

     Once again the results turn out to be identical.

Now that we have it is possible to substitute one kind of source for another, it is time
to investigate how we might put this to use beyond just giving us a different way of
driving a circuit. If applied intelligently, source conversions can be used to simplify
and reduce complex circuits, and thus ease computational difficulty. For example,
consider the circuit of Figure 6.7.

This circuit is unlike any circuit we have seen so far. Although we have analyzed         Figure 6.7
circuits using multiple voltage sources, they have always been in a simple series         A dual source circuit.
loop. As such, their voltages may be added together to find a single equivalent
voltage source. Such is not the case here. In this circuit the voltage sources are
part of a series-parallel network and thus their potentials cannot be merely
added. In fact, there are no further simplifications to be performed on this
circuit using basic series-parallel techniques. We appear to be stuck.

But we're not. This circuit can be simplified into a straight all-parallel network
through the use of source conversions. The E1, R1 combo can be converted into
one current source while the E2, R2 combo can be converted into a second source.
Once these are converted, the resulting circuit will consist of two current sources
and three resistors, all in parallel. This is the sort of circuit we solved back in
Chapter 4.

Example 6.3                                                                               Figure 6.8
         Determine Vb for the circuit of Figure 6.8.                                      Circuit for Example 6.3.

     The first step will be to convert the voltage sources into current
     sources. We will treat the resistors attached to their positive
     terminals as their internal resistances. In other words, we have a 15
     volt source with 1 k resistance and a 6 volt source with a 4 k
     resistance.

175
For the first source, the current will be:

Is = E                                                                                  Figure 6.9
      Rs                                                                                Equivalent current source
                                                                                        version of the circuit depicted
I s = 15 V 1 k                                                                          in Figure 6.8.
I s = 15mA

And for the second source:

Is = E
      Rs

I s = 6 V 4 k 
I s = 1.5 mA

The equivalent converted circuit is shown in Figure 6.9. Before continuing,
it is worth noting that connection nodes a and c no longer exist in this
circuit. More on this in a moment. This new circuit consists of a pair of
current sources that sum to 16.5 mA and which drive three parallel resistors,
1 k || 4 k || 5 k, or approximately 689.7 . Ohm's law tells us Vb is:

V b = I Total× R Equivalent
V b  16.5 mA×689.7
V b = 11.38 V

We can now take this voltage and apply it back into the original
(unconverted) circuit. With this potential known, it is relatively easy to
determine the other currents and voltages using KVL and Ohm's law.
Looking at the 1 k resistor, the voltage across it must be 15 V - 11.38 V, or
3.62 V. Therefore, the current through it must be 3.62 mA. Similarly, the
voltage across the 4 k resistor must be 11.38 V - 6 V, or 5.38 V, which
yields a current of 1.345 mA. Both of these currents are flowing left to right.
Then third current, flowing down through the 5 k, is 11.38 V/5 k, or
2.276 mA. KCL states that the current entering node b must equal the
currents leaving. The entering current is 3.62 mA. The exiting currents are
1.345 mA and 2.276 mA, or 3.62 mA when rounded to three places (like the
entering current).

As mentioned, nodes a and c disappeared in the converted circuit in Example 6.3.
This brings up an important point. Equivalent circuits are equivalent in terms that
the items connected to the equivalent behave the same way as they do with the
original circuit. That does not mean that the items within the equivalent see the same
current or voltage. We do not expect the voltage across the 1 k or 4 k resistors in
the converted version to be the same as those in the original version.

176
6.3 Superposition Theorem

As useful as the source conversion technique proved to be in Example 6.3, it will not
work for all circuits. Thus, more general approaches are needed. One of these
methods is superposition.

Superposition allows the analysis of multi-source series-parallel circuits.
Superposition can only be applied to networks that are linear and bilateral. Further, it
cannot be used to find values for non-linear functions, such as power, directly.
Fortunately, if the circuit contains nothing but resistors, and ordinary voltage sources
and current sources, the circuit will be a linear bilateral network. Also, although
power is a square law function (i.e., it is proportional to the square of voltage or
current), it can be computed from the resulting voltage or current values so this
presents no limits to analysis.

The basic idea is to determine the contribution of each source by itself, and then        Figure 6.10
adding the results to get the final answer(s). Let's start with an almost trivial         A dual source circuit.
example to illustrate the idea. Consider the circuit of Figure 6.10. Here we have
two voltage sources driving a pair of resistors. It is a basic series circuit. The way
this was approached in Chapter 3 was to combine the sources and the resistors into a
single source and resistor. The circulating current could then be found using Ohm's
law. As the two sources are in opposition, the net voltage is 10.5 volts while the total
resistance is 500 . This yields a circulating current of 21 mA.

Instead of this approach, let's consider the contribution of each source by itself. To
do that, we will replace all other sources in the circuit with their ideal internal
resistance. From earlier work we have discovered that the ideal internal resistance of
a voltage source is a short, or zero ohms. Thus, we wind up with two circuits: one
with a 12 volt source that drives 100 , 400  and a short; and a second circuit with
a 1.5 volt source that drives pretty much the same thing, but with an opposing
current direction. The first circuit produces a clockwise current of 12 V/ 500 , or
24 milliamps. Meanwhile, the second circuit produces a counterclockwise current of
1.5 V / 500 , or 3 mA. As these two currents oppose each other, the resulting
current is 24 mA - 3 mA, or 21 mA, the same value originally computed. Granted,
this second method is less efficient than the original method but it illustrates the
process. More importantly, this process can be applied to a variety of multi-source
series-parallel circuits. A key element is to remember the directions of the currents
and polarities of the voltages created in the sub-circuits. Without these data, it will
be impossible to determine whether the various pieces of the puzzle are added to or
subtracted from the total.

177
To summarize the superposition technique:

     · For every voltage or current source in the original circuit, create a new sub-
         circuit. The sub-circuits will be identical to the original except that all
         sources other than the one under consideration will be replaced by their
         ideal internal resistance. This means that all remaining voltage sources will
         be shorted and all remaining current sources will be opened.

     · Label the current directions and voltage polarities on each of the new sub-
         circuits, as generated by the source under consideration.

     · Solve each of the sub-circuits for the desired voltages and/or currents using
         standard series-parallel analysis techniques. Make sure to note the voltage
         polarities and current directions for these items.

     · Add all of the contributions from each of the sub-circuits to arrive at the
         final values, being sure to account for current directions and voltage
         polarities in the process.

In order to get a better handle on the superposition technique, let's reexamine the the
dual source circuit shown in Figure 6.8 (repeated in Figure 6.11 for ease of
reference). We will solve this using superposition. As the circuit has two sources, it
will require two sub-circuits.

Example 6.4                                                                              Figure 6.11
         Determine Vb for the circuit of Figure 6.11 using superposition.                Circuit for Example 6.4.

     As this circuit has two voltage sources, two sub-circuits will be
     needed. The first sub-circuit will use the 15 volt source.
     Consequently, the 6 volt source will be replaced with its ideal
     internal resistance, a short. This new circuit is shown in Figure 6.12.

     The current directions are as follows: current exits the source and                 Figure 6.12
     travels through the 1 k producing a voltage drop + to - from left to                First sub-circuit for the circuit
     right. At node b the current splits. The 4 k and 5 k are in parallel so             of Figure 6.11.
     they both see the same voltage. Some of the current flows down through
     the 5 k resistor producing a voltage drop + to - from top to bottom.
     The remainder of the current flows to the right, through the 4 k,
     producing a voltage drop + to - from left to right. Vb can be
     determined via voltage divider between the 1 k and the parallel
     combo of the 5 k and 4 k. 5 k in parallel with 4 k is
     approximately 2.222 k.

178
     V b = E Rx
               R x +R y

     V b = 15V 2.222 k  2.222 k +1 k 
     V b  10.34 V

     The second sub-circuit will use the 6 volt source. Therefore, the 15 volt       Figure 6.13
     source will be replaced with its ideal internal resistance, a short. This new   Second sub-circuit for the
     circuit is shown in Figure 6.13.                                                circuit of Figure 6.11.

     The current directions are as follows: current exits the source and
     travels through the 4 k producing a voltage drop + to - from right to
     left. At node b the current splits. Now the 1 k and 5 k are in parallel
     so they both see the same voltage. Some of the current flows down
     through the 5 k resistor producing a voltage drop + to - from top to
     bottom, just as it did in the first sub-circuit. The remainder of the
     current flows to the left, through the 1 k, producing a voltage drop +
     to - from right to left. Once again, Vb can be determined via voltage divider,
     this time between the 4 k and the parallel combo of the 5 k and 1 k is
     approximately 833.3 .

     Vb = E Rx
               R x +R y

     V b = 6 V 833.3 833.3+4 k 
     V b  1.034 V

     Both sub-circuits show polarities of + to - from top to bottom for Vb,
     therefore these two voltages simply add, for a total of approximately 11.37
     volts. This agrees nicely with the result obtained using source conversions.
     The slight deviation in the final digit is no doubt due to the rounding of
     intermediate values, such as resistor combinations.

     It is instructive to pursue this example further and investigate a current. In
     the source conversion version it was discovered that the current through the
     1 k resistor is 3.62 mA and flowing left to right. Using superposition, the
     corresponding current in the first sub-circuit can be found using KVL and
     Ohm's law, (15 V - 10.34 V)/ 1 k, or 4.66 mA flowing left to right. In the
     second sub-circuit, this current can be obtained using Ohm's law alone,
     1.034 V / 1 k, or 1.034 mA flowing right to left. As this current opposes
     the current from the first sub-circuit, the two values are subtracting leaving
     approximately 3.63 mA flowing left to right, agreeing with the original
     answer within rounding error.

179
Computer Simulation

For further verification, the circuit of Example 6.4 is entered into a simulator as
shown in Figure 6.14.

                                                                                            Figure 6.14
                                                                                            The circuit of Example 6.4 in a
                                                                                            simulator.

A DC operating point analysis is performed, as shown in Figure 6.15.

                                                                                            Figure 6.15
                                                                                            Simulation results for the
                                                                                            circuit of Example 6.4.

The voltage at node 2, which is Vb in the original circuit, agrees nicely with the
values computed previously.

This exploration shows that the superposition technique offers a fairly
straightforward method of solving a variety of multi-source series-parallel circuits. It
is not without its limitations, though. First, if a circuit has a large number of sources,
superposition can become a bit tedious as it requires as many sub-circuits as there
are sources, and every one of these sub-circuits requires separate solutions. Second,
there are some series-parallel configurations that superposition along with series-
parallel analysis techniques will not solve. We will investigate methods of dealing
with these issues later in this chapter and in the following chapter.

180
6.4 Thévenin's Theorem

Thévenin's theorem, named after Léon Charles Thévenin, is a powerful analysis             Figure 6.16
tool. For DC, it states:                                                                  Thévenin equivalent circuit.

         Any single port linear network can be reduced to a simple voltage
         source, Eth, in series with an internal resistance, Rth.

An example is shown in Figure 6.16. The phrase "single port network" means that
the circuit is cut in such a way that only two connections exist to the remainder of
the circuit (two connection points makes up one port). The remainder of the circuit
may be a single component or a large multi-component sub-circuit. As there are
many ways to cut a typical circuit, there are many possible Thévenin equivalents.
The important thing is that there are only two connection points between the two
portions of the circuit and neither point has to be ground.

Consider the circuit shown in Figure 6.17. Suppose we cut the circuit                     Figure 6.17
immediately to the left of R4. That is, we will find the Thévenin equivalent that         Example circuit.
drives R4. The first step is to make the cut, removing the remainder of the circuit
(in this case, just R4). We then determine the open circuit output voltage. This is
the maximum voltage that could appear between the cut points and is called the
Thévenin voltage, Eth. This is shown in Figure 6.18. In a circuit such as this,
basic series-parallel analysis may be used to find Eth. This process turns out to
be quite straightforward in this particular circuit. Due to the open, no current
flows through R3, thus no voltage is developed across R3, and therefore Eth must
equal the voltage developed across R2 which may be obtained via a voltage
divider with resistor R1 and source E.

The second part is finding the Thévenin resistance, Rth. Beginning with the "cut"         Figure 6.18
circuit, replace all sources with their ideal internal resistance (thus shorting voltage  Finding Eth..
sources and opening current sources). From the perspective of the cut point, look
back into the circuit and simplify by making appropriate series and parallel
combinations to determine its equivalent resistance. This is shown in Figure
6.19. Looking in from where the cut was made (right-to-left here), we find that
R1 and R2 are in parallel, and this combination is then in series with R3. Thus,
Rth = R3 + (R1 || R2). A common error is to determine the equivalent resistance
that the source drives. Remember, everything is determined from the vantage
point of the cut or port.

Thévenin equivalents are not limited to single source circuits. It is possible to find
the equivalent of a network with several sources. Finding the open circuit output
voltage will undoubtedly require some extra work, for example the use of
superposition of source conversions. Finding the Thévenin resistance is unchanged,
just remember to replace every source with its ideal internal resistance before
simplifying the network.

181
As noted earlier, the original circuit could be cut in a number of different ways. We
might, for example, want to determine the Thévenin equivalent that drives R2 in the
circuit of Figure 6.17. This cut appears in Figure 6.20. Clearly, this will result in
different values for both Eth and Rth. For example, Rth is now R1 || (R3 + R4).

                                                                                                                   Figure 6.19
                                                                                                                   Finding Rth..

Finding Thévenin Equivalents in Lab

The procedure for experimentally determining an equivalent in the laboratory
mimics the analytical approach. The first step is to figuratively cut the circuit and
isolate the section that is to be converted. At this point we have the open circuit
version of the circuit and all we need do is connect a multimeter to the open port to
determine Eth.

There are two methods for determining Rth. The first method works well for simple          Figure 6.20
circuits that use only resistors and current and/or voltage sources. The second            An alternate cut or port
method is more generally applicable and will work for circuits with active devices         location.
such as transistors. To use the first method, the sources are physically removed
from the circuit and replaced with their ideal internal resistance. Thus voltage
sources are replaced with a shorting wire and current sources are left as opens.
Do not simply place shorting wires across the terminals of voltage sources as
doing so will cause an overload and potentially damage the sources. Once this is
completed, a multimeter is placed at the open port and set to read resistance. The
indicated value is Rth.

The second method uses a variable resistance, namely either a rheostat or a decade
box, and exploits the voltage divider rule. In this version, the sources are left active
(powered up) and are not replaced with opens or shorts. Once Eth is measured, the
variable resistor is placed across the port connections. This resistance is adjusted
until the port voltage drops to exactly half of Eth. In the equivalent circuit, there are
only two resistances of concern, Rth and this variable load resistance, and they are in
series. Consequently, if the load voltage is now half of the open circuit voltage (Eth),
then the other half of the voltage must be dropping across the equivalent internal
resistance (Rth). For this to be true in a series circuit, the two resistances must have
the same value. Thus, we simply remove the rheostat from the circuit and use a
multimeter to determine its precise value. If a decade box is used instead, the value
is determined directly by reading the knob settings.

182
Whether determined analytically or empirically, the Thévenin equivalent circuit can   Figure 6.21
replace the original single port network regardless of what the original was          Circuit for Example 6.5.
connected to. The same voltages and currents will be seen in this other portion, and
it won't matter if the other portion is comprised of a single resistor, multiple
resistors, multiple resistors and multiple sources, or even multiple resistors and
sources wired to a selection of piquant cheeses. The Thévenin equivalent is a true
functional equivalent and can be used on any linear bilateral network.
Example 6.5

         Determine the Thévenin equivalent of the circuit driving the 1 k in
         Figure 6.21. Verify that the equivalent produces the same voltage
         across this resistor as the original circuit.

     First, we'll redraw the circuit showing the portion to be
     Théveninized, as shown in Figure 6.22. The open circuit output
     voltage will be the voltage across the 800  resistor as there will be
     no voltage drop across the 200  resistor (as no current flows
     through it into the open). This is found via a simple voltage divider.

     Eth = E Rx
               Rx+R y

     Eth = 10 V 800  800+100 
     Eth  8.889 V

     The equivalent resistance is found by shorting the voltage source and then       Figure 6.22
     simplifying the circuit. The result is 200  in series with the parallel          Finding Eth.
     combination of the 100  and 800 . 200 + 100 || 800  288.89 .

     To determine Vc, we can use a voltage divider between the 1 k and
     the 288.89  along with the equivalent source voltage of 8.889 volts.

       V c = E th RL
                  R L +Rth

     V c = 8.889 V 1 k  1 k +288.89 
     V c  6.897 V

     Now let's determine Vc in the original circuit using series-parallel analysis
     techniques. Perhaps the quickest approach is a pair of voltage dividers. Vb is
     found via a divider between the parallel combination of the 1 k + 200 
     and the 800 , against the 100 . Vc is is then found using that voltage with
     a divider between the 1 k and 200 . Using this approach, Vb is
     approximately 8.276 volts and Vc is approximately 6.897 volts, providing an
     excellent match.

183
It might seem that the Thévenin method is the "long way home" in this
example, and it is, but it has the advantage of being more efficient if several
different loads are being considered. For example, suppose we decided to
determine the output voltage not just for the 1 k, but for a group of a half
dozen different resistors. The double voltage divider would have to be
determined for each load resistor using the straight series-parallel method
but only a single divider needs to be computed for each load when using the
Thévenin method. The Thévenin method is also of great use when
determining maximum power transfer, as we shall see a later in this chapter.

Computer Simulation

To verify the results of Example 6.5, the original circuit is recreated in a simulator
along its Thévenin equivalent, as shown in Figure 6.23.

                                                                                        Figure 6.23
                                                                                        The original circuit of Example
                                                                                        6.5 in a simulator along with
                                                                                        the equivalent.

A DC operating point analysis is performed and the results are shown in Figure 6.24.
Note that the voltages across the identical 1 k loads (nodes 3 and 5) are virtually
the same, indicating functional equivalence between the two. The slight deviation is
due to the rounding of the Thévenin voltage and resistance.

184
                                                                                                                   Figure 6.24
                                                                                                                   Results of the simulation
                                                                                                                   showing equivalence.

As a further check, the simulation is run again, but this time using an alternate load
resistor value. The value chosen is the Thévenin resistance value. By matching the
resistances, this should produce a 50/50 voltage divider and the load voltage should
equal half of the Thévenin source voltage, or approximately 4.444 volts. That is
precisely what we find, as seen in Figure 6.25.

                                                                                                                   Figure 6.25
                                                                                                                   Results of the simulation for
                                                                                                                   matched resistance.

As mentioned previously, Thévenin's theorem can be applied to much more complex
multi-source circuits, and the item being driven need not be just a single resistor.
This is illustrated in the next example.

185
Example 6.6                                                                        Figure 6.26
                                                                                   Circuit for Example 6.6.
         Determine the Thévenin equivalent of the circuit driving the
         resistor/voltage source combo in Figure 6.26. Verify that the
         equivalent produces the same voltage across this resistor as
         the original circuit.

     Determining Rth is not particularly difficult here. After
     shorting the 10 volt source and open the current source, it
     can be seen that the 1 k and 3 k are in parallel, yielding
     750 . This is in series with the 1250  for a total of 2 k,
     which is in turn in parallel with the 6 k. The final result is
     1.5 k.

     Finding Eth is a little more involved. One possibility is to use a source
     conversion on the 10 volt source as that will leave us with two parallel
     current sources that may be combined directly. The converted source will be
     10 V/ 1k, or 10 mA, in parallel with 1 k. This results in a total of 25 mA
     feeding upwards with 1 k || 3 k, or 750 . We can use the current divider
     rule to determine the current flowing through the 1250  plus 6 k branch,
     and then use Ohm's law to find the open circuit voltage (i.e., the voltage
     across the 6 k).

     I 6k = I S Rx
               Rx +R y

     I 6k = 25 mA 750 750+7250 
     I 6k = 2.34375 mA

     Eth = I 6k× R6k
     Eth = 2.34375 mA×6 k 
     Eth = 14.0625 V

     Another approach to determine this value would be to use superposition.
     This is left as an additional exercise.

     Turning our attention to the voltage produced across the 6 volt with 500 
     sub-circuit, we have a simple series loop with Eth opposing this 6 volt
     source, leaving 8.0625 volts to produce a clockwise current through Rth in
     series with the 500  (a total of 2 k). That current will be 8.0625 V / 2 k,
     or 4.03125 mA. This will produce a drop across the 500  of 2.015625 volts
     with a polarity of + to - from top to bottom. This will add to the 6 volt
     source resulting in a final potential of 8.015625 volts. The results are
     verified via the simulation technique used previously. The node voltages for
     both the original and equivalent circuits are shown in Figure 6.27.

186
                                                                                                                   Figure 6.27
                                                                                                                   Results of the simulation using
                                                                                                                   the original and equivalent
                                                                                                                   circuits.

6.5 Norton's Theorem

Norton's theorem is credited to Edward Lawry Norton. In a nutshell, Norton's
theorem is the current source version of Thévenin's theorem. That is, a single port
DC network can be reduced to a single current source, IN, with parallel internal
resistance, RN. Indeed, once you understand one of them, the other is but a minor
extension, so we will not need to spend a great deal of time here once the basics are
outlined sufficiently.
The process of determining the Norton equivalent current and resistance is very
similar to that employed for the Thévenin equivalent. First, the Norton resistance is
found the same way as is the Thévenin resistance: replace all sources with their ideal
internal resistance and then perform appropriate series and parallel combinations to
reduce this to a single resistance value. Consequently, the Norton and Thévenin
resistance values are identical, RN = Rth. Second, instead of finding the open circuit
output voltage, we find the short circuit output current. This is the Norton current.
Instead of thinking in terms of a voltmeter at the opened load, we think in terms of
connecting a shorting ammeter across the load. Either way, we're looking for the
maximum value that can be obtained.
Perhaps the most useful thing to remember here is that if we can create a Thévenin
equivalent for a network then it must be possible to create a Norton equivalent.
Indeed, once a Thévenin equivalent is found, a source conversion can be performed
on it to yield the Norton equivalent! The opposite, of course, is also true.

187
6.6 Maximum Power Transfer Theorem

Given a simple voltage source with internal resistance, a useful question to ask is        Figure 6.28
"What value of load resistance will yield the maximum amount of power in the               Defining maximum power
load?" While it is not true that maximizing load power is a goal of all circuit            transfer.
designs, it is a goal of a portion of them and thus worth a closer look. Consider the
basic circuit depicted in Figure 6.28 with source E, source internal resistance Ri and
load resistance R.

We would like to describe the load power in terms of the load resistance. To make
the job easier, we may normalize the voltage source E to 1 volt and the source
resistance Ri to 1 Ohm. By doing this, R also becomes a normalized value, that is, it
no longer represents a simple resistance value but rather represents a ratio in
comparison to Ri. In this way the analysis will work for any set of source values.
Note that the value of E will equally scale the power in both Ri and R, so a precise
value is not needed, and thus, we may as well chose 1 volt for convenience.

The power in the load can be determined by using I2R where I = E / (Ri+R). Using
our normalized values I = 1 / (1+R) and thus the load power is:

         12  or after expanding,  P= 2 R
                                        R +2 R+1
P =(1+R ) R

We now have an equation that describes the load power in terms of the load
resistance. Before we go any further, take a look at what this equation tells you, in
general. It is obvious that maximum power will not occur at the extremes. If R = 0 or
R =  (i.e., shorted or opened load) the load power is zero. While shorting the load
will yield the maximum load current, it will also yield zero load voltage and thus no
power. Similarly, opening the load will yield maximum load voltage but it will also
yield zero load current, and again, no load power. To find the precise value that
produces the maximum load power, the proof can be divided into two major
portions. The first involves graphing the function and the second requires differential
calculus to solve for a precise value. We shall proceed with the graphing portion
which will lead us to the answer. The more rigorous proof of the second method is
detailed in Appendix C.

Graphing the Power Function P = R / (R2+2R+1)

This may be done in parts, looking at the contribution of each term, and then
combining to form the final result. First, consider the denominator R2 + 2R + 1. It
consists of three segments. The most simple is the horizontal line at +1. The 2R term
creates a straight line with slope 2 starting at the origin. The R2 term creates a simple
curve with increasing slope that starts at the origin, crosses the horizontal +1 line at
R = 1 and also crosses the 2R line at R = 2. These items are drawn individually and

188
then added together as illustrated in Figure 6.29.

Normalized Components and Total  10.0              R2+2R+1                                                                                Figure 6.29
                                  9.0                                                                                                     The three terms of the power
                                  8.0                                                            2R                                       equation plotted individually
                                  7.0                                                                                                     and then summed.
                                  6.0                                                                    R2
                                  5.0                                                                                 1             2
                                  4.0
                                  3.0         0.5                                             1                          1.5
                                  2.0
                                  1.0
                                  0.0
                                      0

                                                   Normalized Load Resistance

Of course, we must remember that we really want 1 / ( R2 + 2R + 1) and so we plot
the reciprocal of the combo as shown in Figure 6.30 (red curve). We also include the
numerator term, R. This is shown as a straight line (blue) with a slope of 1. Finally,
these two curves are multiplied together to produce the load power equation (black).

                                 2.5                                                                                          0.25

                                                                            R/(R2+2R+1)                                                                   Figure 6.30
                                                                            (right axis)                                                                  The power equation and
                                                                                                                                                          components plotted.
                                 2.0                                                                                          0.2

Normalized Components            1.5                                                                                          0.15 Normalized Load Power
                                                                                           R                                  0.1

                                 1.0

                                 0.5                                                                                          0.05
                                                                              1/(R2+2R+1)

                                 0.0     0.5                                                                                  0
                                 0                 1                                             1.5                     2    2.5

                                                   Normalized Load Resistance

189
A close examination of the power curve will show that the peak occurs at R = 1.Load Power as a Percentage of Maximum
This is easier to see if we plot the completed power curve using a logarithmic
horizontal axis and also scale the vertical axis to 100%, as shown in Figure 6.31. The
peak is more apparent and the curve is symmetrical in shape rather than lopsided.
This reinforces the idea that the ratio of the resistances is what matters.

       100

                                                                                                                   Figure 6.31
                                                                                                                   The load power curve with
      80 logarithmic axis showing symmetry.

         60

                                       40

                                       20

                                       0
                                       0.01  0.1  1                           10  100

                                                  Normalized Load Resistance

Finally, we can state:

         Maximum load power will be achieved when the load resistance is equal to
         the internal resistance of the driving source.

No other value of load resistance will produce a higher load power. For the circuit of
Figure 6.28, this means that R must equal Ri. As an exercise, we can try substituting
a few values around the peak to verify this. For example, given E = 1 V and Ri = 1 ,
we calculate P for R = 0.5 , 1 , and 2 :

         P0.5 = 0.5/(0.52+20.5+1) = 2/9
         P1 = 1/(12+21+1) = 2/8 = ¼
         P2 = 2/(22+22+1) = 2/9

You can also try this with extremely small variations such as R = 0.9999  along
with R = 1.0001  and you will not achieve a value equal to or greater than ¼ Watt.

While matching the resistance produces the maximum load power, it does not
produce maximum load current or maximum load voltage. In fact, this condition
produces a load voltage and a load current that are half of their maximums. Their

190
product, however, is at the maximum. Further, efficiency at maximum load power is
only 50% (i.e., only half of all generated power goes to the load with the other half
being wasted internally). Values of R greater than Ri will achieve higher efficiency
but at reduced load power. Sometimes we favor efficiency over maximal load power.

As any linear two point network can be reduced to something like Figure 6.28 by
using Thévenin's theorem, combining the two theorems allows us to determine
maximum power conditions for any resistor in a complex circuit.

6.7 Delta-Y Conversions

Certain component configurations, such as bridged networks, cannot be reduced to a
single resistance using basic series-parallel conversion techniques. One method for
simplification involves converting sections into more convenient forms. The
configurations in question are three-point networks containing three resistors. Due to
the manner in which they drawn, they are referred to as delta networks and Y
networks17. These configurations are shown in Figures 6.32. In this particular case
the delta version is drawn upside down so that its terminal designations match those
of the Y configuration.

                                                                                                                   Figure 6.32
                                                                                                                   Delta and Y (-Y) networks.

Alternately, if they are slightly redrawn they are known as pi (also called "")
networks and T (also called "tee") networks. These configurations are shown in
Figure 6.33.

                                                                                                                   Figure 6.33
                                                                                                                   Alternate form: Pi and T(-T)
                                                                                                                   networks.

17 In some sources the capital Greek letter delta () is used instead of spelling out "delta"
    and the letter Y is spelled out as "wye". Thus, you may come across discussion of "-Y ",
    "-wye" or "delta-wye" networks. It's all the same stuff.

191
It is possible to convert back and forth between delta and Y networks. That is, for
every delta network, there exists a Y network such that the resistances seen between
the X, Y and Z terminals are identical, and vice versa. Consequently, one
configuration can replace another in order to simplify a larger circuit.

-Y Conversion

A true equivalent circuit would present the same resistance between any two
terminals as the original circuit. Consider the unloaded case for the circuits of Figure
6.32 (i.e., just these networks with nothing else connected to them). The equivalent
resistances seen between each pair of terminals for the delta and Y respectively are:

     RXY = Ra || (Rb+Rc) = Rd + Re                       (6.1)
     RXZ = Rb || (Ra+Rc) = Rd + Rf                       (6.2)
     RZY = Rc || (Rb+Ra) = Re + Rf                       (6.3)

Assuming we have the delta and are looking for the Y equivalent, note that we have
three equations with three unknowns (Rd, Re and Rf). Thus, they can be solved using
a term elimination process. If we subtract Equation 6.3 from Equation 6.1 we
eliminate the second resistance (Re) and arrive at a difference between the first and
third unknown resistances (Rd - Rf). This quantity can then be added to Equation 6.2
to eliminate the third resistance (Rf), leaving just the first unknown resistance (Rd).

     (Rd + Re) - (Re + Rf) = (Rd - Rf) = Ra || (Rb+Rc) - Rb || (Ra+Rc)
     (Rd + Rf) + (Rd - Rf) = 2Rd = 2( Rb || (Ra+Rc) + Ra || (Rb+Rc) - Rc || (Ra+Rb) )

Therefore,

     Rd = Rb || (Ra+Rc) + Ra || (Rb+Rc) - Rc || (Ra+Rb)

which, after simplifying, is:

     Rd = Ra Rb                                          (6.4)
            R a +R b +R c

Similarly, we can show that

     Re = Ra Rc                                          (6.5)
            Ra +Rb +Rc                                   (6.6)

     R f = Rb Rc
            Ra +Rb +Rc

Note that if three identical resistors are used, the values of the Y equivalent will all
be one-third of that value.

192
Y- Conversion

For the reverse process of converting Y to delta, start by noting the similarities of the
expressions for Rd, Re and Rf. If two of these expressions are divided, a single
equation for Ra, Rb or Rc will result. For example, using Equations 6.4 and 6.5:

     Rd =         Ra Rb
     Re        R a +Rb +R c

                  Ra Rc
               R a +Rb +R c

            Rd = Ra Rb
            Re Ra Rc
            Rd = Rb
            Re Rc

Therefore,

     Rb = Rd
     Rc Re
     Rb = Rc Rd

              Re

This process can be repeated for Equations 6.4 and 6.6 to obtain an expression for
Ra. The two expressions for Ra and Rb can then be substituted into Equation 6.4 to
obtain an expression for Rc that utilizes only Rd, Re and Rf. A similar process is
followed for Ra and Rb resulting in:

     Ra = Rd Re+Re R f +Rd R f  (6.7)
                      Rf        (6.8)
                                (6.9)
     Rb = Rd Re+Re R f +Rd R f
                      Re

     Rc = Rd Re+Re R f +Rd R f
                      Rd

If three identical resistors are used, the values of the delta equivalent will all be three
times that value, the inverse of the situation when converting from delta to Y.

Thus, equations 6.4, 6.5 and 6.6 can be used to convert a delta network into a Y
network, and equations 6.7, 6.8 and 6.9 can be used to convert a Y network into a
delta network. An example of how this will tame an otherwise incorrigible series-
parallel network is next.

193
Example 6.7                                                                         Figure 6.34
         Determine the equivalent of the bridge circuit shown in Figure 6.34.       Circuit for Example 6.7.

     This circuit uses a five resistor bridge which cannot be further
     simplified using basic series-parallel combinations. As a result, the
     techniques presented in Chapter 5 will not be sufficient to obtain a
     solution. A delta-Y conversion is proposed to simplify the circuit
     instead. We begin by defining a delta configuration using the top three
     resistors (shown in blue). When replaced with a Y configuration, we
     will have resistors in series with the 2 k and 4 k, and a third resistor
     in series with the source. This new network can solved using basic
     series-parallel techniques.

     Note that a Y-delta is not as good of a choice. For example, using the 1 k,
     2 k and the 5k as a sideways Y, the delta version leaves resistors in
     parallel with the 3 k and the 4 k, and another in parallel with the source.
     This is straightforward to solve, but unfortunately, node b disappears in the
     process.

     We shall use Equations 6.4, 6.5 and 6.6 to perform the delta-Y conversion.
     The orientation in Figure 6.34 is skewed compared to the reference of Figure
     6.32. To make them match, imagine rotating the networks of Figure 6.32
     slightly clockwise so that point X is at the very top (matching node a),
     leaving Y and Z at the bottom (matching c and b, respectively). Given this
     new orientation, Ra is the 3 k, Rb is the 1 k and Rc is the 5 k.

     Rd = Ra Rb                                                                     Figure 6.35
            R a +R b +R c                                                           Equivalent for the circuit of
                                                                                    Figure 6.34.
     Rd = 3 k 1 k  3 k +1 k +5 k 
     Rd  333.333 

     Re = Ra Rc
            Ra +Rb +Rc

     Re = 3 k 5 k  3 k +1 k +5 k 
     Re  1.666667 k 

     R f = Rb Rc
            Ra +Rb +Rc

     R f = 1 k 5 k  3 k +1 k +5 k 
     R f  555.556 

194
         The equivalent network is placed back into the original circuit as shown in
         Figure 6.35 (red replaces blue). We now have a 333.333  in series with
         2.555556 k || 5.666667 k. To determine Vb and Vc the total equivalent
         resistance can be used to find the source current. From there, a current
         divider may be employed along with Ohm's law to find the node voltages.

                      RTotal = 333.333 +2.555556 k ||5.666667 k 
                      RTotal  2.0946 k 

                      Is = E
                            RTotal

                      I s  12 V 2.0946 k 
                      I s  5.729 mA

                      I b = I s Rright
                               Rleft +R right

                      I b  5.729 mA 5.666667 k  2.555556 k +5.666667 k 
                      I b  3.9484 mA

                     V b = I b×R
                     V b  3.948 mA×2 k 
                     V b  7.8968 V

                   By similar process, Vc is approximately 7.1226 volts.

To verify the results of Example 6.7, we can take the two node voltages, apply them
back to the original circuit, and determine whether or not they satisfy KVL or KCL.

For example, examining node b, the current flowing through the 1 k resistor has to
equal the sum of the currents flowing through the 2 k and 5 k resistors, via KCL.

                      I 1k = V a-V b R
                      I 1k  12 V-7.8968 V 1 k 
                      I 1k  4.1032 mA

                      I 5k = V b-V c R
                      I 5k  7.8968 V-7.1226 V 5 k 
                      I 5k  0.1548 mA

195
                      I 2k = I 1k - I5k
                      I 2k  4.1032 mA -0.1548 mA
                      I 2k  3.9484 mA
This result matches the current Ib calculated previously. For completeness sake, the
process can be replicated for node c.

Computer Simulation

For further verification, both the original circuit of Figure 6.34 and the converted
circuit of Figure 6.35 are entered into a simulator, as shown in Figure 6.36.

                                                                                                                   Figure 6.36
                                                                                                                   Original and converted bridge
                                                                                                                   circuits in simulator.

Both resistive networks are connected to a common power supply. Nodes 2 and 4
correspond to Vb, while nodes 3 and 5 correspond to Vc. The results of a DC
operating point simulation are shown in Figure 6.37.

196
                                                                                                                   Figure 6.37
                                                                                                                   Simulation results for original
                                                                                                                   and converted bridges.

The voltages match each other perfectly, along with the manual calculation. In
closing, we see that it is possible to swap delta networks with Y networks, and
achieve identical results.

6.8 Summary

In this chapter we have examined several new techniques and theorems to assist with
the analysis of DC electrical circuits. Beginning with more practical models for
voltage and current sources, we added an internal resistance which sets limits on the
source's maximum output. For a voltage source, this resistance is in series, its ideal
value being a short. For current sources, the resistance is in parallel, its ideal value
being an open.
Source conversions allow us to create an equivalent current source for any practical
voltage source and vice versa. An equivalent source is one that will create the same
voltage across (and current into) whatever the new source is connected to as did the
original source. In some cases, this swap allows differing sources to be combined
into a single source, simplifying analysis.
The superposition theorem states that, for any multi-source linear bilateral network,
the contributions of each source may be determined independent of all other sources,
the final result being the summation of the contributions, cognizant of current
directions and voltage polarities. Thus, the original circuit of N sources generates N
new circuits, one for each source under consideration and with all other sources
replaced by their ideal internal resistance.

197
Thévenin's and Norton's theorems allow the simplification of complex linear single
port (i.e., two connecting points) networks. The Thévenin equivalent consists of a
voltage source with series a resistance while the Norton equivalent consists of a
current source with a parallel resistance. These equivalents, when replacing the
original sub-circuit, will create the same voltage across the remainder of the circuit
with the same current draw. That is, the remainder of the circuit will see no
difference between being driven by the original sub-circuit or by either the Thévenin
or Norton equivalents.

The maximum power transfer theorem states that for a simple voltage source with an
internal resistance driving a single resistor load, the maximum load power will be
achieved when the load resistance equals the internal resistance. At this point,
efficiency will be 50%. If the load resistance is higher than the internal resistance,
the load power will not be as great, however, the system efficiency will increase.

Delta-Y conversions allow the generation of equivalent "three connection point"
resistor networks. Resistor networks with three elements in the shape of a triangle or
delta (with one connection point at each corner) can be converted into a three
element network in the shape of a Y or T, or vice versa. The two versions will
behave identically to the remainder of the circuit. This allows the simplification of
some circuits and eases analysis.

Review Questions

    1. Define the term linear bilateral network.
    2. What are the ideal internal resistances of voltage sources and current

         sources?
    3. Outline the process of converting a voltage source into a current source, and

         vice versa.
    4. In general, describe the process of using superposition to analyze a multi-

         source circuit.
    5. What do Thévenin's and Norton's theorems state? How are they related?
    6. What does the maximum power transfer theorem state? How might it be

         used with Thévenin's or Norton's theorems?
    7. What are delta and Y configurations? How are they related?

198
6.9 Exercises

Analysis

    1. For the circuit shown in Figure 6.38, determine the equivalent current
         source.
                                                                                Figure 6.38

    2. Given the circuit shown in Figure 6.39, determine the equivalent current
         source.
                                                                                Figure 6.39

    3. Determine the equivalent current source for the circuit shown in Figure 6.40.
                                                                                Figure 6.40

    4. For the circuit shown in Figure 6.41, determine the equivalent current
         source.
                                                                                Figure 6.41

199
    5. For the circuit shown in Figure 6.42, determine the equivalent voltage
         source.
                                                                                Figure 6.42

    6. Given the circuit shown in Figure 6.43, determine the equivalent voltage
         source.
                                                                                Figure 6.43

    7. Determine the equivalent voltage source for the circuit shown in Figure
         6.44.
                                                                                Figure 6.44

    8. For the circuit shown in Figure 6.45, determine the equivalent voltage
         source.
                                                                                Figure 6.45

200
    9. Given the circuit shown in Figure 6.46, determine the equivalent voltage
         source.
                                                                                Figure 6.46

    10. Using source conversion, find Vb for the circuit shown in Figure 6.47.
                                                                                Figure 6.47

    11. Using source conversion, find the current through the 3 k resistor in the
         circuit of Figure 6.48.
                                                                                Figure 6.48

    12. Using source conversion, find Vb for the circuit shown in Figure 6.49.
                                                                                Figure 6.49

201
    13. Using source conversion, find Va for the circuit shown in Figure 6.50.
                                                                                Figure 6.50

    14. Using source conversion, find Vb for the circuit shown in Figure 6.51.
                                                                                Figure 6.51

    15. Using superposition, determine Vb for the circuit shown in Figure 6.47.
    16. Using superposition, find the current through the 3 k resistor for the circuit

         of Figure 6.47.
    17. Using superposition, find the current through the 3 k resistor for the circuit

         of Figure 6.48.
    18. Using superposition, determine Vab for the circuit shown in Figure 6.48.
    19. Using superposition, determine Vb for the circuit shown in Figure 6.49.
    20. Using superposition, find the current through the 4 k resistor for the circuit

         of Figure 6.49.
    21. Using superposition, find the current through the 30 k resistor for the

         circuit of Figure 6.50.
    22. Using superposition, determine Va for the circuit shown in Figure 6.50.
    23. Using superposition, determine Vba for the circuit shown in Figure 6.51.
    24. Using superposition, find the current through the 10 k resistor for the

         circuit of Figure 6.51.

202
    25. Using superposition, find the current through the 1.5 k resistor for the
         circuit of Figure 6.52.
                                                                                Figure 6.52

    26. Using superposition, determine Vab for the circuit shown in Figure 6.52.
    27. Using superposition, determine Vb for the circuit shown in Figure 6.53.

                                                                                Figure 6.53

    28. Using superposition, find the current through the 200  resistor for the
         circuit of Figure 6.53.

    29. Using superposition, find the current through the 4 k resistor for the circuit
         of Figure 6.54.
                                                                                Figure 6.54

    30. Using superposition, determine Vb for the circuit shown in Figure 6.54.
    31. Is it possible to determine Vb in Figure 6.54 by using source conversions

         instead of superposition? Why/why not?

203
    32. Using superposition, determine Vbc for the circuit shown in Figure 6.55.
                                                                                Figure 6.55

    33. Using superposition, find the current through the 10 k resistor for the
         circuit of Figure 6.55.

    34. Using superposition, find the currents through the 100  and 700  resistors
         for the circuit shown in Figure 6.56.
                                                                                Figure 6.56

    35. Using superposition, determine Vbd for the circuit shown in Figure 6.56.
    36. Is it possible to determine Vbd in Figure 6.56 by using source conversions

         instead of superposition? Why/why not?
    37. Using superposition, determine Vad for the circuit shown in Figure 6.57.

                                                                                Figure 6.57

204
    38. Using superposition, find the current through the 20 k resistor for the
         circuit shown in Figure 6.57.

    39. Using superposition, find the current through the 12 k resistor for the
         circuit shown in Figure 6.58.
                                                                                Figure 6.58

    40. Using superposition, determine Vb for the circuit shown in Figure 6.58.
    41. Using superposition, determine Vb for the circuit shown in Figure 6.59.

                                                                                Figure 6.59

    42. Using superposition, find the current through the 100  resistor for the
         circuit of Figure 6.59.

    43. Using superposition, find the current through the 5 k resistor for the circuit
         of Figure 6.60.
                                                                                Figure 6.60

    44. Using superposition, determine Vc for the circuit shown in Figure 6.60.
205
    45. Given the circuit shown in Figure 6.61, determine the Thévenin equivalent
         circuit that is driving the 4 k resistor.
                                                                                Figure 6.61

    46. Given the circuit shown in Figure 6.61, determine the Norton equivalent
         circuit driving the 4 k resistor.

    47. Given the circuit shown in Figure 6.61, determine the Norton equivalent
         circuit driving the 12 k resistor.
                                                                                Figure 6.62

    48. Determine the Thévenin equivalent circuit driving the 12 k resistor for the
         circuit shown in Figure 6.62.

    49. Given the circuit shown in Figure 6.63, determine the Thévenin equivalent
         circuit that is driving the 20 k resistor.
                                                                                Figure 6.63

    50. For the circuit shown in Figure 6.63, determine the Norton equivalent circuit
         driving the 4 k resistor.

206
    51. Given the circuit shown in Figure 6.64, determine the Norton equivalent
         circuit driving the 40  resistor.
                                                                                Figure 6.64

    52. Determine the Thévenin equivalent circuit driving the 10  resistor for the
         circuit shown in Figure 6.64.

    53. Given the circuit shown in Figure 6.65, determine the Norton equivalent
         circuit driving the 12 k resistor.

                                                                                Figure 6.65

    54. Given the circuit of Figure 6.61, determine the power in the 4 k resistor. If
         this resistor can be replaced with any other value, is it possible to achieve a
         higher power? Why/why not?

    55. Given the circuit of Figure 6.62, determine the power in the 12 k resistor.
         If this resistor can be replaced with any other value, is it possible to achieve
         a higher power? Why/why not?

    56. Given the circuit of Figure 6.64, determine the power in the 40  resistor. If
         this resistor can be replaced with any other value, is it possible to achieve a
         higher power? Why/why not?

    57. Given the circuit of Figure 6.65, determine the power in the 6 k resistor. If
         this resistor can be replaced with any other value, is it possible to achieve a
         higher power? Why/why not?

207
Design

    58. Consider the 4 k resistor to be the load in Figure 6.61. Determine a new
         value for the load in order to achieve maximum load power. Also determine
         the maximum load power.

    59. Consider the 12 k resistor to be the load in Figure 6.62. Determine a new
         value for the load in order to achieve maximum load power. Also determine
         the maximum load power.

    60. Consider the 40  resistor to be the load in Figure 6.64. Determine a new
         value for the load in order to achieve maximum load power. Also determine
         the maximum load power.

    61. Consider the 6 k resistor to be the load in Figure 6.65. Determine a new
         value for the load in order to achieve maximum load power. Also determine
         the maximum load power.

    62. Redesign the circuit of Figure 6.52 so that it uses only current sources and
         produces the same component currents and voltages as the original circuit.

    63. Redesign the circuit of Figure 6.54 so that it uses only current sources and
         produces the same component currents and voltages as the original circuit.

    64. Redesign the circuit of Figure 6.58 so that it uses only voltage sources and
         produces the same component currents and voltages as the original circuit.

    65. Redesign the circuit of Figure 6.60 so that it uses only voltage sources and
         produces the same component currents and voltages as the original circuit.

    66. Convert the delta network of Figure 6.66 into a Y network.

                                                                                Figure 6.66

208
    67. Convert the pi network of Figure 6.67 into a T network.
                                                                                Figure 6.67

    68. Convert the Y network of Figure 6.68 into a delta network.
                                                                                Figure 6.68

    69. Convert the T network of Figure 6.69 into a pi network.
                                                                                Figure 6.69

209
Challenge

    70. Redesign the circuit of Figure 6.70 so that it uses only current sources and
         produces the same node voltages as the original circuit.
                                                                                Figure 6.70

    71. Using any combination of techniques, find the current through the 9 k
         resistor for the circuit of Figure 6.70.

    72. Using any combination of techniques, determine Vbc for the circuit shown in
         Figure 6.70.

    73. Is it possible to determine Vbc in Figure 6.70 by using just source
         conversions? Why/why not?

    74. Using superposition, find the current through the 25  resistor for the circuit
         of Figure 6.71.
                                                                                Figure 6.71

210
    75. Using superposition, find Vab in the circuit of Figure 6.71.
    76. Redesign the circuit of Figure 6.71 using only voltage sources so that it

         achieves the same node voltages as the original.
                                                                                Figure 6.72

    77. Is it possible to determine Vbc in Figure 6.72 by using just source
         conversions or just superposition? Why/why not?

    78. Using any combination of techniques, find the current through the 100 
         resistor for the circuit shown in Figure 6.72.

    79. Redesign the circuit of Figure 6.72 so that it uses only voltage sources and
         produces the same node voltages as the original circuit.

    80. Determine the Thévenin and Norton equivalents driving the 40  resistor for
         the circuit shown in Figure 6.53.

    81. Determine the Thévenin and Norton equivalents driving the 12 k resistor
         for the circuit shown in Figure 6.54.

    82. Given the circuit of Figure 6.63, determine if the 4 k resistor is the optimal
         value to achieve maximum power dissipation in that resistor. If it is not,
         determine the value that will produce maximum power in the resistor along
         with the resulting power.

    83. For the circuit of Figure 6.73, determine an equivalent circuit using just a
         single voltage source.
                                                                                Figure 6.73

211
Simulation

    84. Using DC bias simulations, compare the original circuit of problem 1 to its
         converted equivalent. Do this by connecting a resistor to the output
         terminals, trying several different resistance values and checking to see if
         the two circuits always produce the same voltage across this resistor.

    85. Using DC bias simulations, compare the original circuit of problem 5 to its
         converted equivalent. Do this by connecting a resistor to the output
         terminals, trying several different resistance values and checking to see if
         the two circuits always produce the same voltage across this resistor.

    86. Perform a DC bias simulation on the circuit of problem 11 to verify the node
         voltages.

    87. Perform a DC bias simulation on the circuit of problem 13 to verify the node
         voltages.

    88. Perform a DC bias simulation on the circuit of problem 19 to verify the node
         voltages.

    89. Perform a DC bias simulation on the circuit of problem 21 to verify the
         resistor current.

    90. Create DC bias simulations of the original and equivalent circuits generated
         in problem 45 to determine if the equivalent circuit is truly equivalent. Do
         this by substituting several different values for the 4 k resistor in both
         circuits to see if the same load voltage is obtained for both circuits.

    91. Create DC bias simulations of the original and equivalent circuits generated
         in problem 49 to determine if the equivalent circuit is truly equivalent. Do
         this by substituting several different values for the 20 k resistor in both
         circuits to see if the same load voltage is obtained for both circuits.

    92. Create DC bias simulations of the original and equivalent circuits generated
         in problem 53 to determine if the equivalent circuit is truly equivalent. Do
         this by substituting several different values for the 12 k resistor in both
         circuits to see if the same load voltage is obtained for both circuits.

    93. Perform a DC bias simulation on the circuit of problem 63 to verify that the
         node voltages of the new design match those of the original.

    94. Perform a DC bias simulation on the circuit of problem 65 to verify that the
         node voltages of the new design match those of the original.

    95. Using either Monte Carlo simulation or multiple DC bias simulations, verify
         that the resistance calculated in problem 55 achieves maximum power. Do
         this by trying several resistor values near the calculated value, and
         determining the power for each based on the squared load voltages.

212
    96. Using either Monte Carlo simulation or multiple DC bias simulations, verify
         that the resistance calculated in problem 56 achieves maximum power. Do
         this by trying several resistor values near the calculated value, and
         determining the power for each based on the squared load voltages.

     This XKCD comic is too large to fit on this page. Just go to this link instead:
                                     https://xkcd.com/1732/

213
7 Nodal & Mesh Analysis, Dependent Sources

7.0 Chapter Learning Objectives

After completing this chapter, you should be able to:

    · Utilize nodal analysis techniques to solve for voltages in multi-source series-parallel networks.
    · Utilize mesh analysis techniques to solve for currents in multi-source series-parallel networks.
    · Analyze networks using dependent voltage and current sources.

7.1 Introduction

This chapter presents the culmination of the analysis of DC circuits that employ resistors along with any number
of voltage and/or current sources. Here we shall focus on nodal analysis and mesh analysis. Both nodal analysis
and mesh analysis generate a system of simultaneous linear equations that are used to solve the circuit for
various voltages or currents. There are several methods that can be used to solve the simultaneous equations
including substitution, Gauss-Jordan elimination and expansion by minors. These methods are reviewed in
Appendix B and are not covered in this chapter. Instead, to keep clutter to a minimum and focus on the circuit
analysis aspects, the explanations and examples will simply detail the process of examining the circuit and
applying basic circuit laws to create the system of equations. From there, the specific technique used to solve
these simultaneous equations is up to you based on your personal preferences.

It is particularly efficient to obtain a more advanced scientific calculator that can solve these equations directly
rather than plowing through the solution manually. By doing so, you can spend your precious time mastering the
process of circuit analysis and creating the equations. Manual solution techniques, though not necessarily
difficult, can be tedious, time consuming and error prone. If you plan on continuing your study into AC electrical
circuits, you should consider obtaining a calculator that can solve simultaneous equations with complex
coefficients. Such calculators can be expensive when purchased new, such as the Texas Instruments TI-89 and
Nspire models. On the used market, perfectly satisfactory older models such as the TI-85 and TI-86 can be
found at considerable discount. Another model to consider is the Casio FX-9750GII, although it is not quite as
powerful as some of the other units mentioned.

Along with nodal and mesh, we shall also introduce the concept of dependent sources. These are current and
voltage sources whose value is not fixed to some particular value, but rather is dependent on some other current
or voltage in the circuit. What makes this interesting is that this controlling current or voltage may itself be
affected by the value produced by the dependent source. Dependent sources are often used to model the
behavior of active electronic devices such as bipolar and field effect transistors.

214
7.2 Nodal Analysis

Nodal analysis is a technique that can be applied to virtually any circuit. In general
use, it might be considered a universal solution technique as there are no practical
circuit configurations that it cannot handle. Nodal analysis relies on the application
of Kirchhoff's current law to create a series of node equations that can be solved for
node voltages. These equations are based on Ohm's law and will be of the form
I = V/R, or more generally, I = (1/RX)VA + (1/RY)VB... Once the node voltages are
obtained, finding any branch currents or component powers becomes an almost
trivial exercise. We will examine two variations; a general version that can be used
with both voltage and current sources, and a second somewhat quicker version that
can be used with circuits only driven by current sources.

General Method

Consider the circuit shown in Figure 7.1. We begin by labeling connection nodes
and assigning current directions. We are particularly interested in current junctions,
that is, places where currents can combine or split. These are also known as
summing nodes and are circled in green on the figure. The current directions are
chosen arbitrarily and may be the opposite of reality. This is not a problem. If we
assign directions that are wrong, the resulting directions will ultimately show up
reversed but the computed node voltages will be just fine.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.1
                                                                                                                   Basic dual voltage source
                                                                                                                   circuit with currents and nodes
                                                                                                                   defined.

One node is chosen as the reference. This is the point to which all other node
voltages will be measured against. Typically, the reference node is ground, although
it does not have to be.

We now write a current summation equation for each summing node, except for the
reference node. In this circuit there is only one node where currents combine (other
than ground) and that's node b. Points a and c are places where components connect,
but they are not summing nodes, so we can ignore them for now. Using KCL on
node b we can say:

                     I1 + I2 = I3

215
Next, we describe these currents in terms of the node voltages and associated
components via Ohm's law. For example, I3 is the node b voltage divided by R3
while I1 is the voltage across R1 divided by R1. This voltage is Va - Vb. Therefore,

     V a -V b + V c -V b = V b
     R1  R2  R3

Noting that Va = E1 and Vc = E2, with a little algebra this can be reduced to a series of
products of conductances and voltages:

     ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 E1 + 1 E2 = 1 + 1 + 1 VbR1
         R2  R1 R2 R3

All quantities are known except for Vb and thus it is easily found with a little more
algebra. As we shall see, this conductance-voltage product format turns out to be a
convenient way of writing these equations. Also, note that the first two terms on the
left reduce to fixed current values. If there had been more nodes, there would have
been more equations, one for each node.

                                                                                           Figure 7.2
                                                                                           Basic dual current source
                                                                                           circuit.

For current sources, a more direct approach is possible. Consider the circuit of
Figure 7.2. We start as before, identifying nodes and labeling currents. This is shown
in Figure 7.3. We then write current summation equations at each node (except for
ground). We consider currents entering a node as positive, and exiting as negative.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.3
                                                                                                                   Basic dual current source
                                                                                                                   circuit with currents and nodes
                                                                                                                   defined.

         Node a: I1 = I3 + I4
         Node b: I3 = I2 + I5, and rearranging in terms of the fixed source,
         Node b: -I2 = -I3 + I5

216
The currents are then described by their Ohm's law equivalents:

     Node a:            I 1 = V a -V b +V a
     Node b:            R3              R1

                        -I 2 =-V a -V b +V b
                        R3              R2

Expanding and collecting terms yields:

     Node a:            ( ) ( ) I 1 = 1 + 1 V a - 1 V bR3
     Node b:            R1 R3

                        ( ) ( ) -I 2 =- 1 V a + 1 + 1 V bR3
                                             R3 R2

As the resistor values and currents are known, simultaneous equation solution
techniques may be used to solve for the node voltages. Once again, there will be as
many equations as node voltages. It is very important that the terms "line up" when
the final system of equations is written out. That is, there should be a column for the
Va terms, a column for the Vb terms, and so on. They should not be written out in
random order. This format will make it much it easier to enter the coefficients into a
calculator or solve manually.

Example 7.1                                                                              Figure 7.4
         Determine Vb in the circuit of Figure 7.4.                                      Circuit for Example 7.1.

     This circuit has two current summing nodes, ground and node b. Let
     us assume that the currents from the two sources flow into node b
     and the exiting current flows down through the 5 k resistor. It will
     be convenient if we find the conductance equivalents of the resistors
     before continuing. Taking the reciprocals we find: 1 k = 1 mS,
     4 k = 0.250 mS, and 5 k = 0.2 mS. Through KCL we can say:

     I1k + I4k = I5k

     Replacing these currents with their Ohm's law equivalents yields,

     15 V -V b + 6 V -V b = V b
     1k                 4k 5k

     collecting terms,

     ( ) 15mA +1.5 mA = 1 1 k  + 1 4 k  + 1 5 k  V b

217
     and solving for Vb,

                 V b = 16.5 mA 1 mS +0.25mS +0.2 mS
                 V b = 11.379 volts

     As Vb is higher than the 6 volt source, our assumed current direction for the
     4 k resistor was incorrect; we assumed right to left but it is in fact left to
     right, flowing from 11.379 volts to 6 volts. As you can see, this did not
     present a problem.

     For comparison sake, this circuit was solved in Chapter 6 using source
     conversions and also using superposition.

Inspection Method

The system of equations can be obtained directly through inspection if the circuit        Figure 7.5
contains no voltage sources. For the node under inspection, sum all of the current        Diagonal symmetry.
sources connected to it to obtain the current constant. The conductance term for
that node will be the sum of all of the conductances connected to that node. For          1 Va   -2 Vb  -6 Vc  -9 Vd
the other node conductances, determine the conductances between the node                  -2 Va  5 Vb   -4 Vc  -7 Vd
under inspection and these other nodes. These terms will all be negative. As a            -6 Va  -4 Vb  8 Vc   0 Vd
crosscheck, the set of equations produced must exhibit diagonal symmetry, that            -9 Va  -7 Vb  0 Vc   3 Vd
is, if a diagonal is drawn from the upper left to the lower right through the
conductance-voltage pairs, then the coefficients found above the diagonal will
have to match those found below the diagonal as we move perpendicular from
the diagonal. This is illustrated in Figure 7.5. Diagonal symmetry can be seen in
Example 7.1 by noting the matching "-1/R3" coefficients in the final pair of
equations. As an example of the inspection method, focusing on node a in Figure
7.2, we find the fixed current source I1 feeding it (entering, therefore positive).
The conductances directly connected to node a are 1/R1 and 1/R3, yielding the
coefficient for Va. The only conductance common between nodes a and b is 1/R3,
yielding the Vb coefficient.

The inspection method is summarized as follows:

     1. Verify that the circuit uses only current sources with resistors and no voltage
         sources. If voltage sources exist, they must be converted to current sources
         before proceeding.

     2. Find all of the current summing nodes and number them. Also decide on the
         reference node (usually ground).

     3. To generate an equation, locate the first node. This is the node of interest and
         the next few steps will be associated with it.

218
     4. Sum the current sources feeding the node of interest. Entering is deemed
         positive while exiting is deemed negative. The sum is placed on one side of
         the equals sign.

     5. Next, find all of the resistors connected to the node of interest and write
         them as a sum of conductances on the other side of the equals sign, the
         group being multiplied by this node's voltage (e.g., V1).

     6. Now find all of the resistors that are connected to the node of interest and to
         other nodes (except the ground reference). For each of these other nodes,
         multiply the sum of the conductances between the node of interest and this
         other node by this other node's voltage, and then subtract that product from
         the equation built so far. Once all other nodes are considered, this equation
         is finished.

     7. Find the next node and treat this as the new node of interest.
     8. Repeat steps 4 through 7 until all nodes have been treated as the node of

         interest. Each iteration creates a new equation. There will be as many
         equations as there are nodes, less the reference node. Check for diagonal
         symmetry and solve.

The inspection method is best observed in action; as in the following example.

Example 7.2                                                                              Figure 7.6
                                                                                         Circuit for Example 7.2.
         Determine Va and Vb in the circuit of Figure 7.6. Also determine the current
         flowing through the 100  resistor.

     This circuit has three current summing nodes; ground, node a and
     node b. Also, it uses only current sources and no voltage sources.
     Therefore, we are able to use the inspection method to obtain the
     system of equations (in this case, two equations).

     We begin by focusing on node a, our first node of interest. We
     will build the first expression piece by piece. First we find the
     current sources feeding this node:

     800 mA - 2 A = ...

     Next, we find all of the resistors connected to node a and write
     them as conductances, the group being multiplied by node voltage a:

     ( ) 800 mA - 2 A = 1 10  + 1 50  + 1 100 V a ...

     Now find all of the resistors that are connected to this node and to the other
     nodes. Multiply those resistors (expressed as conductances) by the other
     associated node voltages and subtract the products from the expression built

219
         so far. Repeat for all remaining nodes except the ground reference. In this
         example there is only one other node, node b, and thus only one iteration.

    ( ) ( ) 800 mA -2 A = 1 10 + 1 50 + 1 100 V a - 1 50 + 1 100  V b

         Finally, simplify the constants and coefficients, and the first expression is
         complete:

                     -1.2 A = 130 mS V a - 30 mS V b

         Now we repeat the entire process for the next equation. Node b is our new
         node of interest. The fixed current sources are:

                     -800 mA -300 mA = ...

         Next, we find all of the resistors connected to node b and write them as
         conductances, the group being multiplied by node voltage b:

        ( ) -800 mA -300 mA = 1 25 + 1 50 + 1 100  V b ...

         Now we find all of the resistors that are connected to this node and to the
         other nodes. Multiply those resistors (expressed as conductances) by these
         other node voltages and subtract those products from the expression built so
         far. Make sure the terms align vertically based on the node voltages.

    ( ) ( ) -800 mA -300 mA = - 1 50 + 1 100  V a+ 1 25 + 1 50 + 1 100 V b

         Finally, simplify the constants and coefficients, and this expression is
         complete:

                     -1.1 A =-30 mS V a +70 mS V b

         We now have two equations with two unknowns. Let's check for diagonal
         symmetry:

                     -1.2 A = 130 mS V a - 30 mS V b
                     -1.1 A =-30 mS V a +70 mS V b

         The perpendicular coefficient is -30 mS on each side. We can now solve the
         system. The results are Va = -14.27 volts and Vb = -21.83 volts. The current
         flowing through the 100 resistor is (-14.27 V - (-21.83 V))/100 , or
         approximately 75.6 mA flowing left to right.

220
     Let's verify that these values are correct. We can perform a KCL summation
     at node a and see if it balances. We already know that 2 amps and 75.6
     milliamps exit while 800 milliamps enters. We only need to find the currents
     through the 10  and 50  resistors. First, notice that the 50  sees the same
     voltage as the 100  resistor. As it is half the resistance, it must produce
     twice the current, or 151.2 milliamps exiting. The current through the 10 
     is found via Ohm's law, or -14.27 V/10 , which is 1.427 amps entering.

     Entering: 0.8 A + 1.427 A = 2.227 A
     Exiting: 2 A + 0.0756 A + 0.1512 A  2.227 A

     KCL is satisfied. To complete the verification we perform the same
     summation on node b. This is left as an exercise.

Example 7.3                                                                         Figure 7.7
         Write the node equations for the circuit of Figure 7.7.                    Circuit for Example 7.3.

     This circuit has four current summing nodes; ground and nodes a,
     b, and c. Also, it uses only current sources and no voltage sources.
     Therefore, we are able to use the inspection method to obtain the
     system of equations (three equations).

     As we have already seen, we will wind up with conductance values
     in the final equations. We can save some work later by finding the
     conductance value of each resistor right now. The result is shown in
     Figure 7.8.

     We begin by focusing on node a, our first node of interest. We will build      Figure 7.8
     the first expression piece by piece. First we find the current sources         Circuit of Figure 7.7 shown
     feeding this node. That's just the 1.5 A source, entering is positive.         with conductances instead of
                                                                                    resistances.
                 1.5 A = ...

     Next, we find all of the conductances connected to node a and
     multiply by node voltage a:

     1.5 A = (0.2 S +0.25S)V a ...

     Find all of the conductances that are connected to this node and to
     the other nodes. Multiply those conductances by the other associated node
     voltages and subtract those products from the expression built so far. Repeat
     for all remaining nodes except the ground reference.

221
                 1.5 A = (0.2 S +0.25S)V a - (0.25 S)V b - (0 )V c

     Finally, simplify the constants and coefficients, and the first expression is
     complete:

                 1.5 A = 0.45S V a - 0.25 SV b - 0 V c

     We leave the zero term in just for alignment. Now we repeat the entire
     process for the next equation. The node of interest is now node b. Here is the
     result:

                 0 =-0.25 SV a +0.8 S V b - 0.5 V c

     And finally for node c we have:

                 1 A = 0 V a - 0.5 SV b +0.6 V c

     Our three equations are (with some padding to see the columns better):

                 1.5 A = 0.45 S V a -0.25 SV b -0 V c
                     0 =-0.25 SV a +0.8 SV b -0.5 V c

                   1 A = -0 V a -0.5S V b +0.6 V c

     Check for diagonal symmetry: we have pairs of -0.25, 0, and -0.5
     straddling the diagonal.

     Now the system of equations can be solved for the three node voltages and
     verified using KCL summations at each node. This is left as an exercise.

Converting Sources and Other Simplifications                                         Figure 7.9
                                                                                     Circuit with both current and
Given circuits with voltage sources, it may be easier to convert them to current     voltage sources.
sources and then apply the inspection technique rather than using the general
approach outlined initially. There is one trap to watch out for when using source
conversions: the voltage across or current through a converted component
will most likely not be the same as the voltage or current in the original
circuit. This is because the location of the converted component will have
changed. For example, the circuit in Figure 7.9 could be solved using nodal
analysis by converting the voltage source and the associated resistance into a
current source. That is, E/R1 would be converted into a source I3 with a
parallel resistor R1. This is shown in Figure 7.10.

222
Here is the trap: in the converted circuit, although R1 still connects to node a, the       Figure 7.10
other end no longer connects to the voltage source. Rather, the right side now              Circuit converted to current
connects to node c. Therefore, the voltage drop across R1 in the converted circuit is       sources only.
not likely to equal the voltage drop seen across R1 in the original circuit (the
only way they would be equal is if E was 0 volts). In the converted circuit,
nodes a and c have not changed from the original, so the original voltage
across R1 can be determined via Va, Vc and E in the original circuit.

If a circuit uses voltage sources exclusively, or even a very large proportion of
voltage sources, an alternate technique called mesh analysis may be a better
choice than using numerous conversions. Mesh analysis will be detailed later
in this chapter.

A final item to consider is to simplify resistor networks in order to reduce the
number of nodes. Fewer nodes means fewer equations and a quicker solution. For
example, a portion of a network might consist of two parallel resistors which are in
series with a third resistor. Ordinarily, the common junction of these three resistors
would constitute a current summing node and an equation would need to be derived
for it. It may be easier to simply replace the trio with a single resistor that equals the
series-parallel combination value. This would remove the node and simplify creating
the system of equations, but not alter the remainder of the circuit.

Supernode

On occasion you may come across a circuit like the one shown in Figure 7.11 that            Figure 7.11
has a voltage source without a series resistance associated with it. Without that           Circuit for supernode
resistance, it becomes impossible to create an expression for the current passing           analysis.
through the source using the general method, and impossible to convert the
voltage source into a current source in order to use the inspection method.
One possible way out of this quandary is to simply add a very small resistor
in series with it so that a source conversion is possible. The resistor in
question would have to be much smaller than any surrounding resistors in
order to have minimal impact on the results. A reduction by two orders of
magnitude would generally yield a variation smaller than that produced by
resistor tolerances in all but high precision circuits. The other way out is to
use a supernode.

A supernode is, in effect, the combination of two nodes. It relies on a simple
observation. If we examine the circuit of Figure 7.11, the path of the voltage source
produces identical currents flowing into and out of nodes a and b. As a consequence,
if we treat the two nodes as one big node, then when we write a KCL summation,
these two terms will cancel. To see just how this works, refer to Figure 7.12.

223
In this version we have replaced the voltage source with its ideal internal resistance,
a short. We have also labeled the two nodes of interest, a and b, and labeled the
currents, drawn with convenient directions.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.12
                                                                                                                   Circuit modified for supernode
                                                                                                                   analysis.

Due to the shorted voltage source, nodes a and b are now the same node. Consider
the currents entering and exiting this combined or "super" node. On the left side
(formerly node a) we see a constant current Ix entering while I1, I2 and I3 are exiting.
On the right side (formerly node b) we see Iy exiting along with I4, and entering we
see I1 and I2. Now let's set up the entering currents on the left side of the equals sign
with the exiting currents on the right:

      Iin =  I out
     I x+I 1+I 2 = I y+I 1+I 2+I3 +I 4

This can be simplified to:

     Ix - I y = I3 +I4

Writing this in terms of Ohm's law we have:

     Ix- Iy= 1 Va + 1 Vb
                            R1  R3

We also know that Va - Vb = E from the original circuit. Assuming all sources and
resistors are known, that makes two equations with two unknowns, solvable using
simultaneous equation techniques. This is illustrated in the following example.

224
Example 7.4                                                                   Figure 7.13
                                                                              Circuit for Example 7.4.
         Find Va and Vb for the circuit of Figure 7.13.
                                                                              Figure 7.14
         As shown in Figure 7.14, we short the 60 volt source and write a     Circuit modified for supernode
         current summation at the a b supernode:                              analysis.

                      Iin =  I out
                     1 A +I 1+I 2 = 2.5 A +I 1+I 2+I 3+I 4

         This can be simplified to:

                     -1.5 A = I 3 + I 4

         Writing this in terms of Ohm's law we have:

                      -1.5 A = 14  V a + 1 10 V b
                     -1.5 A = 0.25 SV a + 0.1S V b

         We also know that Va - Vb = 60 volts. Therefore Vb = Va - 60 volts.
         Substituting this into the prior equation yields:

                     -1.5 A = 0.25SV a +0.1S(V a -60 V)
                     -1.5 A = 0.25SV a +0.1S V a -6 A

                        4.5 A = 0.35SV a
                           V a = 12.857 V

         We know that Vb is 60 volts below Va, so Vb = -47.143 volts.

         To verify, we will perform a KCL summation at each node. For
         node a, assuming I1 exits as drawn:

                      I 1 = 1 A - V a 4  - V a-V b 20
                      I 1 = 1 A-12.857 V 4 -12.857 V-(-47.143 V) 20
                      I 1 =-5.2143 A (negative exit means it's entering)

225
     Doing likewise for node b, and assuming I1 enters as drawn:

     I 1 = 2.5 A + V b -V a-V b
                   10 20

     I 1 = 2.5 A +-47.143 V 12.857 V-(-47.143 V)
                         -
                    10                           20 

     I 1 =-5.2143 A (negative enter means it's exiting)

     These currents match meaning that the current through the voltage source is
     verified to be the same at both terminals, as it must be.

An alternative to the basic supernode technique is to simply describe one node
voltage in terms of another at the outset. This is illustrated in the example following.

Example 7.5                                                                               Figure 7.15
         Find Va, Vb and Vc for the circuit of Figure 7.15.                               Circuit for Example 7.5.

     Once again we have a situation of a voltage source without a series
     resistance. Without having to short it and thus treating nodes a and c as an
     explicit supernode, we can instead note by observation that the currents
     entering and exiting the voltage source must be identical.

     The circuit is redrawn in Figure 7.16 with currents labeled and using
     equivalent conductances in place of the resistances. This time the voltage
     source is left in.

     We start with the observation that Vc = Va - 8 V. In other words, Vc is locked
     to Va and if we find one of them, we can determine the other. Therefore,
     instead of writing equations using three nodes, we shall instead refer to node
     c in reference to node a, that is we shall write Va - 8 V wherever we need Vc.
     Thus, this three node circuit will only need two equations.

     We begin at node a and apply KCL as usual.

      Iin =  I out
     I 1+I 3 = I 2

     This is expanded using Ohm's law and we solve for I1:

     I1= I2-I3
     I 1 = 0.2 S V a -0.5 S(V b -V a )
     I 1 = 0.7 SV a -0.5 S V b

226
     On to node b:                                                                  Figure 7.16
                                                                                    Circuit of Example 7.5 with
                 1 A = I 3+I 4                                                      currents labeled and using
                 1 A = 0.5 S(V b -V a )+0.25S(V b -V c)                             conductances.
                 1 A = 0.5 S(V b -V a )+0.25S(V b -(V a -8 V ))
                 1 A = 0.5 S(V b -V a )+0.25S(V b -V a+8 V)

                 -1 A = -0.75 V a +0.75V b

     And finally node c:

     I 4 = I1+I5
     I1= I4-I5
     I 1 = 0.25S(V b -V c) -0.1 SV c
     I 1 = 0.25S(V b -(V a-8 V )) -0.1 S(V a -8 V)
     I 1 = 0.25S(V b -V a +8 V) -0.1 S(V a -8 V )

     I 1 =-0.35 V a+0.25V b+2.8 A

     The final equations for nodes a and c both equal I1, meaning they equal each
     other. Thus,

     0.7 SV a -0.5 SV b = -0.35 S V a +0.25 S V b +2.8 A
     2.8 A = 1.05 SV a -0.75 SV b

     The final equations are:

     2.8 A = 1.05 S V a -0.75S V b
     -1 A =-0.75 SV a +0.75SV b

     The solution is Va = 6 volts and Vb  4.6667 volts. As Vc is 8 volts less than
     Va, then Vc = -2 volts.

227
Computer Simulation

In order to verify the result of Example 7.5, the circuit is entered into a simulator as
shown in Figure 7.17.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.17
                                                                                                                   Circuit of Example 7.5 in the
                                                                                                                   simulator.

A DC operating point simulation is run. The results are shown in Figure 7.18 and
match the calculated values perfectly. Node 1 corresponds to Vb, node 2 corresponds
to Va and node 3 corresponds to Vc.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.18
                                                                                                                   Simulation results for the
                                                                                                                   circuit of Example 7.5.

228
7.3 Mesh Analysis

In some respects mesh analysis is a mirror of nodal analysis. While nodal analysis
leverages KCL to create a series of node equations that are used to solve for node
voltages, mesh analysis uses KVL to create a series of loop equations that can be
solved for mesh currents. A mesh current should not be confused with a branch
current. While branch currents represent the current flowing through a particular
component, mesh currents combine to create branch currents. That is, the current
through any particular component may be an individual mesh current or a
combination of two mesh currents. Circuits using complex series-parallel
arrangement with multiple voltage and/or current sources may be solved using this
technique. It is, however, limited to planar circuits. Planar circuits are those that can
be drawn on a flat plane without having any of their wires cross. In essence, these
circuits can be drawn so that they appear like a series of window panes. Non-planar
circuits may be 3D in appearance and in such a circuit it becomes impossible to
define the loop equations as any given component might have more than two
meshing currents.

General Method

Consider the circuit of Figure 7.19. We begin by designating a series of loops. These
loops should be minimal in size and cover all components at least once. By
convention, the loops are drawn clockwise. There is nothing magic about them being
clockwise, it is just a matter of consistency. The current path along a loop is referred
to as a mesh current. In the circuit of Figure 7.19 we have two loops, and thus, two
mesh currents, I1 and I2. Note that all components exist in at least one loop (and
sometimes in more than one loop, like R3). Depending on circuit values, one or more
of these loop's directions may in fact be opposite of reality. This is not a problem. If
this is the case, the currents will show up as negative values, and thus we know that
they're really flowing counter-clockwise.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.19
                                                                                                                   Circuit for mesh analysis.

We begin by writing KVL equations for each loop.

         Loop 1: E1 = voltage across R1 + voltage across R3
         Loop 2: -E2 = voltage across R2 + voltage across R3
         (E2 is negative as I2 is drawn flowing out of its negative terminal.)

229
Expand the voltage terms using Ohm's law.

                   Loop 1: E1 = I1  R1 + (I1 - I2) R3
                   Loop 2: -E2 = I2  R2 + (I2 - I1) R3

Expanding and collecting terms yields:

     Loop 1: E1 = (R1 + R3) I1 - R3  I2
     Loop 2: -E2 = R3  I1 + (R2 + R3) I2

Assuming that the resistor values and source voltages are known, we have two
equations with two unknowns. These can be solved for I1 and I2 using simultaneous
equation solution techniques such as determinants or Gauss-Jordan elimination.

Example 7.6                                                                          Figure 7.20
         Find Vb and Vbc for the circuit of Figure 7.20.                             Circuit for Example 7.6.

     The first step is to define a set of clockwise loops that are of minimum
     size and which cover all components. These loops are drawn in Figure
     7.21. Also, the polarities of the voltage drops produced by these currents
     are drawn next to the components in the same color for easy
     identification. Note that some components see only one current, such as
     the 3 k resistor that sees only I2; and some see two currents in
     opposing directions, such the 5 k resistor that sees both I2 and I3. With
     multiple current directions flowing through a single component,
     obeying the resulting voltage polarities becomes very important.

     We now write KVL summations around each loop. If the current passing
     through a component sees a polarity of + to - then this is counted as a
     voltage drop while the reverse counts as a voltage rise. This is true even for
     voltage sources (i.e., a voltage source may appear negative in one loop and
     positive in another).

              V rises =  V drops

     Loop 1: 12 V = V 1k+V 2k
     Loop 2: 0 V = V 3k+V 5k+V 1k
     Loop 3: 0 V = V 5k+V 4k+V 2k

     These are expanded using Ohm's law. The current for the loop under
     consideration is deemed positive while any opposing (i.e., meshing) current
     is deemed negative:

230
            Loop 1: 12 V = 1 k ( I 1 -I2)+2 k ( I1 -I 3)                                 Figure 7.21
            Loop 2: 0 V = 3 k ( I2)+5 k ( I 2 -I 3)+1 k (I 2 - I 1)                      Circuit of Example 7.6 with
            Loop 3: 0 V = 5 k (I 3 -I 2)+4 k (I 3)+2 k (I 3 - I 1)                       current loops and polarities
The terms are expanded:                                                                  added.

Loop 1: 12 V = 1 k I 1 -1 k I 2+2 k I 1 -2 k I 3
Loop 2: 0 V = 3 k I 2 +5 k I 2 -5 k I3+1 k I 2 -1 k I 1
Loop 3: 0 V = 5 k I 3 -5 k I 2+4 k I 3+2 k I 3 -2 k I1

Like terms are grouped, once again creating aligned columns for
the current coefficients:

Loop 1: 12 V = (1 k +2 k ) I 1 -1 k I 2 -2 k I3
Loop 2: 0 V = -1 k I 1+(3 k +5 k +1 k) I2 -5 k I 3
Loop 3: 0 V = -2 k I1 -5 k I 2+(5 k +4 k +2 k ) I 3

Which simplifies to:

Loop 1: 12 V = 3 k I1 -1 k I2 -2 k I3
Loop 2: 0 V = -1 k I 1 +9 k I 2 -5 k I 3
Loop 3: 0 V = -2 k I1 -5 k I2 +11 k I 3

Note that we have diagonal symmetry. The solution is I1 = 5.729 mA,
I2 = 1.6258 mA and I3 = 1.7806 mA. To find Vb we need to find the net
current through the 2 k resistor. That's I1 - I3, or 5.729 mA - 1.7806 mA,
which is 3.9484 mA. When multiplied by 2 k we find Vb = 7.8968 volts.
Similarly, Vbc = (I3 - I2) 5 k = (1.7806 mA - 1.6258 mA ) 5 k, or 774 mV.

Computer Simulation

In order to verify the results of the analysis, the circuit is entered into a simulator
and a virtual voltmeter is placed across the 5 k resistor. This is shown in Figure
7.22. The results agree nicely with the original analysis.

As nice as this is, in a practical circuit we need to be concerned about the effects of
component tolerance. It would be extraordinarily odd if during production each
resistor was equal to precisely the nominal value specified. In reality, each resistor
will have a stated tolerance. Thus, with all five resistors changing slightly from unit
to unit, we should expect the currents and voltages to vary as well. The question is,
what would be a typical spread? This can be addressed via a Monte Carlo analysis.
This analysis is, in fact, a series of simulations. Each simulation uses randomized
component values that fall within the stated tolerance spread. For example, if we
specify that the 1 k resistor has a 5% tolerance, then the actual resistor used for a

231
simulation will be a randomly generated value between 950  and 1050 . We then
state how many trials we'd like, each one using their own unique randomized values
for each component.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.22
                                                                                                                   Circuit of Figure 7.20 in a
                                                                                                                   simulator with a virtual
                                                                                                                   voltmeter.

The results of a Monte Carlo analysis using the DC operating point simulation is
shown in Figure 7.23. Ten randomized trials were generated for the value of Vb.
Each of the five resistors was assigned a tolerance of 5%. As can be seen, voltage
values both above and below the nominal simulation can result.

232
                                                                                                                   Figure 7.23
                                                                                                                   Monte Carlo analysis results
                                                                                                                   for the circuit of Figure 7.20.

Inspection Method

Like nodal analysis, there is a method to generate the equations by inspection.
Simply focus on one loop, which we'll call the loop under inspection, and ask the
following questions: what is the total source voltage in this loop? This yields the
voltage constant for the equation. Then sum all of the resistance values in the loop
under inspection. This yields the coefficient for that current term. For the remaining
current coefficients in this equation, sum the resistances that are in common between
the loop under inspection and the other loops, respectively. These values will always
be negative. Repeat this process for all loops, with each loop in turn becoming the
loop under inspection. As was the case with nodal analysis, the set of equations
produced must exhibit diagonal symmetry, that is, if a diagonal is drawn from the
upper left to the lower right through the IR pairs, then the coefficients found above
the diagonal will have to match those found below the diagonal.
While it is possible to extend this technique to include current sources, it is often
easier and less error-prone to convert the current sources into voltage sources and
continue with the direct inspection method outlined above. Either way, it is
important to remember that the number of loops determines the number of equations
to be solved.

233
Example 7.7                                                                           Figure 7.24
                                                                                      Circuit for Example 7.7.
         Find Vc for the circuit of Figure 7.24.
                                                                                      Figure 7.25
         First, we'll label the loops, as shown in Figure 7.25.                       Circuit of Example 7.7 with
                                                                                      current loops identified.
         Now, beginning with loop 1, sum all of the voltage sources in this
         loop. That's +50 volts. Secondly, sum all of the resistors in this
         loop. That's 100  + 200 , or 300 . This is the coefficient for
         the I1 term. The coefficient for the I2 term is the sum of all
         resistances that are in common between loops 1 and 2. That's just
         the 200  resistor. The coefficient for the I3 term would be the sum of all
         resistances that are in common between loop 1 and loop 3. In this circuit,
         there aren't any so the coefficient is zero. The first equation is:

                     Loop 1: 50 V = 300I1 -200I2 -0I3

         Repeat the process for loops 2 and 3:

                     Loop 2: 0 V = -200I1 +900I2 -400I3
                     Loop 3: 20V = -0I1 -400I2 +900I3

     Note that the 20 volt source shows up positive because of the direction of I3
     (into the negative terminal and out of the positive terminal).

     As required, we have diagonal symmetry. The solution is I1 = 214.47 mA,
     I2 = 71.698 mA and I3 = 54.088 mA. Vc is the net current through the 400 
     resistor times 400 . The net current is I2 - I3, or 71.698 mA - 54.088 mA,
     which is 17.61 mA. When multiplied by 400  we find Vc = 7.044 volts.
     Note that we use I2 - I3 and not I3 - I2. The reason is because we are trying
     to find the voltage from node c to ground, and I2 is the current flowing in
     that direction. In contrast, using I3 - I2 would yield the voltage from ground
     to node c; the same magnitude but opposite sign.

     As a crosscheck, KVL states that Vc + V500 has to equal the -20 volt source.
     The drop across the 500  is 54.088 mA times 500 , or 27.044 volts from
     left to right. Starting at node c of 7.044 volts and then dropping 27.044 volts
     yields - 20 volts as expected.

234
Supermesh

Sometimes you may run across a current source which has no associated internal
resistance, such as found in the circuit of Figure 7.26. This is similar to the situation
seen previously under nodal analysis where a voltage source does not have a
specified internal resistance. There are two ways of solving this predicament. The
first is add a very large resistance in parallel with the current source and then
perform a source conversion on the pair so that the inspection method of mesh can
be followed. The larger the value of this resistor, the more accuracy that is obtained.
As a general rule it should be, at minimum, at least a couple of orders of magnitude
larger than any surrounding resistor, and preferably larger. The second method is to
use supermesh. A supermesh is a larger mesh loop that contains other mesh loops
inside of it.

Consider the circuit shown in Figure 7.26. In the center we have a current source, Is,
which lacks an associated internal resistance. Two traditional mesh loops, I1 and I2,
are labeled as usual. The problem here is that we cannot use an Ohm's law based IR
voltage drop for Vb. We have no way to express this as the voltage across Is is an
unknown. On the other hand, what we do know is that Is must equal the combination
of the traditional mesh currents I1 and I2. That is, from the perspective of the first
loop, Is = I1 - I2. Remember, one or both of the mesh currents could be negative, and
thus rotating counterclockwise.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.26
                                                                                                                   Circuit for supermesh.

At this point we invoke the idea of a supermesh loop. First, we replace the offending
current source with its ideal internal resistance (an open). The supermesh loop is
drawn which encompasses the original two loops. This is shown in Figure 7.27. The
supermesh loop is drawn in red and labeled.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.27
                                                                                                                   Supermesh labeled.

235
We now perform a KVL summation around the supermesh loop, similar to what we
have done previously. The difference this time is that we need to recognize that
components each see one of the original mesh currents; namely I1 or I2 in this case.
We do not solve for a supermesh current, we simply use the supermesh to define the
loop for the KVL summation. The summation follows:

                 V rises =  V drops
                    E 1 = V R1 +V R2 +E2

The voltage drops across the resistors can be expanded using Ohm's law, using the
original mesh current associated with each resistor.

                E1 -E 2 = I 1 R1+I2 R2

By inspection,

                I s = I 1 -I 2 or
                I2= I1-Is

We now have two equations with two unknowns and can solve for I1 and I2. This
procedure is illustrated in the following example.

Example 7.8                                                                           Figure 7.28
         Find Vb for the circuit of Figure 7.28.                                      Circuit for Example 7.8.

     First, we'll label the loops, as shown in Figure 7.29.

     Next, we'll perform a KVL summation around the supermesh
     loop.

                 V rises =  V drops
                  20 V = V R1+V R2+12 V

     Expand using Ohm's law and rearrange:

                20 V -12 V = 5  I1+8 I 2
                          8 V = 5 I 1+8 I 2

236
     By inspection we know                                                              Figure 7.29
                                                                                        Circuit of Figure 7.28 with
                 3 A = I2 -I 1 or                                                       supermesh labeled.
                 I 2 = I 1+3 A

     We can substitute this expression into the prior supermesh
     expression and solve for I1:

        8 V = 5 I 1+8  I 2
        8 V = 5 I 1+8 ( I1 +3 A)
        8 V = 5 I 1+8  I1 +24 V
     -16 V = 13 I 1

          I 1 -1.231A

     Thus, I2 = -1.231 A + 3 A, or 1.769 A. To determine Vb we simply subtract
     the drop across the 5  resistor from the 20 volt source.

     V b = 20 V - I 1 5

     V b = 20 V - (-1.231 A)5 
     V b  26.15 V

     As a crosscheck, we could also add the voltage across the 8  resistor to the
     12 volt source:

     V b = 12 V +I2 8 
     V b = 12V +1.769 A 8 
     V b 26.15 V

Comparison of Nodal and Mesh

Compared to nodal analysis, mesh analysis has the advantage of dealing with
resistances rather than conductances when writing the system of equations. Further,
the mesh inspection method works with voltage sources which tends to be
convenient for many circuits, while the nodal inspection method requires current
sources. On the down side, the resulting set of mesh currents requires further
processing in order to find either branch currents or node voltages, while nodal
analysis produces node voltages directly with no further processing. Mesh also has
the disadvantage of being limited to planar circuits while there are no such limits to
nodal.

237
7.4 Dependent Sources

A dependent source is a current or voltage source whose value is not fixed (i.e.,
independent) but rather which depends on some other circuit current or voltage. The
general form for the value of a dependent source is Y = kX where X and Y are
currents and/or voltages and k is the proportionality factor. For example, the value of
a dependent voltage source may be a function of a current, so instead of the source
being equal to, say, 10 volts, it could be equal to twenty times the current passing
through a particular resistor, or V=20I.

There are four possible dependent sources: the voltage-controlled voltage source
(VCVS), the current-controlled voltage source (CCVS), the voltage-controlled current
source (VCCS), and the current-controlled current source (CCCS). The source and
control parameters are the same for both the VCVS and the CCCS so k is unitless
(although it may be given as volts/volt and amps/amp, respectively). For the VCCS
and CCVS, k has units of amps/volt and volts/amp, respectively. These are referred to
as the transconductance and transresistance of the sources with units of siemens and
ohms, respectively.

The schematic symbols for dependent or controlled sources are usually drawn using
a diamond. Also, there may be a secondary connection for the controlling current or
voltage. Examples of a voltage-controlled voltage source, current-controlled voltage
source, voltage-controlled current source and a current-controlled current source are
shown in Figure 7.30, left-to-right. On each of these symbols, the control element is
shown to the left of the source. This portion is not always drawn on a schematic.
Instead, the source simply may be labeled as a function, for example, V = 0.02 IX
where IX is the controlling current.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.30
                                                                                                                   Dependent sources (L to R):
                                                                                                                   VCVS, CCVS, VCCS, CCCS.

Dependent sources are not "off-the-shelf" items in the same way that a battery is.
Rather, dependent sources usually are used to model the behavior of more complex
devices. For example, a bipolar junction transistor commonly is modeled as a CCCS
while a field effect transistor may be modeled as a VCCS18. Similarly, many op amp
circuits are modeled as VCVS systems. Solutions for circuits using dependent
sources follow along the lines of those established for independent sources (i.e., the
application of Ohm's law, KVL, KCL, etc.), however, the sources are now dependent
on the remainder of the circuit which tends to complicate the analysis.

18 For details, see Fiore, J.M., Semiconductor Devices: Theory and Application, and
    Operational Amplifiers and Linear Integrated Circuits: Theory and Application, both free
    OER titles.

238
In general, there are two possible configurations: isolated and coupled. A example of
the isolated form is shown in Figure 7.31.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.31
                                                                                                                   Dependent source: isolated
                                                                                                                   configuration.

In this configuration, the dependent source (center) does not interact with the sub-
circuit on the left driven by the independent source, thus it can be analyzed as two
separate circuits. Solutions for this form are relatively straightforward in that the
control value for the dependent source can be computed directly. This value is then
substituted into the dependent source and the analysis continues as is usual.
Sometimes it is convenient if the solution for a particular voltage or current is
defined in terms of the control parameter rather than as a specific value (e.g., the
voltage across a particular resistor might be expressed as 8 VA instead of 12 volts,
where VA is 1.5 volts).
The second type of circuit (coupled) is somewhat more complex in that the
dependent source can affect the parameter that controls the dependent source. In
other words, the dependent source(s) will contribute terms that include the
controlling parameter(s), thus partly controlling itself. Some additional effort will be
in order to solve these circuits. To illustrate, consider the circuit of Figure 7.32.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.32
                                                                                                                   Dependent source: coupled
                                                                                                                   configuration.

In this example it should be obvious that the current from the dependent source can
affect the voltage at node a, and it is this very voltage that in turn sets up the value
of the current source. Circuits of this type can be analyzed using mesh or nodal
analysis. Nodal analysis works well here and is illustrated following.

239
We begin by defining current directions. Assume that the currents through R1 and R3
are flowing into node a, the current through R2 is flowing out of node a, and the
current through R4 is flowing out of node b. We shall number the branch currents to
reflect the associated resistor. The resulting KCL equations are:

            I in =  I out

     Node a : I 1+I3 = I 2
     Node b : k V a = I 3+I 4

The currents are then described by their Ohm's law equivalents:

     Node a : E-V a + V b-V a = V a
                         R1  R3               R2

     Node b : k V a = V b-V a + V b
                             R3           R4

Expanding terms yields:

     Node a : E -V a +V b -V a = V a
               R1 R1 R3 R3 R2

     Node b : k V a = V b -V a +V b
                         R3 R3 R4

Collecting terms and simplifying yields:

     ( ) Node a : E = 1 + 1 + 1 V a - 1 V b
                         R1 R1 R2 R3              R3

     ( ) ( ) Nodeb:
                         0 =- k+ 1 Va + 1 + 1 V b
                             R3                   R3 R4

Values for the resistors, k, and E normally are known, so the analysis proceeds
directly.

Also, it is worth remembering that it is possible to perform source conversions on
dependent sources, within limits. The same procedure is followed as for independent
sources. The new source will remain a dependent source (e.g., converting VCVS to
VCCS). This process is not applicable if the control parameter directly involves the
internal impedance (i.e., is its voltage or current).

Time for an example, this one utilizing a simplified model of a transistor amplifier.

240
Example 7.9                                                                         Figure 7.33
         Find Vb and Vc for the circuit of Figure 7.33.                             Circuit for Example 7.9.

     This CCCS would be typical of a simple model of a bipolar
     junction transistor (nodes a, b, and c). Ideally, the output voltage,
     Vc, would be equal to the input voltage (1 V) times the resistor
     ratio of 15 k / 2 k and inverted, or approximately -7.5 volts.
     In reality, it usually comes up a little short of this. Let's see how
     well this works out.

     This circuit is a good candidate for nodal analysis using the
     general method. Note that the points labeled a and b are the same
     node so we can write just two KCL summations. Using the
     current directions as draw on the schematic, for node b we have:

               I in =  I out

       I x+100 I x = V b 2 k 
     1011 V-V b = V b

           10 k  2 k 

      ( ) 10.1 mA = 1 2 k  + 101 10 k  V b

         10.1 mA = 10.6 mS V b

         V b = 0.95283 V

     For node c we have:

      I in =  Iout

     - V c 15 k  = 100 I x

     - V c = 100 1 V-V b
     15 k                 10 k 

     V c = -7.0755 V

     Alternately, instead of writing the second KCL summation we could have
     used Vb to determine Ix, i.e., (1 - Vb)/10 k. As the current through the
     15 k  resistor is 100Ix, we could then use Ohm's law to find Vc. In any case,
     we do see that Vc is inverted and just shy of the 7.5 volt estimate.

241
Computer Simulation

For verification, the dependent source circuit of Example 7.9 is entered into a
simulator as shown in Figure 7.34. A DC operating point analysis is run, the results
of which are shown in Figure 7.35. The output voltage shows roughly -7.08 volts
and a Vb of just under 1 volt, thus achieving excellent agreement with the manual
calculation.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.34
                                                                                                                   Circuit of Figure 7.33 in a
                                                                                                                   simulator.

                                                                                                                   Figure 7.35
                                                                                                                   Simulation results for the
                                                                                                                   circuit of Figure 7.33.

While this simulation is effective in this case, just using a dependent source to stand
in for a transistor is rather limited. There are many other, perhaps more subtle,
elements to a proper transistor model that will ensure both greater accuracy and
proper results under a wide range of operating conditions. Any quality simulator will
include a parts library using simulation models that are fine-tuned to particular
manufacturer part numbers.

242
7.5 Summary

Nodal analysis can be used to solve virtually any complex multi-source DC electrical
circuit. It is based on KCL, writing expressions involving each node in the circuit. A
system of equations results, there being as many equations as there are nodes in the
circuit, minus the reference node (which usually is taken as ground). The set of
equations will exhibit diagonal symmetry, which can be used as a crosscheck before
setting out to solve them. The solution will be a complete set of node voltages. From
these, any branch current may be determined as needed.

There are two different methods of creating the system of equations. The first
method is deemed the general method and will work for a mix of current sources and
voltage sources. Individual currents are defined based on the node voltages and any
known current sources. KCL is then applied at each node, followed by simplification
and combination of terms to arrive at the end equations. The second approach uses
the inspection method. If the circuit contains only current sources (or if the voltage
sources are converted), this method allows direct generation of the system of
equations without the need for simplification and thus is less prone to error.

Mesh analysis can be used to solve any planar complex multi-source DC electrical
circuit. It is based on KVL, writing expressions involving each closed loop in the
circuit. The loops are minimally sized and the set of loops must cover every
component in the circuit. A system of equations results, there being as many
equations as there are loops. As with nodal analysis, the set of equations will exhibit
diagonal symmetry. The solution will be a complete set of mesh currents. From
these, any node voltage may be determined.

Like nodal, mesh offers two different methods of creating the system of equations.
The general method will work for a mix of current sources and voltage sources.
Individual loops are defined based on the meshing currents passing through each
component. KVL is then applied around each loop, followed by simplification and
combination of terms to arrive at the end equations. In contrast, if the circuit
contains only voltage sources (or if the current sources are converted), then the
inspection method may be used. This method allows direct generation of the system
of equations and is faster and less error prone.

Dependent sources are current or voltage sources whose value depends on the
current or voltage developed in some other part of the circuit. There are four types:
current controlled current source, current controlled voltage source, voltage
controlled current source and voltage controlled voltage source. These sources are
used commonly to model the characteristics of active devices such bipolar and field
effect transistors. Techniques for solution tend to be a bit more involved than when
using constant sources, however, nodal analysis in particular tends to work well.

243
Review Questions

    1. Describe the practical differences between nodal analysis and mesh analysis.
    2. What is diagonal symmetry? Of what use is it?
    3. What are the differences between the general method and the inspection

         method of nodal analysis?
    4. What are the differences between the general method and the inspection

         method of mesh analysis?
    5. What is a supernode?
    6. What is a supermesh?
    7. Describe the concept of dependent sources and how they differ from

         independent or constant sources.

7.6 Exercises

Analysis

    1. Given the circuit in Figure 7.36, write the mesh loop equations.

                                                                                Figure 7.36

    2. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Vb for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.36.

    3. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.36, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current through the 1 k resistor.

    4. Given the circuit in Figure 7.37, write the mesh loop equations and the
         associated determinants.

                                                                                Figure 7.37

244
    5. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Vb for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.37.

    6. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.37, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current through the 500  resistor.

    7. Given the circuit in Figure 7.38, write the mesh loop equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.38

    8. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Vb for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.38.

    9. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.38, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current through the 75  resistor.

    10. Given the circuit in Figure 7.39, write the mesh loop equations and the
         associated determinants.
                                                                                Figure 7.39

    11. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Vbc for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.39.

    12. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.39, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current through the 10 k resistor.

245
    13. Given the circuit in Figure 7.40, write the mesh loop equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.40

    14. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Vac for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.40.

    15. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.40, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current through the 4 k resistor.

    16. Given the circuit in Figure 7.41, write the mesh loop equations and the
         associated determinants.
                                                                                Figure 7.41

    17. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Vc for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.41.

    18. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.41, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current through the 10 k resistor.

    19. Given the circuit in Figure 7.42, write the mesh loop equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.42

246
    20. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Vbd for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.42.

    21. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.42, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current through the 500  resistor.

    22. Given the circuit in Figure 7.43, write the mesh loop equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.43

    23. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Vad for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.43.

    24. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.43, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current through the 3 k resistor.

    25. Given the circuit in Figure 7.44, write the mesh loop equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.44

247
    26. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Ve for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.44.

    27. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.44, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current through the 9 k resistor.

    28. Given the circuit in Figure 7.45, write the mesh loop equations and the
         associated determinants.
                                                                                Figure 7.45

    29. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Vbc for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.45.

    30. Given the circuit shown in Figure 7.45, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current through the 600  resistor.

    31. Given the circuit in Figure 7.46, write the mesh loop equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.46

    32. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Vbc for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.46.

    33. Given the circuit shown in Figure 7.46, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current through the 800  resistor.

248
    34. For the circuit in Figure 7.47, write the mesh loop equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.47

    35. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Va for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.47.

    36. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.47, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current through the 3 k resistor.

    37. Given the circuit in Figure 7.48, write the mesh loop equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.48

    38. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Vc for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.48.

    39. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.48, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current passing through the 8.5 k resistor.

    40. Given the circuit in Figure 7.49, write the mesh loop equations (consider
         using source conversion).
                                                                                Figure 7.49

249
    41. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Va for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.49.

    42. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.49, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current passing through the 30 k resistor.

    43. Given the circuit in Figure 7.50, write the mesh loop equations (consider
         using source conversion).
                                                                                Figure 7.50

    44. Using mesh analysis, determine the value of Vb for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.50.

    45. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.50, use mesh analysis to determine the
         current through the 5 k resistor.

    46. Given the circuit in Figure 7.51, write the node equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.51

    47. Using nodal analysis, determine the value of Vb for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.51.

    48. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.51, use nodal analysis to determine the
         current through the 3 k resistor.

250
    49. Given the circuit in Figure 7.52, write the node equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.52

    50. Using nodal analysis, determine the value of Vb for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.52.

    51. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.52, use nodal analysis to determine the
         current passing through the 12 k resistor.

    52. Given the circuit in Figure 7.53, write the node equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.53

    53. Using nodal analysis, determine the value of Vba for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.53.

    54. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.53, use nodal analysis to determine the
         current passing through the 100  resistor.

    55. Given the circuit in Figure 7.54, write the node equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.54

251
    56. Using nodal analysis, determine the value of Vac for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.54.

    57. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.54, use nodal analysis to determine the
         current passing through the 20 k resistor.

    58. Given the circuit in Figure 7.55, write the node equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.55

    59. Using nodal analysis, determine the value of Vb for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.55.

    60. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.55, use nodal analysis to determine the
         current through the 100  resistor.

    61. Given the circuit in Figure 7.56, write the node equations.
                                                                                Figure 7.56

    62. Using nodal analysis, determine the value of Vb for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.56.

    63. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.56, use nodal analysis to determine the
         current through the 40  resistor.

252
     64. Given the circuit in Figure 7.48, write the node equations.

     65. Using nodal analysis, determine the value of Vd for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.48.

     66. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.48, use nodal analysis to determine the
         current passing through the 20 k resistor.

     67. Given the circuit in Figure 7.49, write the node equations using the general
         approach. Do not use source conversions.

     68. Using nodal analysis, determine the value of Vab for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.49.

     69. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.49, use nodal analysis to determine the
         current passing through the 30 k resistor.

     70. Given the circuit in Figure 7.50, write the node equations.

     71. Using nodal analysis, determine the value of Vb for the circuit shown in
         Figure 7.50.

     72. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.50, use nodal analysis to determine the
         current through the 4 k resistor.

     73. For the circuit of Figure 7.57, determine Vb.

                                                                                Figure 7.57

     74. For the circuit of Figure 7.58, determine Vc.

                                                        Figure 7.58

253
     75. Given the circuit of Figure 7.59, determine Vb.
                                                                                Figure 7.59

     76. Find the current through the 10 k resistor given the circuit of Figure 7.60.
                                                                                Figure 7.60

     77. Given the circuit of Figure 7.61, determine Vc.

                                                          Figure 7.61

     78. In the circuit of Figure 7.62, determine Va.

                                                          Figure 7.62

254
79. For the circuit of Figure 7.63, determine Va.

                                                   Figure 7.63

80. For the circuit of Figure 7.64, determine Va.

                                                   Figure 7.64

Challenge

    81. Given the circuit in Figure 7.43, write the node equations.
    82. Using nodal analysis, determine the value of Vb for the circuit shown in

         Figure 7.43.
    83. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.43, use nodal analysis to determine the

         current through the 3 k resistor.
    84. Given the circuit in Figure 7.41, write the node equations.
    85. Using nodal analysis, determine the value of Vc for the circuit shown in

         Figure 7.41.
    86. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.41, use nodal analysis to determine the

         current through the 8 k resistor.
    87. Given the circuit in Figure 7.45, write the node equations and the associated

         determinants.
    88. Using nodal analysis, determine the value of Vbc for the circuit shown in

         Figure 7.45.

255
     89. For the circuit shown in Figure 7.45, use nodal analysis to determine the
         current through the 2 k resistor.

     90. Given the circuit of Figure 7.65, determine Vc.

                                                                                Figure 7.65

     91. Find the current through the 10 k resistor in the circuit of Figure 7.66.
                                                                                Figure 7.66

     92. Given the circuit of Figure 7.67, determine Vc.

                                                          Figure 7.67

256
     93. Given the circuit of Figure 7.68, determine the current through the 5 k
         resistor.

                                                                                Figure 7.68

     94. For the circuit of Figure 7.69, determine Vb.

                                                        Figure 7.69

     95. For the circuit of Figure 7.70, determine Vc.

                                                        Figure 7.70

257
96. For the circuit of Figure 7.71, determine Va.

                                                   Figure 7.71

97. For the circuit of Figure 7.72, determine Vb.

                                                   Figure 7.72

Simulation

    98. Perform a DC bias simulation on the circuit depicted in Figure 7.42 to verify
         the component currents.

    99. Perform a DC bias simulation on the circuit depicted in Figure 7.44 to verify
         the component currents.

    100. Perform a DC bias simulation on the circuit depicted in Figure 7.42 to
    verify the loop currents and node voltages.
    101. Perform a DC bias simulation on the circuit depicted in Figure 7.51 to
    verify the node voltages.
    102. Perform a DC bias simulation on the circuit depicted in Figure 7.54 to
    verify the node voltages.
    103. Perform a DC bias simulation on the circuit depicted in Figure 7.55 to
    verify the node voltages.

258
Notes

                                                                                                                                  
259
8 Capacitors

8.0 Chapter Learning Objectives

After completing this chapter, you should be able to:

    · Describe the theoretical and practical aspects of capacitor construction.
    · Describe the current-voltage characteristic behavior of capacitors.
    · Utilize component data sheets to determine operating characteristics of capacitors.
    · Determine the initial and steady-state equivalents of resistor-capacitor networks.
    · Determine the transient response of basic RC networks.

8.1 Introduction

This chapter introduces another passive device, the capacitor. Capacitors are fundamentally different from
resistors in terms of both their construction and their operation. For starters, when placed in DC circuits,
capacitors are not ohmic, unlike resistors. Their current-voltage characteristic does not respond to Ohm's law.
Instead, their current-voltage characteristic is dynamic in nature. Further, in the ideal case, capacitors do not
dissipate power. Indeed, capacitors are energy storage devices. In a way, you could imagine them to be a little
like rechargeable batteries, but unlike batteries these devices could be charged or discharged in tiny fractions of
a second and last for billions upon billions of cycles.

Capacitors are an integral part of modern electronic systems. They are used in AC-to-DC power supplies to help
smooth and stabilize the output voltage. In audio and communications systems they are used in filters, for
example to control the high and low frequency response of amplifiers and similar equipment, or for tuning
purposes. Essentially, in any application that needs to smooth out a varying voltage, store electric charge or filter
a signal; a capacitor is likely to be used.

Much of the original work on capacitors was done in the 18th century. One of the earliest examples of a capacitor
was the Leyden jar, which consists of a glass bottle or jar lined with metal foil on the inside and the outside.
Benjamin Franklin's famous kite experiment made use of a Leyden jar. In the early days, capacitors were known
as condensers (not to be confused with the condensers used in air conditioning systems).

260
8.2 Capacitance and Capacitors

A capacitor is a device that stores energy. Capacitors store energy in the form of an
electric field. At its most simple, a capacitor can be little more than a pair of metal
plates separated by air. As this constitutes an open circuit, DC current will not flow
through a capacitor. If this simple device is connected to a DC voltage source, as
shown in Figure 8.1, negative charge will build up on the bottom plate while
positive charge builds up on the top plate. This process will continue until the
voltage across the capacitor is equal to that of the voltage source. In the process, a
certain amount of electric charge will have accumulated on the plates.

                                                      + ++                                  Figure 8.1
                                                                                            Basic capacitor with voltage
                                         + + + ++ --                                        source.
                                        ----- -
                    electron flow

The ability of this device to store charge with regard to the voltage appearing across
it is called capacitance. Its symbol is C and it has units of farads (F), in honor of
Michael Faraday, a 19th century English scientist who did early work in
electromagnetism. By definition, if a total charge of 1 coulomb is associated with a
potential of 1 volt across the plates, then the capacitance is 1 farad.

     1 farad  1 coulomb / 1 volt                            (8.1)

or more generally,

     C= QV (8.2)

     Where
     C is the capacitance in farads,
     Q is the charge in coulombs,
     V is the voltage in volts.

From Equation 8.2 we can see that, for any given voltage, the greater the
capacitance, the greater the amount of charge that can be stored. We can also see
that, given a certain size capacitor, the greater the voltage, the greater the charge that
is stored. These observations relate directly to the amount of energy that can be
stored in a capacitor.

261
Unsurprisingly, the energy stored in capacitor is proportional to the capacitance. It is
also proportional to the square of the voltage across the capacitor.

                     W =12 CV 2 (8.3)

         Where
         W is the energy in joules,
         C is the capacitance in farads,
         V is the voltage in volts.

The basic capacitor consists of two conducting plates separated by an insulator, or
dielectric. This material can be air or made from a variety of different materials such
as plastics and ceramics. This is depicted in Figure 8.2.

l      Plate 1                                                                            Figure 8.2
    w                  d                                                                  Components of a generic
                                                                                          capacitor.
                 Dielectric
            Plate 2

For practical capacitors, the plates may be stacked alternately or even made of foil
and formed into a rolled tube. However it is constructed, the characteristics of the
dielectric will play a major role in the performance of the device, as we shall see.

In general, capacitance increases directly with plate area, A, and inversely with plate
separation distance, d. Further, it is also proportional to a physical characteristic of
the dielectric; the permittivity, . Thus, capacitance is equal to:

                     C=  Ad (8.4)

         Where
         C is the capacitance in farads,
         A is the plate area in square meters,
         d is the plate separation distance in meters,
          is permittivity of the dielectric between the plates.

It should be noted that the effective plate area is somewhat larger than the precise
physical area of the plates. This is due to a phenomenon called fringing. Essentially,
the electric field lines bulge outward at the plate edges rather than maintain uniform
parallel orientation. This is illustrated in Figure 8.3

262
From Equation 8.4 it is obvious that the permittivity of the dielectric plays a major        Figure 8.3
role in determining the volumetric efficiency of the capacitor, in other words, the          Capacitor electric field with
amount of capacitance that can be packed into a given sized component. Some                  fringing.
dielectrics are notably more efficient than others. To make comparisons easier,
relative permittivity is often used, that is, the ratio of the dielectric's permittivity to                ++++ ++++
that of a vacuum, 0.

A table of relative permittivity for a variety of dielectrics is shown in Figure 8.4. A      ---- ----
number of common dielectrics, such as various poly plastic films and mica, exhibit
permittivities two to six times that of air, but there are also ceramic dielectrics whose
dielectrics are hundreds to thousands of times that of air.

             Material         Relative permittivity, r = /0                                  Figure 8.4
              Vacuum          1 (0=8.85E-12 farads/meter)                                    Relative permittivity of various
                                                                                             dielectrics.
                 Air                1.00058986 (at STP)
           PTFE/Teflon                        2.1                                            Data derived from Wikipedia and other
       Polyethylene/XLPE                      2.25                                           sources.
                                              3.4
             Polyimide
          Polypropylene                    2.2-2.36
                                            2.4-2.7
            Polystyrene
        Polyester (Mylar)                      3.1
                                               1.4
                Paper                         3-6
                Mica                           3.9
          Silicon dioxide                       7
               Rubber                       5.5-10
             Diamond                         11.68
               Silicon                      86-173
         Titanium dioxide                     310
        Strontium titanate                 >250,000
     Calcium copper titanate

At quick glance, it might seem that choosing the dielectric with the highest
permittivity would be the best choice but this is not necessarily the case. There are
several other factors that go into this decision including temperature stability,
leakage resistance (effective parallel resistance), ESR (equivalent series resistance)
and breakdown strength. For an ideal capacitor, leakage resistance would be infinite
and ESR would be zero.

Unlike resistors, capacitors do not have maximum power dissipation ratings. Instead,
they have maximum voltage ratings. The breakdown strength of the dielectric will

263
set an upper limit on how large of a voltage may be placed across a capacitor before
it is damaged. Breakdown strength is measured in volts per unit distance, thus, the
closer the plates, the less voltage the capacitor can withstand. For example, halving
the plate distance doubles the capacitance but also halves its voltage rating. Figure
8.5 lists the breakdown strengths of a variety of different dielectrics. Comparing the
tables of Figures 8.4 and 8.5 hints at the complexity of the situation. For instance,
consider polystyrene versus polypropylene. Polystyrene offers modestly increased
permittivity yet polypropylene has a considerable advantage in terms of breakdown
strength. As a consequence, the plates can be placed much closer together when
using polypropylene while achieving the same voltage rating as a capacitor using
polystyrene. Therefore, the polypropylene capacitor will require less volume for the
same capacitance. As an added benefit, polypropylene exhibits high temperature
stability and low moisture absorption, among other characteristics. Comparing
polypropylene to polyester, we find that polyester's improved permittivity along with
a similar breakdown strength yields improved volumetric efficiency over
polypropylene. Unfortunately, polyester suffers from greater temperature
dependence.

                 Substance           Breakdown Strength                                   Figure 8.5
                                            (kV/mm)                                       Dielectric strength of various
                      Air                       3.0                                       dielectrics.
             Borosilicate glass               20-40
     PTFE (Teflon, insulating film)          60-173                                       Data derived from Wikipedia and other
                                             19-160                                       sources.c
                Polyethylene                    650
               Polypropylene                   19.7
                                                23
                 Polystyrene                    580
     PEEK (Polyether ether ketone)          15.7-26.7
                                              65-70
             Polyester (Mylar)                40-60
             Neoprene rubber                   118
               Distilled water                2,000
                                              10-25
                Waxed paper
                     Mica

                  Diamond
               PZT (ceramic)

Capacitor Styles and Packaging

Capacitors are available in a wide range of capacitance values, from just a few
picofarads to well in excess of a farad, a range of over 1012. Unlike resistors, whose
physical size relates to their power rating and not their resistance value, the physical
size of a capacitor is related to both its capacitance and its voltage rating (a

264
consequence of Equation 8.4. Modest surface mount capacitors can be quite small
while the power supply filter capacitors commonly used in consumer electronics
devices such as an audio amplifier can be considerably larger than a D cell battery. A
sampling of capacitors is shown in Figure 8.6.

                                                                                                                   Figure 8.6
                                                                                                                   A variety of capacitor styles
                                                                                                                   and packages.

Toward the front and left side of the photo are a variety of plastic film capacitors.   Figure 8.7
The disk-shaped capacitor uses a ceramic dielectric. The small square device            A variable capacitor.
toward the front is a surface mount capacitor, and to its right is a teardrop-shaped
tantalum capacitor, commonly used for power supply bypass applications in               Figure 8.8
electronic circuits. The medium sized capacitor to the right with folded leads is a     Capacitor schematic symbols
paper capacitor, at one time very popular in audio circuitry. A number of capacitors    (top-bottom): non-polarized,
have a crimp ring at one side, including the large device with screw terminals. These   polarized, variable.
are aluminum electrolytic capacitors. These devices tend to exhibit high volumetric
efficiency but generally do not offer top performance in other areas such as absolute
accuracy and leakage current. They usually are polarized, meaning that the leads
must match the polarity of the applied voltage. Inserting them into a circuit
backwards can result in catastrophic failure. The polarity is usually identified by a
series of minus signs and/or a stripe that indicates the negative lead. Tantalum
capacitors are also polarized but are typically denoted with a plus sign next to the
positive lead. A variable capacitor used for tuning radios is shown in Figure 8.7.
One set of plates is fixed to the frame while an intersecting set of plates is affixed
to a shaft. Rotating the shaft changes the amount of plate area that overlaps, and
thus changes the capacitance.

For large capacitors, the capacitance value and voltage rating are usually printed
directly on the case. Some capacitors use "MFD" which stands for "microfarads".
While a capacitor color code exists, rather like the resistor color code, it has
generally fallen out of favor. For smaller capacitors a numeric code is used that
echoes the color code. Typically it consists of a three digit number such as "152".

265
The first two digits are the precision portion and the third digit is the power of ten    Figure 8.9
multiplier. The result is in picofarads. Thus, 152 is 1500 pf.                            An LCR meter, designed to
                                                                                          read capacitance, resistance
The schematic symbols for capacitors are shown in Figure 8.8. There are three             and inductance.
symbols in wide use. The first symbol, using two parallel lines to echo the two
plates, is for standard non-polarized capacitors. The second symbol represents
polarized capacitors. In this variant, the positive lead is drawn with a straight line
for that plate and often denoted with a plus sign. The negative terminal is drawn
with a curved line. The third symbol is used for variable capacitors and is drawn
with an arrow through it, rather like a rheostat.

In order to obtain accurate measurements of capacitors, an LCR meter, such as the
one shown in Figure 8.9, may be used. These devices are designed to measure the
three common passive electrical components: resistors, capacitors and inductors19.
Unlike a simple digital multimeter, an LCR meter can also measure the values at
various AC frequencies instead of just DC, and also determine secondary
characteristics such as equivalent series resistance and effective parallel leakage
resistance.

Capacitor Data Sheet

A portion of a typical capacitor data sheet is shown in Figure 8.10. This is for a
series of through-hole style metallized film capacitors using polypropylene for the
dielectric. First we see a listing of general features. For starters, we find that the
capacitors use a flame retardant epoxy coating and are also RoHS compliant. We
then move to a set of electrical performance specifications. For example, we see that
this series is available in two variants, one rated at 800 volts DC and the other rated
at 1600 volts DC. Further, tolerance is available as either ±3% or ±5%. Dissipation
factor (tan ) is a measure of particular importance for AC operation and is
proportional to the ESR (equivalent series resistance, ideally 0), smaller being better.
The insulation resistance indicates the value of an effective parallel leakage
resistance (higher is better), here, some 30,000 M. Finally, we see physical size
data, essential for printed circuit board layouts.

Capacitors in Series and in Parallel

Multiple capacitors placed in series and/or parallel do not behave in the same
manner as resistors. Placing capacitors in parallel increases overall plate area, and
thus increases capacitance, as indicated by Equation 8.4. Therefore capacitors in
parallel add in value, behaving like resistors in series. In contrast, when capacitors
are placed in series, it is as if the plate distance has increased, thus decreasing
capacitance. Therefore capacitors in series behave like resistors in parallel. Their
value is found via the reciprocal of summed reciprocals or the product-sum rule.

19 Inductors are the subject of the next chapter.

266
                                                                                      Figure 8.10
                                                                                      Capacitor data sheet.
                                                                                      Courtesy of Panasonic

Example 8.1                                                                           Figure 8.11
                                                                                      Circuit for Example 8.1.
         Find the equivalent capacitance of the network shown in Figure 8.11.

         These capacitors are all in parallel, and thus, the equivalent value is the
         sum of the three capacitances:

                      C Total = C 1+C 2+C 3
                      CTotal = 1 F+100 nF+560 nF
                      CTotal = 1.66  F

267
Example 8.2                                                                                Figure 8.12
                                                                                           Circuit for Example 8.2.
         Find the equivalent capacitance of the network shown in Figure 8.12.

         In this circuit, we find that the left and middle capacitors are in parallel.
         This combination is in series with the capacitor to the right:

                     C left = C 1+C 2
                     Cleft = 3.3  F+4.7  F
                     C left = 8 F
                     C Total = C left C 3

                               C left +C 3
                     CTotal = 8 F 16 F 8 F+16  F
                     C Total  5.33  F

If a circuit contains nothing but a voltage source in parallel with a group of             Figure 8.13
capacitors, the voltage will be the same across all of the capacitors, just as it is in a  A simple capacitors-only
resistive parallel circuit. If the circuit instead consists of multiple capacitors that    series circuit.
are in series with a voltage source, as shown in Figure 8.13, the voltage will divide
between them in inverse proportion. In other words, the larger the capacitance, the
smaller its share of the applied voltage. The voltages can also be found by first
determining the series equivalent capacitance. The total charge may then be
determined using the applied voltage. Finally, the individual voltages are computed
from Equation 8.2, V = Q/C, where Q is the total charge and C is the capacitance of
interest. This is illustrated in the following example.

Example 8.3                                                                                Figure 8.14
         Find the voltages across the capacitors in Figure 8.14.                           Circuit for Example 8.3.

     The first step is to determine the total capacitance. As these are in series, we
     can use the reciprocal rule:

     CTotal = 1 1 1 1
                   ++

               C1 C2 C3
     CTotal = 1 1 1 1

               2  F +4  F +8 F
     CTotal  1.143 F

268
         From here we determine the total charge:

                     Q=VC
                     Q = 12 V1.143 F
                     Q = 13.71C

         Charge is constant across all of the series capacitors, therefore:

                     V 2uF = QC
                     V 2uF = 13.71 C 2  F
                     V 2uF = 6.855 V

                     V 4uF = QC
                     V 4uF = 13.71 C 4  F
                     V 4uF = 3.427 V

                     V 8uF = QC
                     V 8uF = 13.71 C 8 F
                     V 8uF = 1.714 V

         The sum of the three voltages is 12 volts (within rounding error) and verifies
         KVL as expected.

A Practical Tip

While it may be tempting to try, do not attempt to verify the operation of Example
8.3 in the laboratory using a standard DMM. The reason is because the internal
resistance of a typical digital voltmeter is many orders of magnitude lower than the
leakage resistance of the capacitors. As a result, charge will be transferred to the
meter, ruining the measurement. It would be akin to trying to measure the voltages
across a string of resistors, each in excess of 100 M, with a meter whose internal
resistance is 1 M. The meter's resistance dominates the parallel combination and
causes excessive loading which ruins the measurement. A special sort of voltmeter,
an electrostatic voltmeter or electrometer, is needed for these types of measurements.
These are sometimes referred to as non-charge transfer meters.

269
Current-Voltage Relationship

The fundamental current-voltage relationship of a capacitor is not the same as that of
resistors. Capacitors do not so much resist current; it is more productive to think in
terms of them reacting to it. The current through a capacitor is equal to the
capacitance times the rate of change of the capacitor voltage with respect to time
(i.e., its slope). That is, the value of the voltage is not important, but rather how
quickly the voltage is changing. Given a fixed voltage, the capacitor current is zero
and thus the capacitor behaves like an open. If the voltage is changing rapidly, the
current will be high and the capacitor behaves more like a short. Expressed as a
formula:

i=C d v d t (8.5)

Where
i is the current flowing through the capacitor,
C is the capacitance,
dv/dt is the rate of change of capacitor voltage with respect to time.

A particularly useful form of Equation 8.5 is:

d v d t = iC (8.6)

An alternate way of looking at Equation 8.5 indicates that if a capacitor is fed by a   Figure 8.15
constant current source, the voltage will rise at a constant rate (dv/dt). It is        Capacitor with current source.
continuously depositing charge on the plates of the capacitor at a rate of I, which is
equivalent to Q/t. As long as the current is present, feeding the capacitor, the
voltage across the capacitor will continue to rise. A good analogy is if we had a pipe
pouring water into a tank, with the tank's level continuing to rise. This process of
depositing charge on the plates is referred to as charging the capacitor. For example,
considering the circuit in Figure 8.15, we see a current source feeding a single
capacitor. If we were to plot the capacitor's voltage over time, we would see
something like the graph of Figure 8.16.

V

                                                                                Figure 8.16
                                                                                Capacitor voltage versus time.

                                                                             t

270
As time progresses, the voltage across the capacitor increases with a positive
polarity from top to bottom. With a theoretically perfect capacitor and source, this
would continue forever, or until the current source was turned off. In reality, this line
would either begin to deflect horizontally as the source reached its limits, or the
capacitor would fail once its breakdown voltage was reached. The slope of this line
is dictated by the size of the current source and the capacitance.

Example 8.4                                                                                Figure 8.17
                                                                                           Circuit for Example 8.4.
         Determine the rate of change of voltage across the capacitor in the circuit
         of Figure 8.17. Also determine the capacitor's voltage 10 milliseconds after
         power is switched on.

     First, note the direction of the current source. This will produce a negative
     voltage across the capacitor from top to bottom. The rate of change is:

     dvdt = iC
     dv =-5 A
     dt 30 nF
     dvdt -166.7 volts per second

     Thus, for every second, the voltage rises another -166.7 volts. Assuming it
     is completely uncharged when power is applied, after 10 milliseconds it will
     have risen to -166.7 V/s times 10 ms, or -1.667 volts.

Equation 8.6 provides considerable insight into the behavior of capacitors. As just
noted, if a capacitor is driven by a fixed current source, the voltage across it rises at
the constant rate of i/C. There is a limit to how quickly the voltage across the
capacitor can change. An instantaneous change means that dv/dt is infinite, and thus,
the current driving the capacitor would also have to be infinite (an impossibility).
This is not an issue with resistors, which obey Ohm's law, but it is a limitation of
capacitors. Therefore we can state a particularly important characteristic of
capacitors:

         The voltage across a capacitor cannot change instantaneously. (8.7)

This observation will be key to understanding the operation of capacitors in DC
circuits.

271
8.3 Initial and Steady-State Analysis of RC Circuits

When analyzing resistor-capacitor circuits, always remember that capacitor voltage
cannot change instantaneously. If we assume that a capacitor in a circuit is not
initially charged, then its voltage must be zero. The instant the circuit is energized,
the capacitor voltage must still be zero. If there is no voltage across the device, then
it is behaving like a short circuit. We call this the initial state. Thus, we have our
first rule regarding RC circuits:

     For DC analysis, initially capacitors appear as shorts.  (8.8)

Consider the circuit of Figure 8.18. Assume that C1 and C2 are initially uncharged
and there is no voltage across them.

                                                                                          Figure 8.18
                                                                                          A basic resistor-capacitor (RC)
                                                                                          circuit.

The instant power is applied, the two capacitors appear as short circuits. If we
redraw the circuit for this instant in time, we arrive at the equivalent circuit shown in
Figure 8.19.

                                                                                                                   Figure 8.19
                                                                                                                   A basic RC circuit, initial state.

Given this equivalent, we can see that shorting C2 places R2 and R3 in parallel,
however, they are both shorted out by C1. This leaves only R1 left in the circuit along
with the source, E. At this point, currents will begin to flow, and thus begin charging
up the capacitors. As the capacitor voltages rise, the current will begin to decrease,
and eventually the capacitors will stop charging. At that point no further current will
be flowing, and thus the capacitor will behave like an open. We call this the steady-
state condition and we can state our second rule:

     At steady-state, capacitors appear as opens.             (8.9)

272
Continuing with the example, at steady-state both capacitors behave as opens. This
is shown in Figure 8.20. This leaves E to drop across R1 and R2. This will create a
simple voltage divider. The steady-state voltage across C1 will equal that of R2. As
C2 is also open, the voltage across R3 will be zero while the voltage across C2 will be
the same as that across R2.

                                                                                                                   Figure 8.20
                                                                                                                   A basic RC circuit, steady-state.

In reality, practical capacitors can be thought of as an ideal capacitance in parallel     Figure 8.21
with a very large (leakage) resistance, so there will be a limit to this performance.      Circuit for Example 8.4.

Example 8.5

         Given the circuit of Figure 8.21, find the voltage across the 6 k resistor
         for both the initial and steady-state conditions assuming the capacitor is
         initially uncharged.

         For the initial state the capacitor is treated as a short. The initial state
         equivalent circuit is drawn below in Figure 8.22. Immediately apparent
         is the parallel connection between the 6 k and 3 k resistors. This
         combination is equivalent to 2 k. Therefore, we can perform a voltage
         divider to find the potential across the 6 k (i.e., the 2 k combo).

                                                                                           Figure 8.22
                                                                                           Circuit of Figure 8.20, initial
                                                                                           state.

                     V 6k = E Rx
                                R x +R y

                     V 6k = 24 V 2 k  2 k +1 k 
                     V 6k = 16 V

         For the steady-state condition the capacitor will be fully charged, its current
         will be zero, and we treat it as an open. The steady-state equivalent circuit is

273
     drawn below in Figure 8.23.

                                                                                        Figure 8.23
                                                                                        Circuit of Figure 8.20, steady-
                                                                                        state.

     The 3 k resistor is now out of the picture, leaving us with the 6 k in
     series with the 1 k resistor. Once again, a voltage divider may be used to
     determine the voltage across the 6 k.

                 V 6k = E Rx
                            R x +R y

                 V 6k = 24 V 6 k  6 k +1 k 
                 V 6k = 20.57 V

8.4 Transient Response of RC Circuits

The question remains, "What happens between the time the circuit is powered up
and when it reaches steady-state?" This is known as the transient response. Consider
the circuit shown in Figure 8.24. Note the use of a voltage source rather than a fixed
current source, as examined earlier.

The key to the analysis is to remember that capacitor voltage cannot change             Figure 8.24
instantaneously. Assuming the capacitor is uncharged, the instant power is applied,     A simple RC circuit.
the capacitor voltage must be zero. Therefore all of the source voltage drops across
the resistor. This creates the initial current, and this current starts to charge the
capacitor (the initial rate being equal to i/C as dictated by Equation 8.6). According
to Kirchhoff's voltage law, as the capacitor voltage begins to increase, the resistor
voltage must decrease because the sum of the two must equal the fixed source
voltage. This means that the circulating current must also decrease. This, in turn,
means that the rate of capacitor voltage increase begins to slow. As the capacitor
voltage continues to increase, less voltage is available for the resistor, causing
further reductions in current, and a further slowing of the rate of capacitor voltage
change. Eventually, the capacitor voltage will be nearly equal to the source voltage.
This will result in a very small potential across the resistor and an equally small
current, slowing subsequent capacitor voltage increases to a near standstill.
Theoretically, the capacitor voltage approaches the source voltage but never quite
equals it. Similarly, the current drops to near zero, but never completely turns off.
This is illustrated in Figure 8.25.

274
                                                                                                                                   Figure 8.25
                                                                                                                                   Normalized charge and
                                                                                                                                   discharge curves.

                                                  Normalized Charge/Discharge Curves

                    100

                    80

Percent of Maximum  60

                    40

                    20

                    0   0  1                     2                  3                         4  5

                                                    Time Constants

The dashed red line represents the initial rate of change of capacitor voltage. This
trajectory is what would be expected if an ideal current source drove the capacitor,
as in Example 8.4. As noted previously, the rate of voltage change versus times is
equal to i/C, and therefore in this case, E/RC. If the initial rate of change were to
continue unabated, the source voltage, E, would be reached in RC seconds.
Consequently, RC is referred to as the charge time constant and is denoted by 
(Greek letter tau). Thus,

                           Time constant,  = RC                        (8.10)

As noted, once the capacitor begins to charge, the current begins to decrease and the
capacitor voltage curve begins to fall away from the initial trajectory. The solid red
curve represents the capacitor voltage. Notice that after five time constants the
capacitor is nearly fully charged and the circuit is considered to be in steady-state
(i.e., the capacitor behaves as an open).

                        Steady-state is reached in approximately five time constants. (8.11)

275
This sort of recursively dependent operation is characteristic of exponential
functions. The equation for the capacitor's voltage charging curve is:

     V  C  (t  )  =  E  (  1    -    -  t  )  (8.12)
                                        
                                   

     Where
     VC(t) is the capacitor voltage at time t,
     E is the source voltage,
     t is the time of interest,
      is the time constant,
      (also written e) is the base of natural logarithms, approximately 2.718.

The dashed blue line shows the initial slope of current change. The solid blue curve
shows the circulating current (and by extension of Ohm's law, the resistor voltage).
The equation for this curve, which follows the general shape -t, is:

                  E        t
     I (t ) =           -                     (8.13)
                  R                           (8.14)

and

                                t
                             -

     V R(t) = E 

Once power is removed or bypassed, the stored charge on the capacitor will dissipate
through any associated resistor(s) creating a discharge current which will end with
the capacitor voltage drained back to zero. During the discharge phase, both the
capacitor's voltage and current will follow the solid blue curve; Equations 8.13 and
8.14 being appropriate. The discharge time constant may be different from the
charge times constant, depending on the associated resistances.

A precise derivation of the exponential charge/discharge equations is given in
Appendix C.

Example 8.6                                                                            Figure 8.26
                                                                                       Circuit for Example 8.6.
         Given the circuit of Figure 8.26, assume the switch is closed at time t = 0.
         Determine the charging time constant, the amount of time after the switch
         is closed before the circuit reaches steady-state, and the capacitor voltage
         at t = 0, t = 50 milliseconds and t = 1 second. Assume the capacitor is
         initially uncharged.

     First, the time constant:

      = RC
      = 50 k 2  F
      = 100 ms

276
Steady-state will be reached in five time constants, or 500 milliseconds.
Therefore we know that VC(0) = 0 volts and VC(1) = 100 volts. To find
VC(50 ms) we simply solve Equation 8.12.

V  C  (t  )  =  E  (  1  -    -  t  )
                                 
                            

           ( ) - 50 ms

V C (50 ms) = 100 V 1 -  100 ms
V C (50 ms) 39.35 V

This value can also be determined graphically from Figure 8.25. The time of
50 milliseconds represents one-half time constant. Find this value on the
horizontal axis and then track straight up to the solid red curve that
represents the charging capacitor voltage. The point of intersection is at
approximately 40% of the maximum value on the vertical axis. The
maximum value here is the source voltage of 100 volts. Therefore the
capacitor will have reached approximately 40% of 100 volts, or just about
40 volts.

Computer Simulation

The circuit of Figure 8.26 is entered into a simulator, as shown in Figure 8.27. In
order to reflect the notion of a time-varying circuit with a switch, the 100 volt DC
voltage source has been replaced with a rectangular pulse voltage source. This
source starts at 0 volts and then immediately steps up to 100 volts. It stays at this
level for 500 milliseconds before dropping back to 0 volts.

                                                                                        Figure 8.27
                                                                                        Circuit of Figure 8.26 in a
                                                                                        simulator.

A transient (i.e., time domain) simulation is run, plotting the capacitor voltage over
time for the first 500 milliseconds. This is seen in Figure 8.28. There are several
items to note here. First, we see that the overall shape perfectly echoes the generic
curve presented in Figure 8.25. Second, we see that after the predicted five time
constants, or 500 milliseconds, the capacitor voltage has plateaued, indicating

277
steady-state. Third, at steady-state the capacitor voltage has virtually reached the
maximum value set be the source, or 100 volts. Finally, at 50 milliseconds, we see
that the capacitor voltage has reached roughly 40 volts, just as predicted.

                                                                                                                   Figure 8.28
                                                                                                                   Simulation results for the
                                                                                                                   circuit of Figure 8.25.

As mentioned previously, it is possible for a circuit to have different charge and
discharge time constants. This could occur if a switch introduces or removes
component(s) between the charge versus discharge phases. Further, because the
capacitor is discharging, its current direction will be opposite to that of the charging
current. KVL still must be satisfied, but because the capacitor is now behaving as a
source, the magnitude of the discharge resistance's voltage must equal the capacitor
voltage magnitude. Therefore, its curve will take the same shape (the solid blue
curve of Figure 8.25). These issues will be illustrated in the following example.

Example 8.7                                                                               Figure 8.29
                                                                                          Circuit for Example 8.7.
         For the circuit of Figure 8.29, assume the capacitor is initially uncharged.
         At time t = 0 the switch contacts position 1. The switch is thrown to
         position 2 at time t = 50 milliseconds.

     Determine the charging time constant, the amount of time after the
     switch is closed before the circuit reaches steady-state, the maximum
     charging and discharging currents, and the capacitor voltage at t = 0,
     t = 50 milliseconds, t = 90 milliseconds, and t = 1 second.

278
         We begin with the charge time constant:

                      charge = RC
                      charge = 20 k 220 nF
                      charge = 4.4 ms

         Steady-state will be reached in 5 times 4.4 milliseconds, or 22 milliseconds.
         The capacitor is initially uncharged, so VC(0) = 0 volts. As the capacitor will
         have reached steady-state in 22 milliseconds, VC(50 ms) = 12 volts.
         The maximum charging current will occur at t = 0 when all of the 12 volt
         source drops across the 20 k resistor, or 600 amps, flowing left to right.

         At 50 milliseconds the switch is thrown to position 2. The 12 volt source and
         20 k resistor are no longer engaged. At this point the capacitor has 12 volts
         across it, positive to negative, top to bottom. As the capacitor voltage cannot
         change instantaneously, the capacitor now acts as a voltage source and
         discharges through the 120 k resistor. Note that the discharge current is
         flowing counterclockwise, the opposite of the charging current. The
         discharge time constant is:

                      discharge = RC
                      discharge = 120 k  220 nF
                      discharge = 26.4 ms

         The capacitor will fully discharge down to 0 volts in 5 time constants, or
         some 132 milliseconds after the switch is thrown to position 2. Thus steady-
         state occurs at t = 182 milliseconds. The maximum discharge current occurs
         the instant the switch is thrown to position 2 when all of the capacitor's 12
         volts drops across the 120 k resistor, yielding 100 amps, flowing top to
         bottom.

         Clearly, at t = 90 milliseconds the capacitor is in the discharge phase. The
         capacitor's voltage and current during the discharge phase follow the solid
         blue curve of Figure 8.25. The elapsed time for discharge is 90 milliseconds
         minus 50 milliseconds, or 40 milliseconds net. We can use a slight variation
         on Equation 8.14 to find the capacitor voltage at this time.

                           V C (t) = E -t

                                                                                 - 40 ms

                     V C (40 ms) = 12 V-  26.4 ms
                     V C (40 ms) 2.637 V

         The shape of the capacitor's voltage will appear somewhat like a rounded
         pulse, rising with a curve and then falling back to zero with a
         complementary curve (the red and then blue curves of Figure 8.25).

279
Basic single resistor-capacitor circuits prove to be fairly easy to solve given a little
practice, but what if a more complex circuit is used? In this situation the section
feeding the capacitor may be simplified using Thévenin's theorem to determine the
effective source voltage and charging resistance. The circuit then reverts back to a
simple RC network which may be solved directly.

If power is interrupted before the capacitor is fully charged, the equations presented
previously may be used to determine the precise voltage(s) and current(s) reached.
The capacitor will then behave as a voltage source and begin to discharge, its
voltage curve following the blue plot line of Figure 8.25, with its maximum voltage
being what the capacitor charged to, not the associated driving voltage. The
following example and simulations address these issues.

Example 8.8                                                                               Figure 8.30
                                                                                          Circuit for Example 8.8.
         For this example we shall revisit the circuit of Example 8.5. The circuit is
         redrawn in Figure 8.30 for convenience. Assume the capacitor is
         initially uncharged.

     Determine the charging time constant, the amount of time after the
     switch is closed before the circuit reaches steady-state, and the
     capacitor voltage at t = 0, 100 milliseconds, and 200 milliseconds. At
     200 milliseconds, the switch is opened. Determine how long it takes
     for the capacitor to fully discharge and the voltage across the 6 k
     resistor at t = 275 milliseconds (i.e., 75 milliseconds after the switch is
     opened).

     The first step is to determine the Thévenin equivalent driving the capacitor.        Figure 8.31
     If we remove the capacitor and determine the open circuit voltage at those           Thévenin equivalent for the
     points, we see that it is just a voltage divider between the 24 volt source, the     circuit of Figure 8.30 driving
     6 k resistor and the 1 k resistor (the 3 k resistor has no current through           the capacitor.
     it and thus produces no voltage drop). This works out to 20.57 volts. The
     Thévenin resistance will be 3 k in series with 1 k || 6 k, or roughly
     3.857 k. The equivalent charging circuit is drawn in Figure 8.31.

     We can now determine the charging time constant:

                 charge = R C
                 charge = 3.857 k  10  F
                 charge = 38.57 ms

     Steady-state will be reached in 5 time constants, or 192.8 ms. Thus, we
     know that VC(0) = 0 volts and VC(200 ms) = 20.57 volts. For the capacitor
     voltage at 100 milliseconds, we simply use the charge equation.

280
     V C (t ) =  E  (  1-    -  t  )
                                
                           

                  ( ) - 100 ms

     V C (100 ms) = 20.57 V 1-  38.57ms
     V C (100 ms) 19.03 V

     For the discharge phase, we need to determine the time constant. With the
     voltage source removed, the capacitor will discharge through the now series
     combination of the 3 k resistor and 6 k resistor.

     discharge = R C

     discharge = 9 k 10 F
     discharge = 90 ms

     Steady-state will be reached 450 milliseconds later at t = 650 milliseconds.
     To find V6k at t = 275 milliseconds, we can find the voltage across the
     capacitor and then perform a voltage divider between the 6 k and 3 k
     resistors. Remembering that t = 275 milliseconds is 75 milliseconds into the
     discharge phase, we have:

                                          t
                                       -

           V C (t ) = E 

                  ( ) -75ms

     V C (75 ms) = 20.57 V 1-  90ms
     V C (75 ms) 8.94 V

     Finally, this voltage splits between the 6 k and 3 k resistors. Using the
     voltage divider rule, we find:

     V 6k = V C Rx
                 R x +R y

     V 6k = 8.94 V 6 k  6 k +3 k 
     V 6k = 5.96 V

Computer Simulation

In order to verify the analysis of Example 8.8, the circuit of Figure 8.30 is entered
into a simulator, as shown in Figure 8.32. In place of a DC source, a pulse generator
is used to mimic the on-off nature of the switch. This starts starts at zero volts and
then immediately jumps up to 24 volts. It stays at this level for 200 milliseconds
before returning back to zero. This is sufficient time to check whether or not the
capacitor voltage has reached steady-state (predicted to take 192.8 milliseconds).

281
                                                                                                                   Figure 8.32
                                                                                                                   Circuit of Figure 8.30 in a
                                                                                                                   simulator.

A transient analysis is run on this circuit, plotting the capacitor voltage (i.e., the
difference between the node 2 and node 3 voltages). The result is shown in Figure
8.33. This plot confirms nicely the charge phase of the capacitor. After
approximately 200 milliseconds, the voltage has leveled out at just over 20 volts,
precisely as predicted.

                                                                                                                   Figure 8.33
                                                                                                                   Simulation results for the
                                                                                                                   charge phase of the circuit of
                                                                                                                   Figure 8.30.

What about the discharge phase? In order to investigate that portion, the simulation
circuit is modified. The pulse voltage source is disconnected from the remainder of
the circuit, just as it would be if the switch in Figure 8.30 had been opened again.
Also, the capacitor is modified to have an initial voltage of 20.57 volts, the precise
value at had reached after it attained steady-state. A second transient analysis is run,
282
again plotting the capacitor voltage. The results of this simulation are shown in
Figure 8.34. It is worth noting that the time axis is relative to the switch being
opened, not the original timing. That is, the horizontal origin of 0 milliseconds
corresponds to t = 200 milliseconds.

                                                                                                                   Figure 8.34
                                                                                                                   Simulation results for the
                                                                                                                   discharge phase of the circuit of
                                                                                                                   Figure 8.30.

Note that the time required to reach the new steady-state value of zero volts has
stretched out to some 450 milliseconds after the switch is opened, precisely as
predicted.
At this point, a fair question to ask is, "Couldn't we leave the pulse source in place in
order to investigate the discharge phase?" Although the pulse source does go back
down to zero volts at t = 200 milliseconds, that's not the same as opening the switch
back in Figure 8.30. If the source is still connected but producing zero volts, it
becomes part of the Thévenin equivalent. As such, the 1 k resistor is back in the
circuit, producing a discharge time constant identical to the charge time constant.
To prove the point, the simulation is run again. The pulse remains at 24 volts for 200
milliseconds and then jumps down to zero, as before. The simulation time is
extended out to 400 milliseconds total, enough to see both the charge and discharge
phases. Further, instead of just plotting the capacitor voltage; the voltages of the
source (blue trace, node 1), the 6 k resistor (green trace, node 2) and the 3 k
resistor (red trace, node 5) are plotted. The results are shown in Figure 8.35.

283
                                                                                                                   Figure 8.35
                                                                                                                   Simulation results using pulse
                                                                                                                   voltage source for discharge
                                                                                                                   phase.

The first item to note is that steady-state appears to be reached in just under 200
milliseconds for both the charge and discharge phases, as expected. Second, note
that the node 2 voltage (green) minus the node 3 voltage (red) starts at zero and
winds up at a little over 20 volts at 200 milliseconds. This is, of course, the capacitor
voltage, but what is interesting here is that this plot shows how the voltage across
the 3 k resistor shrinks as the capacitor voltage grows, the sum equaling the node 2
voltage. This makes perfect sense because, as the capacitor voltage increases, the
current through it must be decreasing, and as this same current is flowing through
the 3 k resistor, the resistor's voltage must also be decreasing due to Ohm's law.

The other interesting part of this plot is what happens at 200 milliseconds when the
source goes back to zero. Note that the node 3 voltage immediately jumps to a
negative value. This is because the voltage across the capacitor cannot change
instantaneously. It must still have 20.57 volts across it the instant the source goes
back to zero. In this situation, because the source is essentially a short, the capacitor
winds up in series with the 3 k resistor and the parallel combination of the 1 k
and 6 k resistors, or about 857 . Calculating the voltage divider between the 3 k
and 857  resistors with 20.57 volt source shows the 3 k resistor receiving
approximately 16 volts. Further, the discharge current will be flowing out of the
capacitor in a counterclockwise direction, meaning it flows from ground up through
the 3 k resistor. Thus, we expect node 3 to be at approximately -16 volts, which is
precisely what the plot indicates. How cool is that?

What if we didn't wait for steady-state? How would these plots change? Essentially,
the trajectories of the curves would not change. After all, how would the circuit
"know" that the switch would open early or the pulse would flip prematurely?

284
What happens is that the curves are followed to the point in time where the circuit is
interrupted. From there, the next phase occurs with the present voltages as the
starting points. To test this, the simulation is run yet again, but this time the source
pulse width is shortened to just 50 milliseconds, well short of steady-state. The
results of the simulation are shown in Figure 8.36.

                                                                                                                   Figure 8.36
                                                                                                                   Simulation results for
                                                                                                                   interrupted discharge phase
                                                                                                                   using pulse voltage source.

Comparing the plot of Figure 8.36 to that of Figure 8.35 shows that the two are
identical up to 50 milliseconds. At that point, the input pulse returns to zero and the
capacitor begins to discharge. The shapes and timings of the node 2 and node 3
voltages are the same as they were in Figure 8.35, however, the amplitudes are
reduced. This is because the capacitor did not have time to reach the steady-state
voltage of 20.57 volts. In fact, it only reaches about 14.94 volts using Equation 8.12.
Applying the voltage divider on this potential as before shows that the 3 k resistor
should jump to approximately -11.6 volts, which is confirmed by the simulation.

8.5 Summary

The capacitor is a device that is used to store electric charge. Capacitance, C, is
measured in farads, F. The idealized device consists of two conductive plates
separated by some distance, that space being filled by an insulating dielectric.
Capacitance is directly proportional to the plate area and the dielectric's permittivity,
and inversely proportional to the plate distance. Another important characteristic of
the dielectric is its breakdown strength. Along with the plate spacing, this will
285
establish the capacitor's voltage rating. The permittivity will also help to determine
the capacitor's volumetric efficiency, a measure of how much capacitance can be
achieved within a given volume. Non-ideal parameters include the ESR, or
equivalent series resistance, which is ideally zero; and the effective parallel leakage
resistance, ideally infinity. Absolute accuracy, temperature stability and similar
parameters round out the distinguishing features of one kind of capacitor against
another. When placed in parallel, capacitors add in the same manner as resistors in
series. When placed in series, capacitors behave like resistors in parallel.

Perhaps the most important operational characteristic regarding capacitors is that
voltage across a capacitor cannot change instantaneously. It will take some finite
amount of time before the charge on the capacitor builds, leading to a predictable
rise in voltage across it. Because of this, for DC circuits capacitors initially behave
like shorts, but after sufficient time has passed, they behave like opens. The amount
of time required to reach steady-state is five time constants, where one time constant
is defined as the product of the circuit's effective resistance and its capacitance. The
current charge curve is of the shape -t. The current starts at a maximum and
eventually approaches zero as time passes. The corresponding voltage shape is of the
form 1--t. Here, the capacitor's voltage starts at zero and rises to some maximum
value. The capacitor's voltage discharge curve effectively is swapped compared to
the charge curve (e.g. voltage follows -t).

Review Questions

    1. What are the physical characteristics of capacitors and how do they affect
         capacitance?

    2. Define the voltage-current characteristic for capacitors.
    3. What is meant by a capacitor's volumetric efficiency?
    4. How do the permittivity and breakdown strength of the dielectric affect the

         overall capacitance and voltage rating?
    5. How do capacitors combine when placed in series and how do they combine

         when placed in parallel?
    6. Define the initial and steady-state behavior of capacitors.
    7. Define time constant for an RC circuit.
    8. Describe the charge and discharge characteristics of RC circuits.

286
8.6 Exercises

Analysis

    1. For the circuit shown in Figure 8.37, determine the effective capacitance.
                                                                                Figure 8.37

    2. Determine the effective capacitance of the configuration shown in Figure
         8.38.
                                                                                Figure 8.38

    3. Given the capacitor network shown in Figure 8.39, determine the effective
         value.
                                                                                Figure 8.39

    4. Determine the effective capacitance of network shown in Figure 8.40.
                                                                                Figure 8.40

287
    5. Determine the voltage across each capacitor for the circuit shown in Figure
         8.41.
                                                                                Figure 8.41

    6. Determine the voltage across each capacitor for the circuit shown in Figure
         8.42.
                                                                                Figure 8.42

    7. Determine the initial voltage across each component for the circuit shown in
         Figure 8.43.
                                                                                Figure 8.43

    8. Given the network shown in Figure 8.43, determine the steady-state voltage
         across each component.

288
    9. For the circuit shown in Figure 8.44, determine the capacitor voltage 3
         microseconds after the power is switched on.
                                                                                Figure 8.44

    10. For the circuit shown in Figure 8.45, determine the capacitor voltage 5
         seconds after the power is switched on.
                                                                                Figure 8.45

    11. Determine the time constant and the time required to reach steady-state for
         the circuit shown in Figure 8.46.
                                                                                Figure 8.46

    12. For the circuit shown in Figure 8.46, determine the capacitor voltage and
         circulating current 20 microseconds and 100 milliseconds after the switch is
         thrown.

    13. Given the circuit shown in Figure 8.47, determine the capacitor voltage and
         circulating current 200 milliseconds and 10 seconds after the switch is
         thrown.
                                                                                Figure 8.47

289
    14. Determine the time constant and the time required to reach steady-state for
         the circuit shown in Figure 8.47.

    15. Determine the time constant and the time required to reach steady-state for
         the circuit shown in Figure 8.48, switch position 1.
                                                                                Figure 8.48

    16. Determine the charge and discharge time constants for the circuit shown in
         Figure 8.49.
                                                                                Figure 8.49

    17. Given the circuit shown in Figure 8.48, determine the capacitor voltage 10
         milliseconds after the power is turned on. At this point, the switch is thrown
         to position 2. Determine how long it will take the capacitor to discharge to
         nearly zero volts.

    18. For the circuit shown in Figure 8.49, determine the capacitor voltage 400
         microseconds after the power is turned on. At this point, the switch is
         thrown to position 2. Determine how long it will take the capacitor to
         discharge to nearly zero volts.

    19. Determine the time constant and the time required to reach steady-state for
         the circuit shown in Figure 8.50, switch position 1.
                                                                                Figure 8.50

290
    20. Given the circuit shown in Figure 8.50, determine the capacitor voltage 12
         milliseconds after the power is turned on. At this point, the switch is thrown
         to position 2. Determine how long it will take the capacitor to discharge to
         nearly zero volts.

Design

    21. Given the circuit of Figure 8.46, determine a new resistor value such that
         steady-state is reached in 2 milliseconds.

    22. Given the circuit of Figure 8.47, determine a new resistor value such that
         steady-state is reached in 5 seconds.

    23. When an audio amplifier is turned on, the power surge can cause an audible
         pop from the loudspeaker. To prevent this, amplifiers often connect to the
         loudspeaker via a relay. The relay is energized to connect the loudspeaker
         once the output has settled, typically a few seconds after power is applied.
         This delay may be created via an RC network. Suppose the driving circuit is
         5 volts and the relay trips at 4 volts. Further, the associated charging
         resistance is 10 k. Determine the capacitance required to achieve a 2
         second delay time.

Challenge

    24. Determine the time constant and the time required to reach steady-state for
         the circuit shown in Figure 8.51.

                                                                                Figure 8.51

    25. For the circuit shown in Figure 8.51, determine the capacitor voltage 1
         second after the power is turned on. At this point, the switch is thrown to
         position 2. Determine how long it will take the capacitor to discharge to
         nearly zero volts.

291
Simulation

    26. Perform a transient analysis to verify the time to steady-state of Figure 8.46
         (problem 11).

    27. Perform a transient analysis to verify the time to steady-state of Figure 8.47
         (problem 14).

    28. Use a transient analysis to verify the design of problem 21.
    29. Use a transient analysis to verify the design of problem 22.
    30. Use a transient analysis to verify the operation of the circuit shown in Figure

         8.51 as specified in problem 25. You may wish to do this as two separate
         simulations, one for each switch position, with the second position using a
         pre-charged capacitor.

292
Notes

                                                                                                                                 
293
9 Inductors

9.0 Chapter Learning Objectives

After completing this chapter, you should be able to:

    · Describe the theoretical and practical aspects of inductor construction.
    · Describe the current-voltage characteristic behavior of inductors.
    · Utilize component data sheets to determine operating characteristics of inductors.
    · Determine the initial and steady-state equivalents of resistor-inductor networks.
    · Determine the initial and steady-state equivalents of resistor-capacitor-inductor networks.
    · Determine the transient response of basic RL networks.

9.1 Introduction

This chapter introduces our third passive device, the inductor. Inductors are fundamentally different from both
resistors and capacitors in terms of their construction and their operation. Inductors do, however, share certain
broad traits with capacitors. First, they are energy storage devices. In the case of the inductor, energy is stored in
a magnetic field, similar to the case of the capacitor which utilizes an electric field. Further, in the ideal case,
inductors do not dissipate power. Also like capacitors, when inductors are placed in DC circuits they are not
ohmic, meaning that their current-voltage characteristic does not respond to Ohm's law. Instead, their current-
voltage characteristic is dynamic in nature. In some respects, though, their current-voltage behavior is opposite
to the way in which capacitors behave, and thus they offer their own unique performance characteristics.

Inductors have a long history of use in electronic systems. In fact, one of the most common uses in the home is
as an integral part of a typical loudspeaker system. They are used in modern switch-mode DC power supplies in
products such as personal computers and televisions. In audio and communications systems they are used in
filters and tuning circuits alongside capacitors. Like a capacitor, for any application that needs to smooth out a
varying voltage, store energy or filter a signal; an inductor is a likely candidate.

Unfortunately, real-world inductors generally do not behave as close to their desired ideal operation as do real-
world capacitors. The secondary effects of inductor construction limit their performance; perhaps the most
notable factor being their potentially large equivalent series resistance. They are also susceptible to external
magnetic fields which can introduce noise and interference, degrading signal quality. For these reasons, there are
areas where, given a choice, capacitors would be preferred over inductors. But this is by no means a broad
condemnation and there are areas where the use of inductors is essential. Beyond this, the very concept of
inductance is important in that informs designers of the practical limits of performance of their circuits.

294
The concept of electromagnetic induction was first discovered by English scientist
Michael Faraday in the early 19th century. He noticed that if he wrapped two wires
around an iron ring and introduced a current in one of them, then a transient (short-
lived) current would appear in the second coil of wire. He noticed a similar effect
when he slid a bar magnet through a wire coil. Around the same time, American
Joseph Henry discovered much the same independently of Faraday and performed
considerable research in this area. In his honor, the unit of inductance, the henry
(abbreviated H), is named after him. The symbol for inductance is L, named after
physicist Heinrich Emil Lenz. Inductors are commonly referred to as coils or
chokes, for reasons that will be apparent shortly.

9.2 Inductance and Inductors

To begin, we need to examine the interrelation between electric current and
magnetic fields in a conductor. When a current passes through a conductor, such as a
wire, a magnetic field is created around the conductor that is proportional to the
strength of the current. This is illustrated in Figure 9.1.

                                                                                            Figure 9.1

                                                           I                                Magnetic field around a

                                                                                            conductor.

The magnetic field can be thought of as sets of concentric rings around the
conductor, although for clarity only single loops are drawn in the Figure. The
number of magnetic lines in a given area is known as the magnetic flux and is given
the symbol  (the Greek letter phi). The unit of magnetic flux is the weber, Wb,
named after Wilhelm Weber, a 19th century German physicist.

     Magnetic flux  the number of magnetic lines enclosed

     in a given area.                                         (9.1)

Note that the magnetic field runs the length of the conductor. The direction of the         Figure 9.2
field lines follows the right hand rule: if you grasp the wire with your right hand         Right hand rule.
such that your thumb is pointing in the direction of conventional current flow, then
your fingers wrap in the direction of the magnetic field. This rule is illustrated in       Image source (modified)
Figure 9.2.

If we form the conductor into a loop, the field lines are corralled into the center of
the loop. This is illustrated in Figure 9.3. In this diagram it can be seen that the lines
effectively collect in the center, going into the page.

295
                                                                                         Figure 9.3
                                                                                         Magnetic field around a loop.

The enhancement effect can be magnified by adding more loops in tandem. This is          Figure 9.4
known as a solenoid and is shown in Figure 9.4. It is the most basic form of an          Solenoid.
inductor.

The concentrating effect of the magnetic field is shown in Figure 9.5. In this figure,
the coil is shown from the side, as a cross-section of the individual loops. The dots
inside the conductors indicate that the current is flowing toward you, out of the page;
while the the crosses indicate that the current is flowing into the page. The lines of
flux exit out the right, loop around, and reenter from the left. Due to limited space,
the entire loop for each line is not drawn, and it is important to remember that
magnetic flux lines do not end, but always create a loop. Further, although it is
shown as a plane here, this field is three dimensional, with lines looping back into
the page as well as in front of it.

                                                                                         Figure 9.5
                                                                                         Magnetic field in a solenoid.

                                                                                         Image source.

This is how electromagnets can be created20. The north pole is the exiting end (right
side) of Figure 9.5 while the south pole is the entering end (left side).

20 Truly one of the coolest inventions of all time: a magnet with an on/off switch.
296
If the current changes, there will be a commensurate change in the magnetic field.
Further, this change in the field will induce a current in the conductor that creates a
magnetic field that opposes the original change in the field. This is known as Lenz's
law. Alternately, it can be stated that the induced current caused by a changing
magnetic field will oppose the change in the original current that created that change
in the original magnetic field.

At this point we can offer a proper definition of the weber:

     1 weber  the magnetic flux that, acting on a single loop

     of a conductor, produces a potential of 1 volt

     if the flux is reduced to zero at an even rate

     over 1 second.                                                        (9.2)

In magnetic circuits we are also interested in the magnetic flux density which is the
magnetic flux per unit area. The symbol for flux density is B and has units of teslas
(T), named after Nicola Tesla, the Serbo-Croatian-American engineer and inventor.
One tesla is defined as one weber per square meter.

     1 tesla  1 weber / meter2                                             (9.3)

To provide a reference, the magnetic flux density of the Earth near the equator is
approximately 31 T, while the value of the voice coil gap in a loudspeaker is
around 1 to 2 T, with medical MRI scanners being a little higher still.

Finally, we come to the definition of inductance and its unit, the henry:

     Inductance is a measure of the tendency of a conductor to

     oppose a change in the current flowing through it.                    (9.4)

     1 henry  1 weber / 1 amp                                              (9.5)

Unsurprisingly, the energy stored in the magnetic field of an inductor is proportional
to the inductance. It is also proportional to the square of the current through the
inductor.

     W =12 L I 2 (9.6)

     Where
     W is the energy in joules,
     L is the inductance in henries,
     I is the current in amps.

297
An inductor in its simplest form consists of a series of wire loops. These might be         Figure 9.6
wound around an iron core, although a non-ferrous core might also be used. For a            Simple air-core inductor
simple single layer inductor, such as the one drawn in Figure 9.6, the inductance is        dimensions.
described by the following formula:

                      L= A N 2 (9.7)
                               l

         Where
         L is the inductance in henries,
          is the permeability of the core material,
         A is the cross sectional area of the coil,
         N is the number of coils or turns,
         l is the length of the coil.

Inductors may also be wound using multiple layers or around a toroidal core, and
these designs utilize alternate formulas.

Inductor Styles and Packaging

Equation 9.7 indicates that, in order to achieve high inductance, we would like a
core with high permeability, permeability being a measure of how easy it is to
establish magnetic flux in said material. Substances such as iron or ferrite have a
much greater permeability than air and are used commonly for cores. They do have a
disadvantage in that they will saturate sooner than an air core, and this can lead to
distortion.

Another approach is to pack as many turns as is possible within a given length. One
way to do this is to minimize the thickness of the insulation around the wire21. This
can be achieved by using a thin enamel coating instead of the typical plastic
insulation. A second method is to use a very fine wire. This leads to two problems,
namely an undesirable increase in equivalent series resistance (known colloquially
as coil resistance or Rcoil), and limited current carrying capacity. All of these effects
have to be balanced in order to achieve the best performance for a given application.

Commercial inductors range in value from a fraction of a nanohenry for small                Figure 9.7
surface mount "chip" inductors up to several henries. Some devices exhibit large            Electric bass guitar pickup.
internal inductances even though they are not specifically used as inductors. One
common example is a transformer. Another example is an electric guitar or bass
pickup, such as the one shown in Figure 9.7 with its cover removed. Units such as
this may be constructed of several thousand turns of very fine wire (typically AWG
41 to 44) and achieve inductances in excess of one henry.

21 The wound wire must be insulated otherwise each loop will short to the loops next to it
    and we'd be left with a tube instead of a series of loops.

298
A variety of inductors is shown in Figure 9.9, all of which are of the through-hole
type (surface mount inductors do not appear considerably different from their
surface mount resistor and capacitor cousins).

                                                                                                                   Figure 9.9
                                                                                                                   A collection of inductors.

The two units toward the left are molded inductors and use a standard color code,
similar to the ones used for resistors and capacitors. The unit at the top (yellow) is a
high current inductor that features low Rcoil. The three inductors in the center use
obvious ferrite cores, two wound on straight cores and the third wound on a toroidal
core. The unit to the right uses a high permeability material at the very top and is
wrapped in a plastic sheath for protection. Variable inductors are also a possibility
and can be made by using a ferrite core that can be slid within the coils, effectively
changing the permeability of the core (part ferrite, part air).

The schematic symbols for inductors are shown in Figure 9.10. The standard                Figure 9.10
symbol is at the top. The variable inductor symbol is in the middle and is a two-         Inductor schematic symbols
lead device, somewhat reminiscent of the symbol for a rheostat. At the bottom is          (top-bottom): standard,
the symbol for an inductor with an iron, ferrite, or similar high permeability core.      variable, iron/ferrite core.
In general, like resistors, single inductors are not polarized and cannot be inserted
into a circuit backwards. There are, however, special applications where multiple
coils can be wound on a common core, and for these, the polarity of their
interconnection can make a difference.

Inductor Data Sheet

A portion of an inductor data sheet is shown in Figure 9.12. This page lists the
available sizes of this particular model, each with corresponding quantities. We can
see this model is available in inductance values ranging from 1 H up to 100 mH.
Tolerance of the smaller values is ±10% while values at and above 33 H are at
±5%. Q is the quality factor and is particularly important in AC circuits (higher being
better), along with its associated frequency, fQ. Continuing across we find IR. This is
the maximum rated current. For the smaller values, we find they can withstand in
excess of 2 amps while the larger units can withstand only tens of milliamps.

299
                                                                                                                   Figure 9.12
                                                                                                                   Inductor data sheet.

                                                                                                                                                Courtesy of TDK

Finally, we come to Rmax. This is also known as Rcoil. It represents the equivalent
series resistance of the inductor. In general, smaller is better. For this model, it
ranges from a fraction of an ohm to a few hundred ohms. This trend is typical of
inductors; all else being equal, the larger the inductance, the larger the value of the
associated series resistance. In many circuits, the value of Rcoil cannot be ignored.
300
Inductors in Series and in Parallel

Suppose we take two identical inductors and place them in series. This effectively
doubles both the length and the number of loops. From Equation 9.7 we can see that
doubling both the number of loops and the length would double the inductance. This
is because N2 goes up by a factor of four which is then halved be the increased
length. Consequently, inductors in series add values just like resistors in series. By
extension, inductors in parallel behave like resistors in parallel. The equivalent of
parallel inductors can be found by using either the product-sum rule or by taking the
reciprocal of the sum of their reciprocals.

Example 9.1                                                                                 Figure 9.11
         Find the equivalent inductance of the network shown in Figure 9.11.                Circuit for Example 9.1.

     The 6 mH and 12 mH inductors are in parallel. The equivalent value of the
     pair is:

     Lparallel = L2 L3
                L 2 +L3

     Lparallel = 6 mH12 mH 6 mH+12 mH
     Lparallel = 4 mH

     This combination is in series with the 5 mH inductor. Therefore the total
     equivalent inductance is 4 mH + 5 mH, or 9 mH.

Current-Voltage Relationship

The fundamental current-voltage relationship of the inductor is the mirror image of
that of the capacitor:

                     v =L didt (9.8)

This states that the voltage across the inductor is a function of how quickly the
current is changing. If the current is not changing (i.e., in steady-state), then the
voltage across the inductor is zero. In this case, the inductor behaves like a short, or
more accurately, like its Rcoil value. In contrast, during a rapid initial current change,
the inductor voltage can be large, and thus the inductor behaves like an open.

301
If we rearrange Equation 9.8 and solve for the rate of change of current, we find      Figure 9.11
that:                                                                                  Inductor with voltage source.

                      didt = vL (9.9)

Thus if an inductor is fed by a constant voltage source, the current will rise at a
constant rate equal to v/L. For example, considering the circuit in Figure 9.11, we
see a voltage source feeding a single inductor. If we were to plot the inductor's
current over time, we would see something like the graph of Figure 9.12.

     I
                                                                                           Figure 9.12
                                                                                           Inductor current versus time.

                              t

As time progresses, the current through the inductor increases, flowing from top to
bottom. With a theoretically perfect inductor and source, this would continue as long
as the circuit was energized. In reality, this line would either begin to deflect
horizontally as the source reached its limits, or the inductor would fail once its
maximum current or power handling was reached. The slope of this line is dictated
by the size of the applied voltage source and the inductance.

Example 9.2                                                                            Figure 9.13
                                                                                       Circuit for Example 9.2.
         Determine the rate of change of current through the inductor in the circuit
         of Figure 9.13. Also determine the inductor's current 10 microseconds after
         power is switched on.

     From Equation 9.9, the rate of change of current is:

     didt = vL
     di = 10V
     dt 50 mH
     didt = 200 A per second

     In other words, for every second, the current rises another 200 amps. Thus,
     after just 10 microseconds it will have risen to 200 A/s times 10 s, or 2 mA.

302
Equation 9.8 is key to understanding the behavior of inductors. As noted previously,
if an inductor is driven by a fixed voltage source and ignoring Rcoil, the current
through it rises at the constant rate of v/L. This change in current through the
inductor is not limitless. An instantaneous change requires that di/dt is infinite, and
thus, the voltage driving the inductor would also have to be infinite, which is a clear
impossibility. Therefore we can state a particularly important characteristic of
capacitors:

         The current through an inductor cannot change instantaneously. (9.10)

This observation will be central to analyzing the operation of inductors in DC
circuits.

9.3 Initial and Steady-State Analysis of RL Circuits

When analyzing resistor-inductor circuits, remember that current through an
inductor cannot change instantaneously as this would require an infinite voltage
source. When a circuit is first energized, the current through the inductor will still be
zero, which is characteristic of opens. Once at steady-state, the current has leveled
out and therefore the voltage across the inductor will approach zero, which is
characteristic of shorts. Thus, we can state the general behavior of inductors at the
beginning and ending of the charge cycle:

     For DC analysis, initially inductors appear as opens.  (9.11)

     At steady-state, inductors appear as shorts.           (9.12)

This is the opposite of what was seen with capacitors. For example, in the circuit of
Figure 9.14, initially L is open, leaving us with R1 and R2 in series with the source, E.
At steady-state, L shorts out, leaving R1 in series with the parallel combination of R2
and R3. All practical inductors will exhibit some internal resistance, so it is often best
to think of an inductor as an ideal inductance with a small resistance (Rcoil) in series
with it.

                                                                                            Figure 9.14
                                                                                            Basic RL circuit.

303
Example 9.3                                                                           Figure 9.15
                                                                                      Circuit for Example 9.3.
         Assuming the initial current through the inductor is zero in the circuit of
         Figure 9.15, determine the voltage across the 2 k resistor when power
         is applied and after the circuit has reached steady-state. Draw each of the
         equivalent circuits.

         First, we'll redraw the circuit for the initial-state equivalent. To do so,
         open the inductor. The new equivalent is shown in Figure 9.16. By
         opening the inductor, the 6 k resistor has been removed from the circuit
         and sees no voltage. What we are left with is a voltage divider between
         the source and the 1 k and 2 k resistors.

                                                                                      Figure 9.16
                                                                                      Initial-state equivalent of the
                                                                                      circuit of Figure 9.15.

Using the voltage divider rule,

            V 2k = E Rx
                        Rx+R y

            V 2k = 25 V 2 k  2 k +1 k 
            V 2k  16.67 V

For steady-state, we redraw using a short in place of the inductor, as shown
in Figure 9.17. Here we have another voltage divider, this time between the
1 k resistor and the parallel combination of 2 k and 6 k, or 1.5 k.

                                                                                      Figure 9.17
                                                                                      Steady-state equivalent of the
                                                                                      circuit of Figure 9.15.

                      V 2k = E Rx
                                  Rx+R y

                     V 2k = 25 V 1.5 k  1.5 k +1 k 
                     V 2k = 15V

304
Computer Simulation

To verify the results of Example 9.3, the circuit is entered into a simulator as shown
in Figure 9.18. A DC operating point analysis is run and the results are shown in
Figure 9.19.

                                                                                                                   Figure 9.18
                                                                                                                   Circuit of Figure 9.15 in a
                                                                                                                   simulator.

The steady-state potential at node 2 corresponds to the voltage across the 2 k
resistor and agrees with the theoretical calculation of 15 volts. Note that node 3 is
also 15 volts, indicating that the steady-state voltage across the inductor is zero,
meaning it is behaving as a short, exactly as expected.

                                                                                                                   Figure 9.19
                                                                                                                   Simulation results for the
                                                                                                                   circuit of Figure 9.15.

305
9.4 Initial and Steady-State Analysis of RLC Circuits

When analyzing resistor-inductor-capacitor circuits, remember that capacitor voltage
cannot change instantaneously, thus, initially, capacitors behave as a short circuit.
Once the capacitor has been charged and is in a steady-state condition, it behaves
like an open. This is opposite of the inductor. As we have seen, initially an inductor
behaves like an open, but once steady-state is reached, it behaves like a short. For
example, in the circuit of Figure 9.20, initially L is open and C is a short, leaving us
with R1 and R2 in series with the source, E. At steady-state, L shorts out both C and
R2, leaving all of E to drop across R1. For improved accuracy, replace the inductor
with an ideal inductance in series with the corresponding Rcoil value. Similarly,
practical capacitors can be thought of as an ideal capacitance in parallel with a very
large (leakage) resistance.

                                                                                                                   Figure 9.20
                                                                                                                   Basic RLC circuit.

Example 9.4                                                                           Figure 9.21
                                                                                      Circuit for Example 9.4.
         Assuming the initial current through the inductor is zero and the capacitor
         is uncharged in the circuit of Figure 9.21, determine the current
         through the 2 k resistor when power is applied and after the circuit
         has reached steady-state. Draw each of the equivalent circuits.

         For the initial-state equivalent we open the inductor and short the
         capacitor. The new equivalent is shown in Figure 9.22. The shorted
         capacitor removes everything to its right from the circuit. All that's left
         is the source and the 2 k resistor.

                                                                                      Figure 9.22
                                                                                      Initial-state equivalent of the
                                                                                      circuit of Figure 9.21.

     We can find the current through the 2 k resistor using Ohm's law.

306
                      I 2k = ER
                      I 2k = 14 V 2 k 
                      I 2k = 7 mA

         Steady-state is redrawn in Figure 9.23, using a short in place of the inductor,
         and an open for the capacitor. We are left with a resistance of 2 k in series
         with the parallel combination of 1 k and 4 k, or 2.8 k in total.

                                                                                                                   Figure 9.23
                                                                                                                   Steady-state equivalent of the
                                                                                                                   circuit of Figure 9.21.

                       I2k = ER
                      I 2k = 14 V 2.8 k 
                      I 2k = 5 mA

9.5 Transient Response of RL Circuits

The transient response of RL circuits is nearly the mirror image of that for RC
circuits. To appreciate this, consider the circuit of Figure 9.24.

                                                                                                                   Figure 9.24
                                                                                                                   RL circuit for transient
                                                                                                                   response analysis.

Again, the key to this analysis is to remember that inductor current cannot change
instantaneously. When power is first applied, the circulating current must remain at
zero. Therefore no voltage drop is produced across the resistor, and by KVL, the
voltage across the inductor must equal the source, E. This establishes the initial rate
of change of current via Equation 9.9 (di/dt = E/L) and is represented by the dashed
red line in the graph of Figure 9.25. As the current starts to increase, the voltage drop
across the resistor begins to increase. This reduces the voltage available for the
inductor, thus slowing the rate of change of current. This is depicted by the solid red

307
                    curve on the graph. Meanwhile, the solid blue curve represents the decreasing
                    inductor voltage. Thus, in the RL circuit, the inductor's voltage curve echoes the RC
                    circuit's current curve (or resistor voltage curve), and the RL current curve echoes
                    the RC circuit's capacitor voltage curve.

                    The curves presented in Figure 9.25 are identical to those presented in Chapter 8       Figure 9.25
                    when we discussed capacitors. They are reproduced here for your convenience.            Normalized charge and
                                                                                                            discharge curves.
                                                     Normalized Charge/Discharge Curves

                       100

                    80

Percent of Maximum  60

                    40

                    20

                    0   0         1  2                                     3                            4   5

                                        Time Constants

                    As noted before, the rate of current change versus time is equal to v/L, and therefore
                    in this case, E/L. If the initial rate of change were to continue unabated, the
                    maximum (steady-state) current, E/R, would be reached in L/R seconds22. Therefore
                    the time constant for an RL circuit is:

                            = LR                                                                (9.13)

                    Once again, five constants will achieve steady-state.

                    22 Which is to say, E/L amps per second times L/R seconds yields E/R amps.
                    308
Following the prior work on capacitors, the relevant equations for the RL circuit can
be shown to be23:

                                        t           (9.14)
                                     -

             V L(t ) = E 

             V  R(t)  =  E   (1  -           -   t  (9.15)

                                                 )

             I (t ) =  E  (  1  -          -  t  )  (9.16)
                                              

                       R

     Where
     VL(t) is the inductor voltage at time t,
     VR(t) is the resistor voltage at time t,
     I(t) is the current at time t,
     E is the source voltage,
     R is the series resistance,
     t is the time of interest,
      is the time constant,
      (also written e) is the base of natural logarithms, approximately 2.718.

Time for an example.

Example 9.5

     Given the circuit of Figure 9.26, assume the switch is closed at time t = 0.          Figure 9.26
     Determine the charging time constant, the amount of time after the switch             Circuit for Example 9.5.
     is closed before the circuit reaches steady-state, and the inductor voltage and
     current at t = 0, t = 2 microseconds and t = 1 millisecond. Assume the
     inductor is initially uncharged.

     First, the time constant:

              = LR
              = 400 H

                   150 
               2.667 s

         Steady-state will be reached in five time constants, or approximately 13.33
         microseconds. Thus we know that VL(0) = 9 volts and VL(1 ms) = 0 volts.
         Because the inductor is an open initially, IL(0) = 0 amps. At IL(1 ms), the
         circuit is in steady-state and the inductor acts like a short. Therefore, all of
         the 9 volt source drops across the 150  resistor, for 60 mA.

23 See also Appendix C.

309
     To find VL(2 s) we simply solve Equation 9.14.

         V -t L(t ) = E  

                                       - 2s

     V L(2 s) = 9 V  2.667 s
     V L(2 s) 4.251 V

     This value can also be determined graphically from Figure 9.25. The time of
     2 microseconds represents 75% of a time constant. Find this value on the
     horizontal axis and then track straight up to the solid blue curve that
     represents the charging inductor voltage. The point of intersection is right
     around 47% of the maximum value on the vertical axis. The maximum value
     here is the source voltage of 9 volts. Therefore the inductor will have
     reached approximately 47% of 9 volts, or just over 4.2 volts.

     The current can be found in a similar manner using Equation 9.16.

     I L(t ) = ER (1 - - t)

     ( ) I L(2 s) = 9 V
     150             - 2s

           1 -  2.667 s

                                                      -0.75

     I L(2  s) = 60 mA (1 -  )

     I L(2  s) = 31.66 mA

Computer Simulation

To verify our analysis, the circuit of Figure 9.26 is entered into a simulator, as shown
in Figure 9.27. In order to reflect the notion of a time-varying circuit with a switch,
the 9 volt DC voltage source has been replaced with a rectangular pulse voltage
source. This source starts at 0 volts and then immediately steps up to 9 volts. It stays
at this level for 20 microseconds before dropping back to 0 volts.

                                                                                                                   Figure 9.27
                                                                                                                   The circuit of Figure 9.26 in a
                                                                                                                   simulator.

310
The results of a transient analysis are shown in Figure 9.28. The waveform shown
tracks the inductor's voltage at node 2 with respect to ground.

                                                                                                                   Figure 9.28
                                                                                                                   Simulation results for the
                                                                                                                   circuit of Figure 9.26.

We can see that the voltage starts at 9 volts as expected. It then falls back to zero and
is at steady-state in less than 15 microseconds, just as predicted. At 20
microseconds, the pulse source returns to zero volts. At this instant, the current
through the inductor must still be the steady-state current of 60 milliamps. This
current will still be flowing in a clockwise direction, thus it will produce a 9 volt
drop across the 150  resistor with a + to - polarity from left to right. This
effectively places node 2 negative with respect to ground. The result is that the
polarity of the inductor's voltage flips, with the inductor now acting as a short-lived
source. We see this on the transient analysis as a negative 9 volt spike. The discharge
time constant is identical to the charge constant, and thus we see the inductor's
voltage fall back to zero in the same amount of time.

Example 9.6                                                                                Figure 9.29
                                                                                           Circuit for Example 9.6.
         Given the circuit of Figure 9.29, find VL at t = 1 microsecond after the
         circuit is energized. Assume the inductor is initially uncharged.

     First, the time constant:

      = LR
      = 6 mH

          15 k 
      = 400 ns

311
     Steady-state will be reached in five time constants, or 2 microseconds, at
     which point the inductor voltage will be zero as it will be behaving as a
     short. In contrast, as the inductor is initially an open (IL(0) = 0), all of the
     current from the source will flow into the 15 k resistor, producing 30 volts
     across this parallel network. Therefore, we can state that VL(0) = 30 volts
     and VL(2 s) = 0 volts, defining the extremes. In order to find VL(1 s), we
     can use Equation 9.14.

                                       t
                                   -

        V L(t)= E 

                                         - 1s

     V L(1  s) = 30 V  0.4 s
     V L(1  s) 2.463 V

     There are a few different ways to crosscheck this value. For starters, we can
     determine the inductor current using a slight modification of Equation 9.16
     (the current source value is used in place of E/R as the equation effectively
     requires the maximum or steady-state current).

     I  L(t)  =  I  (1  -    -t  )

                           

              ( ) - 1s

     I L(1 s) = 2 mA 1 -  0.4 s

     I L(1 s) = 1.836 mA

     The inductor voltage of 2.463 volts would also have to appear across the
     parallel 15 k resistor. This produces 2.463 V / 15 k, or 0.164 mA of
     resistor current. By KCL, the remainder of the 2 mA source current must be
     flowing down through the inductor. This yields a net inductor current of
     2 mA - 0.164 mA, or 1.836 mA, verifying our prior result.

Example 9.6 also reinforces the concept of the time constant being inversely
proportional to the resistance, rather than directly proportional as in the RC case. In
the circuit of Figure 9.29, it should be obvious that the larger the resistance value,
the larger the resulting initial-state voltage. From Equation 9.9 it can be seen that if
the voltage across the inductor is increased, then the initial rate of change of current
with respect to time will increase, and that implies a shorter time constant.

For more complex circuits, Thévenin's theorem may be used in order to determine
the effective source voltage and charging resistance. As we saw with RC circuits, it's
also possible that the discharge resistance may be considerably different from the
charging resistance. In such a case, the charge and discharge curves can be highly
asymmetric in both time and amplitude. Generally, the larger the discharge
resistance is when compared to the charge resistance, the larger in voltage and the
shorter in time the discharge spike will be (think in terms of the area under the curve
staying constant).

312
Example 9.7                                                                         Figure 9.30
                                                                                    Circuit for Example 9.7.
         Assume the initial current through the inductor is zero in Figure 9.30.
         Determine the time constant. Also, determine the inductor voltage
         and the voltage across the 6 k resistor 200 nanoseconds after the
         switch is closed.

     This circuit is based on the circuit presented in Figure 9.15 as used
     in Example 9.3. In that analysis it was discovered that the steady-
     state voltage for the 6 k and 2 k resistors was 15 volts, the pair
     being in parallel. Further, the initial voltage across the 2 k resistor
     and the inductor was 16.67 volts and for the 6 k resistor, 0 volts.

     For the Thévenin circuit, the open circuit voltage at the inductor would be
     the potential across the 2 k resistor, which is obtained from a voltage
     divider between it and the 1 k resistor, or 16.67 volts. The equivalent
     resistance is obtained by shorting the voltage source which leaves the 1 k
     and 2 k resistors in parallel, which is then in series with the 6 k resistor,
     yielding approximately 6.667 k. The equivalent is shown in Figure 9.31.

                                                                                    Figure 9.31
                                                                                    Thévenin equivalent of the
                                                                                    circuit of Figure 9.30 driving
                                                                                    the inductor.

     Immediately, we can see that the initial-state voltage across the inductor is
     confirmed in the equivalent circuit. We can now determine the time constant.

                  = LR
                  = 1 mH

                       6.667 k 
                  = 150 ns

     Steady-state will be reached in 750 nanoseconds. To find the inductor
     voltage we can use Equation 9.14.

                                                                t
                                                             -

                       V L(t)= E 

                                                                        - 200 ns

                 V L(200 ns) = 16.67 V  150 ns
                 V L(200 ns) 4.39 V

313
Referring back to the original circuit, in order to determine the voltage
across the 6 k resistor we can find the current through it and use Ohm's
law. The current would be the same as the inductor's current as the two are
in series. Thus, Equation 9.16 would do the trick.

              I L(t) = ER (1 - -t )

               ( ) 16.67 V
I L(200 ns) =            1-          - 200 ns
                                       150 ns

               6.667 k 

                                                       -1.333

I L(200 ns) = 2.5 mA (1 -  )

I L(200 ns)  1.841mA

And finally,

V 6k(200 ns) = I R

V 6k(200 ns) = 1.841 mA 6 k 
V 6k(200 ns)  11.05 V

Further, the voltage across the 2 k resistor must be the sum, or
approximately 15.44 volts.

Computer Simulation

The results of Example 9.7 are crosschecked in a simulator. Once again the circuit is
built using a pulse generator, as shown in Figure 9.32.

                                                                                                                   Figure 9.32
                                                                                                                   Circuit of Figure 9.30 in a
                                                                                                                   simulator.

A transient analysis is run out to 1 microsecond which is modestly into steady-state.
Node voltages 2 and 3 are plotted, as shown in Figure 9.33. The initial voltage
across the 2 k resistor (node 2) is as predicted, approximately 16.7 volts, and falls
to 15 volts at steady-state, approximately 750 nanoseconds later. The voltage across
the 6 k resistor (node 2) starts at zero volts and also winds up at 15 volts in steady-
state, just as predicted. Further, note that the predicted voltages across the 2 k and
6 k resistors at 200 nanoseconds are verified.

314
                                                                                                                   Figure 9.33
                                                                                                                   Transient analysis simulation of
                                                                                                                   the circuit of Figure 9.30.

The voltage across the inductor is node 2 minus node 3. This differential is plotted
separately in Figure 9.34. The expected initial, steady-state and 200 nanosecond
voltages are as predicted.

                                                                                                                   Figure 9.34
                                                                                                                   Simulation of the inductor
                                                                                                                   voltage versus time for the
                                                                                                                   circuit of Figure 9.30.

315
One very important observation is that if an RL circuit is abruptly altered or opened,
very large voltage spikes may occur. This is due to the fact that inductor current
cannot change instantaneously. If the circuit is opened, the open represents a very
large resistance. Ohm's law indicates that the inductor current times this very large
resistance may produce a very large voltage across the new open. In fact, the
potential may be sufficient to cause a spark or arc. Note that because the current
cannot change instantaneously (both magnitude and direction), the inductor now
behaves as a voltage source of very high magnitude and with reverse polarity. This
phenomenon is used to create the ignition spark in internal combustion engines. In
short, the ignition coil is charged, creating some current flow. The circuit is then
interrupted leaving just the coil in series with the spark plug, the spark plug being
little more than a precisely sized gap between two electrodes. This results in a large
voltage being developed across the spark plug gap, typically in the neighborhood of
20,000 volts, which is sufficient to create a small arc (i.e., the spark) that then ignites
the air-fuel mixture in the piston.

An example of producing a discharge voltage spike that is considerably larger than
the source voltage can be illustrated with the circuit of Figure 9.35. We shall assume
that the inductor is initially uncharged when power is applied, and that the switch is
in position 1. In this case, the circuit consists of just the 12 volt source, the 2.2 k
resistor, and the inductor. The circuit reaches steady-state in roughly 227
nanoseconds. At that point the inductor behaves as a short, leaving the full 12 volt
source to drop across the 2.2 k resistor. This produces a clockwise current of
approximately 5.455 mA.

                                                                                                                   Figure 9.35
                                                                                                                   Circuit illustrating large
                                                                                                                   discharge voltage spike.

If we now move the switch to position 2, this current must be maintained because
the current through the inductor cannot change instantaneously. The new discharge
resistance is now the series combination of the two resistors, or 49.2 k. Ohm's law
and KVL dictate that the resulting inductor voltage must be 49.2 k times 5.455 mA,
or just beyond -268 volts. This potential is negative because the clockwise current is
flowing up through the 47 k resistor, producing a drop + to - from ground up. The
increased resistance also shortens the time constant and now steady-state will be
reached in only 10.1 nanoseconds. Thus, we see a much larger magnitude spike
(over twenty times that of the source voltage) with a much shorter time duration
(less than one-twentieth of the charge time).

316
Depending on the kind of switch that is used, things can be even more extreme than
what has been just described. Switches come in two basic varieties: make-before-
break and break-before-make. The former makes contact with the second position
before it breaks contact with the first position, while the latter does the opposite. The
behavior just described assumes that a make-before-break switch is being used. In
contrast, if a break-before-make switch is used, we'd see a drastically different
result.

Let us pick up back at steady-state with 5.455 mA flowing through the inductor. We
now throw the switch to position 2. This new switch breaks contact with the wire
leading back to voltage source prior to it making contact with the 47 k resistor. For
a short instant of time the switch is not making contact with anything and the
resulting resistance in the loop is determined by the air gap between the switch
contacts. Even if this was a mere 10 M, the resulting potential would be over
50,000 volts. This will almost certainly create a spark and we will have inadvertently
recreated the spark plug scenario. Hopefully, there are no combustible gases nearby.

9.6 Summary

The inductor is a device that stores energy in the form of a magnetic field.
Inductance, L, is measured in henries, H. The idealized device consists of several
loops or coils of wire. These may or may not be wrapped around a magnetic core
material. Inductance is directly proportional to the permeability of the core material
and the cross sectional area of the loops, and inversely proportional to the length of
the coil. It is also proportional to the square of the number of loops. The most
important non-ideal parameter is Rcoil, or equivalent coil resistance. Ideally, this value
is zero. Absolute accuracy, temperature stability and similar parameters round out
the distinguishing features of one kind of inductor against another. When placed in
series, inductors add in the same manner as resistors in series. When placed in
parallel, inductors combine like resistors in parallel.

Perhaps the most important operational characteristic regarding inductors is that
current through an inductor cannot change instantaneously. It will take some finite
amount of time before the magnetic field reacts, leading to a predictable rise in
current through it. Because of this, for DC circuits inductors initially behave like
opens, but after sufficient time has passed, they behave like shorts. The amount of
time required to reach steady-state is five time constants, where one time constant is
defined as the inductance divided by the circuit's effective resistance. The current
charge curve is of the shape 1--t. The inductor's current starts at zero and rises to
some maximum value. The corresponding voltage shape is of the form -t. Here, the
voltage starts at a maximum and eventually approaches zero as time passes.

317
Review Questions

    1. What are the physical characteristics of inductors and how do they affect
         inductance?

    2. Define the voltage-current characteristic for inductors.
    3. What is Rcoil?
    4. How do inductors combine when placed in series? How do they combine

         when placed in parallel?
    5. Define the initial and steady-state behavior of inductors.
    6. Define time constant for an RL circuit.
    7. How do the charge and discharge characteristics of RL circuits compare to

         those of RC circuits?

9.7 Exercises

Analysis

    1. For the circuit shown in Figure 9.36, determine the effective inductance.
                                                                                Figure 9.36

    2. Determine the effective inductance of the network shown in Figure 9.37.
                                                                                Figure 9.37

    3. Given the inductor network shown in Figure 9.38, determine the effective
         value.
                                                                                Figure 9.38

318
    4. Determine the effective inductance of network shown in Figure 9.39.
                                                                                Figure 9.39

    5. Determine the initial voltage across each component for the circuit shown in
         Figure 9.40.
                                                                                Figure 9.40

    6. Given the network shown in Figure 9.40, determine the steady-state voltage
         across each component.

    7. Given the network shown in Figure 9.41, determine the steady-state voltage
         across each component.
                                                                                Figure 9.41

    8. Determine the initial voltage across each component for the circuit shown in
         Figure 9.41.

    9. Given the network shown in Figure 9.42, determine the steady-state voltage
         across each component.
                                                                                Figure 9.42

319
    10. Determine the initial voltage across each component for the circuit shown in
         Figure 9.42.

    11. Determine the initial voltage across each component for the circuit shown in
         Figure 9.43.
                                                                                Figure 9.43

    12. Given the network shown in Figure 9.43, determine the steady-state voltage
         across each component.

    13. Given the network shown in Figure 9.44, determine the steady-state voltage
         across each component.
                                                                                Figure 9.44

    14. Determine the initial voltage across each component for the circuit shown in
         Figure 9.44.

    15. For the circuit shown in Figure 9.45, determine the inductor current 20
         microseconds after the power is switched on. Assume this is an ideal
         inductor with no internal resistance.
                                                                                Figure 9.45

320
    16. For the circuit shown in Figure 9.46, determine the inductor current 100
         milliseconds after the power is switched on. Assume this is an ideal inductor
         with no internal resistance.
                                                                                Figure 9.46

    17. Determine the time constant and the time required to reach steady-state for
         the circuit shown in Figure 9.47.
                                                                                Figure 9.47

    18. Determine the time constant and the time required to reach steady-state for
         the circuit shown in Figure 9.48.
                                                                                Figure 9.48

    19. Given the circuit shown in Figure 9.37, determine the inductor voltage and
         circulating current 200 milliseconds and 2 seconds after the switch is
         thrown. How does this change if we include 5  of internal resistance to the
         inductor?

    20. For the circuit shown in Figure 9.48, determine the inductor voltage and
         circulating current 50 nanoseconds and 100 milliseconds after the switch is
         thrown.

321
    21. Determine the time constant and the time required to reach steady-state for
         the circuit shown in Figure 9.49, switch position 1.
                                                                                Figure 9.49

    22. Determine the charge and discharge time constants for the circuit shown in
         Figure 9.50.
                                                                                Figure 9.50

    23. Given the circuit shown in Figure 9.49, determine the inductor current 1
         millisecond after the power is turned on. At this point, the switch is thrown
         to position 2. Determine the inductor voltage the instant of switch contact
         (assume ideal switch).

    24. For the circuit shown in Figure 9.50, determine the inductor current 400
         microseconds after the power is turned on. At this point, the switch is
         thrown to position 2. Determine the inductor voltage the instant of switch
         contact (assume ideal switch).

    25. Determine the time constant and the time required to reach steady-state for
         the circuit shown in Figure 9.51, switch position 1.
                                                                                Figure 9.51

322
    26. Given the circuit shown in Figure 9.51, determine both the inductor current
         and voltage 10 milliseconds after the power is turned on. At this point, the
         switch is thrown to position 2. Determine how long it will take the inductor
         to discharge to nearly zero amps. Assume ideal switch.

Design

    27. For Figure 9.47, determine a new resistor value such that steady-state is
         reached in 2 milliseconds.

    28. For Figure 9.48, determine a new inductor value such that steady-state is
         reached in 5 microseconds.

Challenge

    29. Determine the time constant and the time required to reach steady-state for
         the circuit shown in Figure 9.52.
                                                                                Figure 9.52

    30. For the circuit shown in Figure 9.52, determine the inductor voltage 400
         microseconds after the power is turned on. At this point, the switch is
         thrown to position 2. Determine how long it will take the inductor to
         discharge to nearly zero amps. Assume ideal switch.

Simulation

    31. Use a transient analysis to verify the time constant and time to steady-state
         of Figure 9.48 (problem 18).

    32. Use a transient analysis to verify the inductor voltage waveform of
         Figure 9.47 as specified in problem 19.

323
10 Magnetic Circuits and Transformers

10.0 Chapter Learning Objectives

After completing this chapter, you should be able to:

    · Describe the basic quantities of a magnetic circuit including magnetic flux, flux density and
         magnetizing force.

    · Outline a BH curve and define aspects including hysteresis, coercivity and retentivity.
    · Analyze basic magnetic circuits using BH curves.
    · Describe the uses and operation of transformers.
    · Analyze basic transformer circuits.

10.1 Introduction

This chapter extends the material presented in the chapter on inductors and introduces the concept of magnetic
circuits. Basic applications are also illustrated. Here we shall take a closer look at the parameters of magnetic
circuits such as permeability and flux density, and introduce new parameters including reluctance and
magnetizing force. We shall also examine a key graphic that helps define the magnetic properties of materials,
namely the BH curve. In the process we shall define new terms including coercivity and retentivity, and
introduce the concept of hysteresis.

As we shall see, there are certain parallels between magnetic circuits and electrical circuits. For example, there
is an "Ohm's law for magnetic circuits", sometimes referred to as Hopkinson's law. There is also a version of
Kirchhoff's voltage law dealing with the magnetic equivalents of voltage rises and drops.

Perhaps the two most common applications of magnetic circuits for the new student involve the use of
transformers and relays, both of which will be examined in this chapter. Other common applications include
dynamic loudspeakers and microphones, magnetic resonance imaging (i.e., medical MRI), pick-up cartridges for
vinyl phonographs and the various applications made available by magnetic Hall effect sensors such as
advanced anti-lock braking systems, timing control systems for internal combustion engines, and other instances
requiring position and motion sensing. These magnetic devices tend to be much more reliable and capable than
simple devices such as mechanical switches. This does not mean that magnetic systems are in some way "taking
over", indeed, there are some applications where they have become obsolete. One example is the use of output
transformers to couple a home audio power amplifier to a loudspeaker. At one time, these were an integral part
of every design, however, today they generally are not used. With this in mind, it is perhaps best to think of
magnetic circuits as another item in the engineer's or technician's toolkit to help solve practical problems.

324
10.2 Electromagnetic Induction

Perhaps the most important observation regarding magnetic systems is Faraday's law
of electromagnetic induction. Briefly, it states:

     If a conductor is cut by changing magnetic lines of force,  (10.1)
     a voltage will be induced in the conductor.

More specifically,

                    e =- d  dt                                   (10.2)

     Where
     e is the induced voltage,
     d/dt is the rate of change of magnetic flux with respect to time.

Therefore, the larger the flux and the more quickly it fluctuates, the greater the
induced voltage. What is important here is a relative change with respect to the
conductor and field. This can be accomplished in two basic ways: by a magnetic
field that is itself fluctuating around a fixed conductor, or by a conductor moving
through a magnetic field.

The concept of electromagnetic induction is a key element of a variety of
transducers. Simply put,

     A transducer is a device that transforms energy             (10.3)
     from one type to another.

Although many people don't think of them as such, electric motors and generators
are perfect examples of transducers. An electric motor transforms electrical energy
into mechanical energy and a generator does the precise opposite, transforming
mechanical energy into electrical energy. More commonly, the word transducer is
associated with devices such as loudspeakers and microphones. A loudspeaker
transforms its electrical input into an acoustic pressure wave (sound) whereas the
microphone performs the complementary function of transforming an acoustic
pressure wave into an electrical signal. While there are different ways of
constructing these devices, the most common designs are the dynamic loudspeaker
and dynamic microphone, both of which rely on the principle of electromagnetic
induction. The designs of the two devices are strikingly similar, mostly varying in
size and parts optimization. Let's take a closer look at how they operate.

325
Dynamic Loudspeakers and Microphones

Regardless of their output capabilities and frequency range, all dynamic
loudspeakers share a common set of elements. Corresponding elements can be found
in dynamic microphones. Indeed, the devices are so similar that in some
applications, small loudspeakers might pull double duty and switch over to a
microphone mode of operation. A cutaway view of a loudspeaker designed to
reproduce low frequencies is shown in Figure 10.1.

                                                                                                                   Figure 10.1
                                                                                                                   Cutaway view of a dynamic
                                                                                                                   loudspeaker.
                                                                                                                   A. Frame
                                                                                                                   B. Suspension
                                                                                                                   C. Lead wire
                                                                                                                   D. Spider
                                                                                                                   E. Magnet
                                                                                                                   F. Diaphragm
                                                                                                                   G. Voice coil former
                                                                                                                   H. Voice coil
                                                                                                                   I. Dust cap

                                                                                                                                                Image courtesy of Audio Technology.

The heart of the system is a voice coil (H) which is a coil of tightly wound magnet
wire. This sits inside of a magnetic field that is created by a powerful permanent
magnet (E). The voice coil is connected to a diaphragm (F) that is is usually made of
paper or plastic. This assembly is connected to the frame by the spider (D) at the top
of the voice coil, and a suspension at the end of the diaphragm (B). The voice coil
and diaphragm can move back and forth relative to the frame, like a piston.

To understand the operation, recall that passing a current through a coil of wire           Figure 10.2
creates a magnetic field around the coil, as illustrated in Figure 10.2. This magnetic      Magnetic field around a coil.
field is the same as is created by a normal magnet. In this case the north pole is on
the left side (i.e., lines of force exiting). Consequently, this coil will interact with a  Image ©, courtesy of HyperPhysics
permanent magnet just like any other magnet would. In the case of the
loudspeaker, the voice coil is fed a current from the amplifier that echoes the
music or voice signal. This current creates a magnetic field around the voice coil
which interacts with the field of the permanent magnet. As the direction of the
current changes, the poles of the voice coil's field reverse. Thus, sometimes the
voice coil is pushed outward and sometimes it is pulled inward. Further, the larger
the current, the greater the field it creates, and the greater the push or pull.

326
This results in a back-and-forth motion of the diaphragm that echoes the shape of the
waveform being fed from the amplifier. As the diaphragm pushes against the air, it
sets up a pressure wave, and we have sound.

A dynamic microphone runs the sequence in reverse. First, the diaphragm will move
back and forth in accordance to an applied sound wave. This causes the voice coil to
move back and forth within the field of the permanent magnet. We now have a coil
of wire being cut by magnetic lines of force, and by Faraday's law of induction, this
means that a voltage will be induced in the coil. As long as the diaphragm can
respond to the subtle changes in the acoustic pressure wave, then the resulting
induced voltage should be of high fidelity. Clearly, to do this with great accuracy, the
diaphragm/voice coil/suspension assembly will need to very light and nimble,
meaning that the components of the microphone will tend to be much smaller than
those of a loudspeaker.

Electric Guitar Pickup

A set of pickups for an electric guitar is shown in Figure 10.3. Although it might be       Figure 10.3
tempting to think that the pickups are just microphones, they are not. If you have          Pickups on an electric guitar.
any doubt of this statement, just try screaming into a guitar pickup and listen to
what comes out24. The operation of the guitar pickup does, however, rely on
Faraday's law.

As discussed in the prior chapter covering inductance, an electric guitar pickup
consists of thousands of turns of very fine wire around a permanent magnet. The
pickup is placed immediately below the guitar strings. In this position, the metal
guitar strings (generally various combinations of steel, nickel and/or cobalt), are
within the field generated by the magnet. When a string is plucked, it vibrates in a
complex pattern that depends on the note it is tuned to and the overtones that are
present. This pattern distorts the magnetic field because the strings have a much
higher permeability than the air around them. We now have a changing magnetic
field, in the middle of which is large coil of wire. Faraday's law states that a voltage
must be induced in this coil, and that it will follow the motions of the strings. This
induced voltage is then fed to an amplifier, hopefully, set to 11.

The astute observer might ask, "Why are there multiple pickups?" Perhaps
surprisingly, it is not to get a larger, and thus louder, signal. It has to do with the
timbre, or tone quality, of the sound. When a guitar string vibrates, its motion can be
thought of as containing the myriad motions of the fundamental pitch and all of the
overtones that go with it. Towards the bridge, where the strings are attached, the
lowest pitched elements produce little motion, and thus their strength in the overall
signal is reduced. The result is that a pickup placed closer to the bridge sounds
"thin" or "cutting" while one placed further up sounds "full" or "thick".

24 A little string resonance if you're lucky, and some irritated band-mates if you're not.
327
Bicycle Computer

Our third and final illustrative example is that of a bicycle computer. These handy             Figure 10.4
little devices consist of a small sensor system on the front wheel which is                     Bicycle computer sensor and
connected to a display unit mounted on the handlebars. Typically, these units will              magnet.
display current speed, average speed, elapsed time, distance covered, and other
attributes of interest.

The sensing apparatus of a typical bicycle computer is shown in Figure 10.4. This
apparatus consists of two parts: a permanent magnet mounted to one of the wheel
spokes, and a weatherproof sensing unit mounted to the front fork. The principle of
operation is fairly straightforward: each time the while rotates, the magnet attached
to the spoke swings by the sensor. The moving magnetic field creates a short-lived
voltage spike in the sensor, an example shown in Figure 10.5. The computer records
these spikes over time. Knowing the circumference of the wheel, a simple
multiplication yields the accumulated distance traversed. Given internal clocking
circuitry, the time recorded between the pulses can be turned into a velocity. Given
these data, other attributes such as average or maximum speed are easily obtained
with further computation.

                                                                                                Figure 10.5
                                                                                                Sensor signal feeding bicycle
                                                                                                computer.

Using the oscilloscope trace shown in Figure 10.5 as an example, we can see that the
time between the pulses is about 3.5 divisions, with each division being 200
milliseconds in length. This gives one rotation every 0.7 seconds, or roughly 5140
revolutions per hour. The sensor was mounted on a bike with 700 by 25 mm tires
which yields a circumference of about 2.1 meters. Thus, the velocity would be 5140
revolutions per hour at 2.1 meters per revolution, or about 10.8 km/h ( 6.73 MPH).25

25 In reality, the bike was mounted on a maintenance stand so its velocity was, in fact, zero.
    Running alongside a bike with an oscilloscope and probes is no easy feat, especially
    when the scope needs AC power.

328
10.3 Magnetic Circuits

Magnetic circuits include applications such as transformers and relays. A very           Figure 10.6
simple magnetic circuit is shown in Figure 10.6. First, it consists of a magnetic        Simple magnetic circuit.
core. The core may be comprised of a single material such as sheet steel but can
also use multiple sections and air gap(s). Around the core is at least one set of turns
of wire, i.e., a coil formed around the core. Multiple sets of turns are used for
transformers (in the simplest case, one for the primary and another for the
secondary). As we have seen already, passing current through the windings generates
a magnetic flux, , in the core. As this flux is constrained within the cross sectional
area of the core, A, we can derive a flux density, B.

              B = A                             (10.4)

     Where
     B is the magnetic flux density in teslas,
      is the magnetic flux in webers,
     A is the area in square meters.

Recall from Chapter 9 that one tesla is defined as one weber per square meter. An
alternate unit that is sometimes used is gauss (cgs system of units), named after Carl
Friedrich Gauss, the German mathematician and scientist.

              1 tesla = 10,000 gauss            (10.5)

Example 10.1

     A magnetic flux of 6E-5 webers exists in a core whose cross section has
     dimensions of 1 centimeter by 2 centimeters. Determine the flux density in
     teslas.

     First, convert the dimensions to meters to find the area. There are 100
     centimeters to the meter.

                 A = width× height
                 A = 0.01 m×0.02 m
                 A = 2E-4 m2

                 B = A
                 B = 2E-4 m2 6E-5 Wb
                 B = 0.3 T

329
Ohm's Law for Magnetic Circuits (Hopkinson's or Rowland's Law)

There is a common parallel drawn between magnetic circuits and electrical circuits,
namely Hopkinson's law (Rowland's law). For electrical circuits, Ohm's law states:

     V=IR

In like manner, for magnetic circuits, we have:

     F =R                                                             (10.6)

     Where
     F is the magnetomotive force (or MMF) in amp-turns,
      is the magnetic flux in webers,
     R is the reluctance of the material in amp-turns/weber.

The magnetomotive force compares to a source voltage or electromotive force
(EMF), the magnetic flux is likened to the flow of current, and the reluctance stands
in for resistance (i.e., on the one hand we have a material that resists the flow of
current, and on the other, a material in which there is "reluctance" to establish
magnetic flux). Further, magnetomotive force is the product of the current flowing
through a coil and the number of loops or turns in the coil:

     F =NI                                                            (10.7)

     Where
     F is the magnetomotive force in amp-turns,
     N is the number of loops or turns in the coil,
     I is the current in the coil in amps.

The equation for reluctance has a nice parallel with the equation for resistance
(Equation 2.11 from Chapter 2):

     R= l
           A

     R = l A                                                          (10.8)

     Where
     R is the reluctance in amp-turns/weber,
     l is the length of the material in meters,
     A is the cross sectional area of the material in square meters,
      is the permeability of the material in henries/meter.

330
Given the characteristics of the coil and the path length of the magnetic circuit, the
magnetic flux gives rise to a magnetizing force, H.

     H = N Il                                                               (10.9)

         Where                                                                          Figure 10.7
         H is the magnetizing force in amp-turns/meter,                                 Typical permeability curve for
         N is the number of turns or loops in the coil,                                 a high permeability material.
         I is the coil current in amps,
         l is the length of the magnetic path in meters.                                

Equation 10.8 reveals that ferromagnetic materials (i.e., materials that have high
permeability, such as steel) produce a low reluctance. The practical problem here is
that , unlike the resistivity  of resistors, is not a constant for these sorts of
materials. It can vary considerably, as seen in the general diagram presented in
Figure 10.7. As a result, it is impractical to find reluctance in same manner that we
find resistance. All is not lost, though.

The flux density and corresponding magnetizing force for any given material are
related by the following equation:

                                                                                                                                                                                       H

     B=H                                                                    (10.10)

     Where
     B is the flux density in teslas,
      is the permeability of the material in henries/meter,
     H is the magnetizing force in amp-turns/meter.

Once again, the tricky bit here is the permeability of the core material. For air, we
can use the permeability of free space, 0.

     0 = 4 × 10-7 H/m  1.257×10-6 H/m                                       (10.11)

For other materials, such as sheet steel or cast steel, we shall take another path;     Figure 10.8
namely an empirically derived curve that plots flux density B against magnetizing       Generic BH curve.
force H. Such graphs generically are referred to as "BH curves". An example is

shown in Figure 10.8. Clearly, this curve is not a nice straight line, or even an
obvious, predictable function. The immediately apparent attributes are the initial B

steep rise which is followed by a flattening of the curve. This flattening

corresponds to saturation of the magnetic material. In contrast, a plot for air would

reveal a straight line with a very shallow slope. As we shall see, being able to

achieve a high flux density for a given magnetizing force will result in an effective

and efficient magnetic circuit. So while air has the positive attribute of not

saturating, the resulting flux density is low, usually leading to lower performance.                       H

331
The BH Curve

The process of generating a BH curve is as follows. First, we create a core of the            Figure 10.9
material to be investigated. A coil of wire is then wrapped around this core. An              Toroidal core with coil.
example is shown in Figure 10.9. Here we have a basic toroid with a coil of N
turns.                                                                                          I

We begin with the system at rest and not energized. A small current, I, is applied to         N turns
the coil. This produces a magnetizing force via Equation 10.9. There will be a
corresponding flux density, as per Equation 10.10.

The current is then increased. This produces an increase in magnetizing force and a
corresponding change in flux density. The current is increased further, until the
curve flattens, indicating that saturation has been reached. This trajectory is shown
as the dashed line in Figure 10.10, starting at point a with point b indicating
saturation. The current is then reduced. This causes a reduction in magnetizing force,
but while the flux density decreases, it does not trace back perfectly along the
original trajectory. Instead, the curve is displaced above the original.

              Retentivity           B         Saturation
              (residual magnetism)      c
                                                        b

                                                                                              Figure 10.10
                                                                                              Generation of BH curve.

              d                            g

     -H                             a                               H

                                                        Coercivity

                                        f (coercive force)

     e                              -B

Eventually, the current will be reduced to zero. This corresponds to point c on the
graph of Figure 10.10. At this point, even though there is no current in the coil, there
is still flux in the core. The resulting flux density is referred to as retentivity and is a
measure of residual magnetism. This phenomenon is what makes it possible to
magnetize materials.

If we now reverse the direction of the coil current and begin to increase its
magnitude, the flux density will continue to drop. At point d, it will have reached

332
zero. As we have effectively coerced the flux back to zero, we call the magnetizing
force required to do this the coercivity or coercive force.

As the current magnitude increases, the flux density also increases but with opposite
sign. Eventually, saturation is reached again at point e. Once again, if the current's
magnitude is decreased, the magnitude of the flux density will also decrease but will
not perfectly trace back along the original trajectory. This time it will follow a lower
path. When the current is reduced to zero at point f, a mirror retentivity is evident.
Further positive increases in current show a mirror coercivity at point g. Finally, as
current is increased to maximum, we again reach saturation at point b.

If the current is cycled in this manner again, the process is repeated, and the outer
path indicated by the arrows is taken again. Thus, a specific value of magnetizing
force can give rise to different values of flux density: it depends on the recent history
of the material. This effect is known as hysteresis and is found in other areas as well.

Effectively, published BH curves follow the middle of the hysteresis loop. An                Figure 10.11
example of BH curves for three different core materials is shown in Figure 10.1126.          BH curves for:
Curve A is for sheet steel (which is common in transformers), curve B is for cast            A. Sheet steel
steel, and curve C is for cast iron. We shall make use of these in upcoming                  B. Cast steel
examples. Curves for other materials are also available.                                     C. Cast iron

B (T)

1.5

                                                                        A

1.0

                                                                       B

0.5

                                                                       C

100 200 300 400 500 600 700 H (At/m)

26 Curves based on https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saturation_(magnetic); Steinmetz (1917),
    Theory and Calculation of Electric Circuits; and Boylestad (2010), Introductory Circuit
    Analysis.

333
Example 10.2

         Assume the toroid of Figure 10.9 is made of cast steel, has a 500 turn coil, a
         cross section of 2 cm by 2 cm, and an average path length of 50 cm.
         Determine the flux in webers if a current of 0.3 amps feeds the coil.

         We shall use Equation 10.9 to find the magnetizing force and from the BH
         curve, find the flux density.

                      H = N Il
                      H = 500 turns×0.3 A

                                    0.5 m
                      H = 300 At/m (amp-turns per meter)

         Cast steel corresponds to curve B (green) in Figure 10.10. A decent estimate
         for the flux density is 0.52 teslas. This is the corresponding flux density. In
         order to find the flux, we need to find the area of the core.

                      A = width×height
                      A = 0.02 m×0.02 m
                      A = 4E-4 m2

                      = B×A
                      = 0.52 T×4E-4 m2
                      = 2.08E-4 Wb

KVL for Magnetic Circuits

A cursory examination of Equations 10.7 and 10.9 shows that:

     F =Hl=N I                                                (10.12)

Continuing the Ohm's law analogy, the amp-turns product of the coil, NI, is               Figure 10.12
analogous to a voltage rise. Further, the Hl product is analogous to a voltage drop.      Electrical circuit analogy for
If we then extend the analogy to include the concept of Kirchhoff's voltage law, it       the magnetic system of Figure
should come as no surprise that the sum of NI "rises" must equal the sum of the Hl        10.9.
"drops". In the circuit of Figure 10.9, there is a single "rise" and a single "drop".
Thus, the magnetic circuit is analogous to the minimal electric circuit shown in
Figure 10.12. F is the magnetomotive force, NI, while R is the reluctance of the
toroidal core. This reluctance will experience a "drop" of Hl.

The core could consist of two or more different materials, creating the equivalent of
a series circuit. In this case, a table such as the one found in Figure 10.13 can be

334
used to aid in computation. In this table, each section of the core gets its own row.       Figure 10.13
The table is divided into two sides (note the thick separating line in the center). In      Table format used for
general, we will be working through problems where we know the data on the left             magnetic circuit analysis.
side and need to find something on the right side, or vice versa. The bridge between
the two sides (i.e., traversing the thick line) is a BH curve for the material of that
particular section. The exception to this rule is if the section is an air gap. In that
case we can use Definition 10.11 which shows that for air, H  7.958E5 B or
alternately, B  1.257E-6 H.

Section       Flux   Area            Flux Density  Magnetizing Force              Length          "Drop"
              (Wb)   A (m2)              B (T)          H (At/m)                   l (m)          Hl (At)
   1
   2

Time for a few illustrative examples. We shall consider a simple system like that of
Figure 10.9, a two section core, a core with an air gap, and a core with two coils.

Example 10.3

     Assume the core of Figure 10.14 is made of sheet steel, has a 200 turn coil,           Figure 10.14
     a cross section of 1 cm by 1 cm, and an average path length of 12 cm.                  Magnetic system for Example
     Determine the coil current required to achieve a flux of 1E-4 webers.                  10.3.

                                                                                         I

     The analogous circuit consists of a single source and reluctance, like
     that of Figure 10.12. Thus,

              N I = H sheet l sheet                                                      N turns

     We shall begin by filling in the portions of the table that can be
     addressed directly, such as the path length, area and flux. Don't forget to
     convert the centimeter values into meters.

  Section      Flux  Area            Flux Density  Magnetizing Force              Length          "Drop"
Sheet Steel    (Wb)  A (m2)              B (T)          H (At/m)                   l (m)          Hl (At)

               1E-4  1E-4                                                          0.12

     Now we determine the flux density to complete the left side of the table.

                 B = A
                 B = 1E-4 m2 1E-4 Wb
                 B= 1T

335
  Section     Flux  Area    Flux Density  Magnetizing Force                        Length  "Drop"
Sheet Steel   (Wb)  A (m2)      B (T)          H (At/m)                             l (m)  Hl (At)

              1E-4  1E-4           1                                                0.12

     We use the BH curve of Figure 10.11 to find H from this flux density. From
     the blue curve (A) the value is about 190 amp-turns per meter.

  Section     Flux  Area    Flux Density  Magnetizing Force                        Length  "Drop"
Sheet Steel   (Wb)  A (m2)      B (T)          H (At/m)                             l (m)  Hl (At)

              1E-4  1E-4           1               190                              0.12

     At this point we find the Hl "drop" with a simple multiplication.

  Section     Flux  Area    Flux Density  Magnetizing Force                        Length  "Drop"
Sheet Steel   (Wb)  A (m2)      B (T)          H (At/m)                             l (m)  Hl (At)

              1E-4  1E-4           1               190                              0.12    22.8

     This "drop" is 22.8 amp-turns and the coil has 200 turns. Therefore the
     required current is:

                 I = H l N
                 I = 22.8At

                        200 t
                 I = 114 mA

Next, let's consider a core with two sections.                                        Figure 10.15
                                                                                      Magnetic system for Example
Example 10.4                                                                          10.4.

         Given the magnetic system shown in Figure 10.15, assume section A is      I
         made of sheet steel and section B is made of cast steel. Each part has a                                    A
         cross section of 2 cm by 2 cm. The path length of A is 12 cm and the
         path length of B is 4 cm. If the coil has 50 turns, determine the coil    N turns B
         current required to achieve a flux of 2E-4 webers.

         The analogous circuit consists of a single source and two reluctances.
         This is shown in Figure 10.16.

336
     Therefore:

                 N I = H sheet l sheet+H cast lcast

     For our table there will be two rows, one for sheet steel and the second for
     cast steel. The first row will require using curve A (sheet steel) from Figure
     10.11 while the second row will require using curve B (cast steel).

                                                                                      Figure 10.16
                                                                                      Analogous electrical circuit for
                                                                                      the system of Figure 10.15.

     The flux, like the current in a series loop, will be the same in both sections.
     From here we can fill out a series of other values in the table to arrive at:

  Section     Flux  Area    Flux Density  Magnetizing Force                     Length  "Drop"
              (Wb)  A (m2)      B (T)          H (At/m)                          l (m)  Hl (At)
Sheet Steel
Cast Steel    2E-4  4E-4         0.5                                             0.12

              2E-4  4E-4         0.5                                             0.04

     The BH curves are used to transition to the right side, and we arrive at:

  Section     Flux  Area    Flux Density  Magnetizing Force                     Length  "Drop"
              (Wb)  A (m2)      B (T)          H (At/m)                          l (m)  Hl (At)
Sheet Steel
Cast Steel    2E-4  4E-4         0.5               70                            0.12

              2E-4  4E-4         0.5               290                           0.04

     And now we fill in the Hl "drops":

  Section     Flux  Area    Flux Density  Magnetizing Force                     Length  "Drop"
              (Wb)  A (m2)      B (T)          H (At/m)                          l (m)  Hl (At)
Sheet Steel
Cast Steel    2E-4  4E-4         0.5               70                            0.12     8.4

              2E-4  4E-4         0.5               290                           0.04    11.6

337
     Using our KVL analogy, the total "drop" is 8.4 At + 11.6 At, or 20 amp-
     turns. The coil was specified as having 50 turns. Therefore:

                 I = H l N
                 I = 20 At

                       50 t
                 I = 400 mA

     Notice that even though the cast steel section is shorter than the sheet steel
     section, it produces a larger "drop"; just like a larger resistor in an electrical
     circuit. This requires a larger current in the coil than if the entire core had
     been made of sheet steel.

     Finally, it should be apparent that the current demand can be reduced if the
     coil has more turns. There is a practical limit here because all of the turns
     have to fit within the opening of the core. Once that space is full, the only
     way to increase the number of turns is to use finer gauge wire but doing so
     increases wire resistance and power loss, and also lowers maximum current
     capacity.

Dealing With Air Gaps

Some systems include an air gap in the core. If there is only a single material for      Figure 10.17
the remainder, this will create a system like that depicted in Figure 10.17. The main    Analogous electrical circuit
observation here is that the permeability of air is far below that of ferromagnetic      for a system with an air gap.
materials and thus the gap will exhibit a relatively large reluctance compared to its
path length. The obvious question then is, why would we use a gap? One possibility
is an electro-magnetic relay, the internals of which are illustrated in Figure 10.18.

                                                                                         Figure 10.18
                                                                                         Internals of an electrical relay.

338
To create a relay, we place one portion of the core on a hinge which can be held
open with a small spring. This creates the air gap (to the immediate left of the core in
the Figure). If we apply a sufficiently large current, the resulting magnetic flux will
be enough to overcome the spring tension and close the second piece onto the first
(i.e., magnetic attraction). Once this happens, the gap disappears, reducing the
reluctance around the loop. The system will stay closed until the coil current is
turned off and the restoring spring pulls apart the two sections again. We add
insulated metal contacts to the moving section and what we end up with is a heavy
duty switch that is "thrown" by a controlling current rather than a mechanical lever
moved by a human.

It is worth repeating that for air gaps, instead of a BH curve we can use Definition
10.11 which shows that for air, H  7.958E5 B or alternately,
B  1.257E-6 H.

Example 10.5                                                                             Figure 10.19
                                                                                         Magnetic system for Example
         Given the magnetic system shown in Figure 10.19, assume the core is             10.5.
         made of sheet steel. The cross section throughout is 3E-4 m2. The path
         length of the main core is 8 cm and the path length of the gap is 1 mm.      I
         How many turns will the coil need in order for a coil current of 400 mA
         to achieve a flux of 1.2E-4 webers?

     The analogous circuit consists of a single source and two reluctances,           N turns           gap

     one for the sheet steel core and a second for the air gap. This is shown

     in Figure 10.17. Further, the analogous KVL relation is:

             N I = H sheet l sheet+H gap l gap

     For this table there will be two rows, one for the sheet steel core and one for
     the air gap. As we have seen, the flux will be the same in both sections.
     From there we can fill out some of the other values in the table resulting in:

  Section     Flux   Area    Flux Density       Magnetizing Force                 Length       "Drop"
              (Wb)   A (m2)      B (T)               H (At/m)                      l (m)       Hl (At)
Sheet Steel
    Gap      1.2E-4  3E-4         0.4                                              8E-2

             1.2E-4  3E-4         0.4                                              1E-3

339
     The BH curve for sheet steel and Definition 10.11 for the air gap are used to
     transition to the right side, yielding:

  Section     Flux   Area           Flux Density  Magnetizing Force                 Length  "Drop"
              (Wb)   A (m2)             B (T)          H (At/m)                      l (m)  Hl (At)
Sheet Steel
    Gap      1.2E-4  3E-4                0.4               63                        8E-2

             1.2E-4  3E-4                0.4            3.183E5                      1E-3

     The Hl "drops" are filled in:

  Section     Flux   Area           Flux Density  Magnetizing Force                 Length  "Drop"
              (Wb)   A (m2)             B (T)          H (At/m)                      l (m)  Hl (At)
Sheet Steel
    Gap      1.2E-4  3E-4                0.4               62                        8E-2     5.0

             1.2E-4  3E-4                0.4            3.183E5                      1E-3    318.3

     Using our KVL analogy, the total "drop" is 5.0 At + 318.3 At, or 323.3 amp-
     turns. The coil current was specified as being 400 mA. Therefore:

                 N = H lI
                 N = 323.3 At

                        400 mA
                 N  808 turns

And finally, an example using two coils.                                                Figure 10.20
                                                                                        Magnetic system for Example
Example 10.6                                                                            10.6.

         Given the magnetic system shown in Figure 10.20, assume the core is        I1               I2
         made of sheet steel. The cross section throughout is 3E-4 m2 and the
         length of the core is 20 cm. Coil one consists of 2000 turns and coil two      N1           N2
         consists of 500 turns. If a current of 120 mA into coil one achieves a
         flux of 2.4E-4 webers, determine the current of coil 2.

         The analogous circuit consists of two voltage sources and a single
         reluctance for the sheet steel core. This is illustrated in Figure 10.21.

340
     The analogous KVL relation is:                                                Figure 10.21
                                                                                   Analogous electrical circuit
                 N 1 I 1 -N 2 I 2 = H sheet l sheet                                for the system of Figure 10.20.

     As we are seeking I2, we can rearrange this equation into a more useful
     form:

                 N 2 I 2 = N 1 I 1 - H sheet l sheet

     Only one row will be required for this table. We fill out the obvious values
     in the table resulting in:

  Section     Flux   Area        Flux Density  Magnetizing Force            Length  "Drop"
Sheet Steel   (Wb)   A (m2)          B (T)          H (At/m)                 l (m)  Hl (At)

             2.4E-4  3E-4             0.8                                     0.2

     The BH curve for sheet steel is used to transition to the right side:

  Section     Flux   Area        Flux Density  Magnetizing Force            Length  "Drop"
Sheet Steel   (Wb)   A (m2)          B (T)          H (At/m)                 l (m)  Hl (At)

             2.4E-4  3E-4             0.8               100                   0.2

     The Hl "drop" is computed:

  Section     Flux   Area        Flux Density  Magnetizing Force            Length  "Drop"
Sheet Steel   (Wb)   A (m2)          B (T)          H (At/m)                 l (m)  Hl (At)

             2.4E-4  3E-4             0.8               100                   0.2     20

     Using our KVL analogy, we find:

                 N 2 I 2 = N 1 I 1 - H sheet l sheet
                 N 2 I 2 = 2000 turns×120 mA -20 At
                 N 2 I 2 = 240 At -20 At
                 N 2 I 2 = 220 At

     Coil two was specified as having having 500 turns, therefore its current is:

                  I 2 = 220 At 500 turns
                  I 2 = 440 mA

341
An item of key importance is that the preceding example must make use of an AC
current in order to function as described. A DC current will not produce the predicted
results. The reason for this goes back to Definition 10.1 and Equation 10.2: Unless
the flux is changing relative to the conducting coil, no voltage will be induced in a
coil. So, while a DC input current will create a flux in the core, that flux will be
static and unchanging. Consequently, the second coil will not produce an output. In
contrast, an AC current smoothly varies in amplitude and polarity. This creates a
smoothly varying magnetic flux which in turn allows a voltage to be induced in the
second coil.

Assuming for a moment that an AC current was used in the preceding example,
notice that the current is nearly four times higher in coil two than in coil one. If we
had been able to reduce the core "drop" to zero, perhaps by reducing the core's
reluctance to a negligible value, then the current would have been increased
precisely by a factor four (to 480 mA versus 440 mA). This is the same as the ratio
of the number of turns of coil one to the number of turns of coil two, and is known
as the turns ratio. It is a key parameter describing transformers, which just happens
to be the subject of the next section.

10.4 Transformers

Transformers have been in wide use in the electrical industry for over a century.
Beginning with Michael Faraday and working through a sequence of scientists and
inventors, the fundamentals of modern transformer design had been established by
the late 1800s.

Transformer have three basic uses:

    · Voltage scaling.
    · Isolation.
    · Impedance matching.

Transformers range from very small units used in communications systems up to
large power distribution units many times the size of an adult human. A couple of
transformers typical of the type used in consumer electronics devices is shown in
Figure 10.22. These devices are designed to handle standard residential AC input
voltages (120 volts in North America, 220 to 240 volts in much of the remainder of
the planet) and feeding circuits that demand perhaps 10 to 30 watts of power. The
unit on the left is designed to be mounted directly onto a printed circuit board while
the unit on the right is designed for chassis mount.

342
                                                                                      Figure 10.22
                                                                                      Transformers suitable for
                                                                                      consumer electronics devices.
                                                                                      The unit on the left features
                                                                                      four separate coils for
                                                                                      enhanced flexibility.

In contrast, Figure 10.23 shows pole mounted transformers used to reduce typical
North American residential distribution lines (in the vicinity of 15 kV) down to
home voltage (120 volts). These transformers are capable of delivering 1000 or more
times as much power as the transformers of Figure 10.22. The transformers in these
figures by no means present the extremes. Transformers are available that are
considerably smaller or larger than the ones pictured here.

Transformers exploit magnetic circuit theory for their operation, as illustrated      Figure 10.23
previously in Example 10.6. In its most basic form, the device has two coils or       A cluster of three residential
windings; one for the input side (called the primary winding) and one for the output  power transformers.
side (the secondary winding). It is possible to have multiple input and/or output
windings. Such is the case for the transformer on the left side of Figure 10.22; it
has two input primary coils and two secondary coils. This allows for a variety of
interconnection options, as we shall see. A typical schematic symbol is shown in
Figure 10.24. This symbol is appropriate for the magnetic system of Figure 10.20
which featured two coils. The vertical lines in the symbol represent the magnetic
core.

Voltage Scaling and Isolation

A particularly important transformer parameter is the ratio of the number of turns
on the primary coil (NP) to the number of turns on the secondary coil (NS). This is
denoted N, and referred to as the turns ratio.

     N = NP                    (10.13)
            NS

343
As the two windings are on the same core and ideally see the same flux, the voltage
ratio of the primary to secondary will be equal to N for an ideal lossless transformer.
Thus, if N=10 and the primary voltage (VP) is 60 volts, the secondary voltage (VS)
will be 6 volts. Thus:

              V S = V P N    (10.14)

The primary and secondary appear as "NI" potentials in the magnetic circuit,             Figure 10.24
therefore, the current will change inversely with N. For example, if N=10 and the        Schematic symbol for a simple
primary current is 1 amp, the secondary current will be 10 amps. Thus:                   transformer.

              IS = N IP      (10.15)

It is important to note that the product of primary current and voltage must equal the
product of secondary current and voltage for an ideal transformer. Such a device
does not dissipate power but rather transforms it (hence the name).

              VS IS = VP IP  (10.16)

Real world devices will exhibit some loss due to finite winding wire resistance, non-
ideal behavior of the magnetic circuit and the like. Instead of a power dissipation
rating, power transformers are given a VA (volt-amps) rating, typically thought of as
secondary voltage times maximum secondary current. Transformers like the ones
pictured in Figure 10.22 have ratings in the range of 10 to 30 VA. Generally, the
higher the VA rating, the larger and heavier the transformer. On the other hand,
applications using signal transformers in communications systems tend to focus on
the turns ratio and not on the VA rating as the associated voltages and currents tend
to be small. Their goal generally is to increase the amplitude of a signal voltage.

Also, because there is no direct electrical connection between the primary and
secondary, the transformer may be used solely for isolation. This is a safety feature.
If N=1, then there is no change in the voltage being presented to the device, ideally.

Example 10.7

     A microphone feeds a small transformer which is used as the first stage of a
     preamplifier. The transformer has a primary winding of 50 turns and a
     secondary winding of 250 turns. Assuming an ideal transformer, determine
     the output voltage of the transformer if the signal from the microphone is 35
     microvolts.

     As this is an ideal transformer, the turns ratio indicates how much the input
     voltage is scaled. First we use Equation 10.13 to determine the turns ratio.

344
                 N = NP
                        NS

                 N = 50 250
                 N = 0.2

     Now we use Equation 10.14 to determine the secondary voltage.

                 V S = V P N
                 V S = 35 V 0.2
                 V S = 175 V

Power applications will make use of N to scale the voltage in order to create a more     Figure 10.25
appropriate or efficient level. If the voltage is brought down (N>1), it is referred to  Schematic symbol for a
as a step-down transformer. If N<1, it is referred to as a step-up transformer. For      transformer with a center-
example, a consumer electronics product may require a modest DC voltage for its          tapped secondary.
operation, say 15 or 20 volts. To achieve this, the standard North American
residential "wall" voltage of 120 volts may be reduced using a step-down
transformer with N=5. This would result in a secondary voltage of 24 volts that
could then be rectified, filtered, and regulated to the desired DC level. Conversely,
a step-up transformer could be used to create a much higher secondary potential
(for example, in long distance power transmission to reduce I2R losses).
For some applications, split secondaries or multiple secondaries may be used. A
center tap is relatively common and is used to divide the secondary into two equal
voltage sections (e.g., a 24 volt center-tapped secondary would behave as two 12
volt secondaries in series). The schematic symbol for a transformer with a center-
tapped secondary is shown in Figure 10.25.

Multiple secondaries are also common and are more flexible than a center-tapped
secondary. Multiple secondaries can be combined in series to increase the secondary
voltage or combined in parallel to increase secondary current capacity (i.e, load
current).

Example 10.8                                                                             Figure 10.26
                                                                                         Circuit for Example 10.8.
         The power transformer shown in Figure 10.26 has turns ratio of 10. If the
         primary is connected to a 120 volt source and the secondary is connected in
         series with a 32  load resistor, determine the current through the load
         resistor. Assume this is an ideal transformer.

     The turns ratio indicates secondary voltage via Equation 10.4.

345
                     V S = V P N
                     V S = 120 V 10
                     V S = 12V

         Ohm's law can be used to find the secondary current.

                      IS = VS
                             RL

                      I S = 12V 32
                      I S = 375 mA

As mentioned earlier, transformers work with AC voltages and currents. Unlike the
consistent polarity of DC sources, AC (literally, Alternating Current) flips back and
forth in voltage polarity and current direction. In order to determine the phase
relationship between the primary and secondary, transformers use "dot notation".
The dot indicates the positive polarity of voltage. This is illustrated in the circuit of
Figure 10.27.

                                                                                                                   Figure 10.27
                                                                                                                   Transformer dot convention.

On the primary side, the current flows into the dot and establishes the positive
reference. In this case, the primary is seen as the load for the source, E. On the
secondary side, current flows out of the dot and also notates the positive reference
because the secondary is seen as the source for the load, R.

Impedance Matching

The third use of the transformer is impedance matching. Impedance is an AC
phenomenon that consists of both resistance and reactance (an ohmic value
associated with capacitors and inductors). The symbol for impedance is Z. Although
impedance is measured in ohms, it differs from ordinary resistance in that it is a
vector quantity and has a phase angle. For our present purposes, we can ignore this
distinction.27

27 The concept of impedance is covered in great detail in the companion text, AC Electrical
    Circuit Analysis, another free OER title.

346
Because both the voltage and current are being scaled, the source's "view" of the
load changes. The impedance seen by the source can be defined via Ohm's law as
the voltage it produces divided by its output current.

                ZP = VP                              (10.17)
                        IP

From Equation 10.14, we know that VP = VS  N. Substituting this into Equation
10.17 yields:

                ZP = VS N                            (10.18)
                         IP

From Equation 10.15, we know that IP = IS / N. Substituting this into Equation 10.18
yields:

                       VS N2                         (10.18)
                ZP =

                          IS

By definition,

                ZS = VS                              (10.19)
                        IS

Combining Equations 10.18 and 10.19 leaves us with:

                ZP = N2ZS                            (10.20)

Thus, the impedance seen by the source is the secondary impedance times the square
of the turns ratio. This is called the reflected impedance.

Example 10.9

     Assume that the transformer shown in Figure 10.27 has turns ratio of 5. If
     the primary is connected to an 20 volt source and the secondary is connected
     to an 8  load resistor, determine the primary current and the reflected
     impedance. Assume this is an ideal transformer.

     First we'll use Equation 10.20 to find the reflected impedance seen in the
     primary.

347
                      ZP = N2ZS
                      Z P = 52×8 
                      Z P = 200 

         Ohm's law can be used to find the primary current.

                      IP = VP
                             RP

                      I P = 20V 200
                      I P = 100 mA

Here is where impedance matching comes in. In the preceding example, if the
source, E, had a large internal resistance compared to the load resistance, R, and
there was no transformer, there would be considerable loss in the system. For
example, if the source impedance was 10  and it was directly connected to the 8 
load without the transformer, the resulting voltage divider would cause a great deal
of internal power dissipation in the source leading to inefficiency. On the other hand,
in the given circuit with transformer, the source sees a reflected impedance of 200 .
The resulting voltage divider between 200  and the 10  internal resistance of the
source will cause very little loss, yielding a much more efficient transfer.

10.5 Summary

This chapter has extended the material presented in Chapter 9 on inductance into the
realm of magnetic circuits. We began with the concept of electromagnetic induction,
which in simple terms states that if a conductor experiences changing magnetic lines
of force, then a voltage will be induced in that conductor. This concept is exploited
by an array of different devices including electric motors, generators, relays,
loudspeakers, microphones, and other transducers and sensors. For example,
dynamic loudspeakers and microphones both make use of a coil of wire suspended
in a fixed magnetic field. In the case of the loudspeaker, the signal fed into the coil
creates a changing magnetic field that interacts with the permanent magnet's field
and causes an attached diaphragm to vibrate against the air, which in turn creates
sound. A dynamic microphone works in an opposite manner. Sound waves cause a
diaphragm to vibrate back and forth. This diaphragm is attached to a coil, and the
motion of the coil within the permanent magnet's field causes a voltage to be
induced in the coil. This voltage can then be amplified by electronic circuitry.

Magnetic circuits are constructed by creating one or more coils of wire wrapped
around a core that is made of a ferromagnetic material such as steel. A key part of
analyzing magnetic circuits is Hopkinson's law (also called Rowland's law), which is
the magnetic circuit version of Ohm's law. In this analogy, magnetic flux is likened

348
to current flow, magnetic reluctance stands in for resistance, and magnetomotive
force is analogous to electromotive force (i.e., voltage). Further, the magnetomotive
force is the product of the number of turns in a coil and the current through said coil,
or NI. When current is passed through the coil, a magnetizing force, H, and an
associated magnetic flux are created. Given this, the core material will have a
corresponding flux density, B. The linkage between B and H is found through a BH
curve for that particular material. BH curves are non-linear for ferromagnetic
materials. They also exhibit hysteresis, meaning that the recent operational history of
the material plays a role in its current state. Every element of the core has a certain
reluctance and thus exhibits an analogous "voltage drop". These "drops" must add
up to the NI "rises" of the coil(s), in a KVL analogy.

Transformers use one or more primary coils to transform an input voltage into one
more output voltages appearing on secondary coils. The ratio between the number of
turns of the primary coil to the number of turns of the secondary coil is called the
turns ratio, N. The secondary voltage is equal to the primary voltage divided by N
while the secondary current is equal to the primary current times N. If N is greater
than one, we have a step-down transformer (reducing the voltage), and if N is less
than one, we have a step-up transformer (increasing the voltage). Ideally,
transformers do not dissipate power. Thus, they do not have a power rating, but
instead have a VA (volt-amps) rating to indicate their capacity. Transformers can also
be used for impedance matching to increase the efficiency of a system. The
impedance seen by the source on the primary is equal to the secondary impedance
times the square of the turns ratio. This is called the reflected impedance.

Review Questions

    1. Describe the concept of electromagnetic induction.
    2. Describe Ohm's law for magnetic circuits (Hopkinson's or Rowland's law).
    3. Describe hysteresis.
    4. Define residual magnetism and coercivity.
    5. Outline the operation of a relay.
    6. What are some of the uses of transformers?
    7. What is turns ratio? How does it affect voltage and current in the primary

         and secondary?
    8. What is the difference between a step-up and a step-down transformer?
    9. What is reflected impedance?

349
10.6 Exercises

Analysis

     1. In the magnetic circuit shown in Figure 10.1, assume the cross section is 1
         cm by 1 cm with a path length of 8 cm. The entire core is made of sheet
         steel and there are 100 turns on the winding. Determine the current to
         establish a flux of 8E-5 webers.

     I          Figure 10.1

     N turns

     2. Repeat problem 1 using cast steel for the core.

     3. Given the core shown in Figure 10.1, assume the cross section is 2 cm by 2
         cm with a path length of 10 cm. The entire core is made of cast steel and
         there are 200 turns on the winding. Determine the current to establish a flux
         of 4E-4 webers.

     4. Repeat problem 3 using sheet steel for the core.

350
5. In the magnetic circuit shown in Figure 10.1, assume the cross section is 1
    cm by 1 cm with a path length of 8 cm. The entire core is made of sheet
    steel. Determine the number of turns required to establish a flux of 8E-5
    webers given a current of 50 mA.

6. Given the core shown in Figure 10.1, assume the cross section is 2 cm by
    2 cm with a path length of 10 cm. The entire core is made of sheet steel
    Determine the number of turns required to establish a flux of 4E-4 webers
    given a current of 200 mA.

7. In the magnetic circuit shown in Figure 10.2, assume the cross section is
    1 cm by 1 cm. Section A is sheet steel with a path length of 6 cm. Section B
    is cast steel with a length of 2 cm. There are 500 turns on the winding.
    Determine the current to establish a flux of 5E-5 webers.

I                                       Figure 10.2
                                 A

N turns B

8. In the magnetic circuit shown in Figure 10.2, assume the cross section is
    1 cm by 1 cm. Section A is sheet steel with a path length of 6 cm. Section B
    is cast steel with a length of 2 cm. Determine the number of turns on the coil
    to establish a flux of 6E-5 webers with a current of 50 mA.

9. A transformer is shown in Figure 10.3, assume the cross section is 5 cm by
    5 cm. The core is sheet steel with a path length of 20 cm. N1 is 500 turns
    and N2 is 200 turns. Determine the secondary current (I2) if a primary
    current (I1) of 1 amp establishes a flux of 1.5E-3 webers.

I1                                  I2  Figure 10.3

    N1                              N2

    10. Given the same conditions of problem 9, alter the secondary turns (N2) so
         that the secondary current (I2) is 3 amps given the original primary current
         of 1 amp.

351
11. In general, how would the performance noted in problem 9 change if cast
    steel was substituted for sheet steel?

12. Given the results of problems 9 through 11, what does the ratio of N1 to N2
    represent in terms of idealized performance, and what steps should be taken
    to make the transformer operate as close to ideal as possible?

13. Given the magnetic circuit shown in Figure 10.4, assume the cross section is
    1 cm by 2 cm with a path length of 6 cm. The entire core is made of sheet
    steel with the exception of a 1 mm air gap. Determine the current required to
    establish a flux of 8E-5 webers if N = 1000 turns.

I             Figure 10.4

N turns  gap

    14. Using the data given in problem 13, determine the number of turns required
         to establish the same flux when the input current is 200 mA.

    15. An ideal transformer has a 6:1 voltage step-down ratio. If the primary is
         driven by 24 VAC and the load is 100 , determine the load voltage and
         current, and the primary side current.

    16. A 120 VAC transformer is specified as having a 36 volt center-tapped
         secondary. If each side of the secondary is connected to its own 50  load,
         determine the load currents and the primary side current.

    17. An ideal transformer has a 12:1 voltage step-down ratio. If the secondary is
         connected to a 10  load, what impedance is seen from the primary side?

    18. An ideal transformer has a 1:5 voltage step-up ratio. If the secondary is
         connected to a 2  load, what impedance is seen from the primary side?

Design

    19. A step-down transformer with N=8 has a 15 volt RMS secondary which is
         connected to a load with an effective value of 5 . Determine the minimum
         acceptable VA rating of the transformer.

352
    20. A step-up transformer with N=.5 is driven from a 120 VAC source. The
         secondary is connected to a load with an effective value of 150 .
         Determine the minimum acceptable VA rating of the transformer.

Challenge

    21. A transformer specified as having a 120 VAC primary with an 18 volt
         secondary is accidentally connected backwards, with its secondary
         connected to the source and its primary connected to a 16  load. Determine
         the load current in both the normal and reversed connections. Also
         determine the required transformer VA rating for both connections.

    22. Consider the distributed public address system for an airport as shown in
         Figure 10.5. It consists of an audio power amplifier with a nominal 70 volt
         RMS output that is connected to four remote loudspeakers, each separate
         from the others and some 150 meters away from the amplifier. Each
         loudspeaker assembly includes a 10:1 voltage step-down transformer that
         feeds the loudspeaker impedance of 8  (resistive) off its secondary. These
         four lines are fed in parallel by the amplifier. Determine the power delivered
         to each loudspeaker and the total current delivered by the power amplifier.
         Assume the transformers are ideal and ignore any cable resistance.

                                                                                                 Figure 10.5

    23. Continuing with the preceding problem, assume that the wiring connecting
         each transformer back to the amplifier is AWG 22. Determine the power lost
         in each of the 150 meter long sections of dual cable. Further, suppose the
         system is reconfigured without the transformers and the output of the
         amplifier is lowered to 7 volts RMS to compensate. Determine the power lost
         in each of the cable feeds under the new configuration.

353
Simulation

    24. Use a transient analysis to verify the results of problem 15.
    25. Use a transient analysis to verify the results of problem 16.

354
Appendix A

                          Standard Component Sizes

Passive components (resistors, capacitors and inductors) are available in standard sizes. The tables below are for
resistors. The same digits are used in subsequent decades up to at least 1 Meg ohm (higher decades are not
shown). Capacitors and inductors are generally not available in as many standard values as are resistors.
Capacitors below 10 nF (.01 F) are usually available at the 5% standard digits while larger capacitances tend to
be available at the 20% standards.

                         5% and 10% standard values, EIA E24 and EIA E12

                                                 10% values (EIA E12) are bold
                            20% values (seldom used) are every fourth value starting from 10

                                                   (i.e., every other 10% value)
             10 11 12 13 15 16 18 20 22 24 27 30
             33 36 39 43 47 51 56 62 68 75 82 91

                         1% and 2% standard values, EIA E96 and EIA E48

                                                  2% values (EIA E48) are bold
            10.0 10.2 10.5 10.7 11.0 11.3 11.5 11.8 12.1 12.4 12.7 13.0
            13.3 13.7 14.0 14.3 14.7 15.0 15.4 15.8 16.2 16.5 16.9 17.4
            17.8 18.2 18.7 19.1 19.6 20.0 20.5 21.0 21.5 22.1 22.6 23.2
            23.7 24.3 24.9 25.5 26.1 26.7 27.4 28.0 28.7 29.4 30.1 30.9
            31.6 32.4 33.2 34.0 34.8 35.7 36.5 37.4 38.3 39.2 40.2 41.2
            42.2 43.2 44.2 45.3 46.4 47.5 48.7 49.9 51.1 52.3 53.6 54.9
            56.2 57.6 59.0 60.4 61.9 63.4 64.9 66.5 68.1 69.8 71.5 73.2
            75.0 76.8 78.7 80.6 82.5 84.5 86.6 88.7 90.9 93.1 95.3 97.6

355
Appendix B

          Methods of Solution of Linear Simultaneous Equations

Some circuit analysis methods, such as nodal analysis and mesh analysis, yield a set of linear simultaneous
equations. There will be as many equations as there are unknowns. For example, a particular circuit might yield
three equations with three unknown currents (often referred to as a "3 by 3" for the matrix it creates). There are
several techniques that may be used to solve this system of equations. The methods include graphical,
substitution, Guass-Jordan elimination and determinants (determinants may be solved via Cramer's Rule/Sarrus'
Rule or via expansion by minors).

Graphical

Graphical solutions involve plotting the individual equations on graph paper. The location of where the lines
cross is the solution to the system (i.e., values that satisfy all of the equations). This technique will not be
discussed further because it is only practical for two unknowns. It would be very difficult to draw something
like a four dimensional graph for four equations with four unknowns!

Substitution

The idea here is to write one of the equations in terms of one of the unknowns and then substitute this back into
one of the other equations resulting in a simplified version. This process is iterated for as many unknowns as the
system includes. Take for example the following 2x2:

10 = 20I1 + 8I2
 2 = 8I1 + 4I2

Solve the second equation for I2.

 2 = 8I1 + 4I2
4I2 = 2 - 8I1

 I2 = 0.5 - 2I1

Substitute this back into the first equation and expand/simplify/solve.

10 = 20I1 + 8I2
10 = 20I1 + 8(.5 - 2I1)
10 = 20I1 + 4 - 16I1
10 = 4I1 + 4
I1 = 1.5

Finally, substitute this value back into one of the two original equations to determine I2.

356
   2 = 8I1 + 4I2
   2 = 8(1.5) + 4I2
   2 = 12 + 4I2
4I2 = -10
 I2 = -2.5

For a 3x3, this process is iterated as follows: Equation 2 would be solved for I3 and this would be substituted
back into equation 1 yielding a new equation (let's call it A) with only I1 and I2 terms. Similarly, Equation 3
would be solved for I3 and this would be substituted back into equation 2 yielding a new equation (let's call it B)
with only I1 and I2 terms. Equations A and B now make a 2x2 with I1 and I2 as the unknowns and can be solved
as outlined above. This would yield values for I1 and I2 which could then be substituted into one of the three
original equations to obtain I3. While the substitution method is perfectly valid for an arbitrarily sized system, it
proves cumbersome as the system gets larger.

Gauss-Jordan Elimination

In some respects, Gauss-Jordan is similar to substitution but it tends to involve less overhead for larger systems
and thus is generally preferred. This method involves multiplying one equation by a constant such that when it is
subtracted from another equation, one of the unknown terms disappears. The process is then iterated for as many
unknowns exist in the system. Using the same example from before:

10 = 20I1 + 8I2
 2 = 8I1 + 4I2

Multiply the second equation by the ratio of the coefficients for I2 (8/4 = 2).

 2 = 8I1 + 4I2
 4 = 16I1 + 8I2

Subtract this new equation from the first equation. The I2 terms will cancel leaving just I1.

10 = 20I1 + 8I2
 4 = 16I1 + 8I2
 6 = 4I1
I1 = 1.5

Substitute this result back into one of the original equations to obtain I2. For a 3x3, iterate as follows: Using
equations 1 and 2, multiply equation 2 by the ratio of the coefficients for I3. Subtract this equation from equation
1 to generate a new equation (let's call it equation A) that only has I1 and I2 as unknowns. Using equations 2 and
3, multiply equation 3 by the ratio of the coefficients for I3. Subtract this equation from equation 2 to generate a
new equation (let's call it equation B) that only has I1 and I2 as unknowns. Equations A and B now make a 2x2
with I1 and I2 as the unknowns and can be solved as outlined previously. This would yield values for I1 and I2
which could then be substituted into one of the three original equations to obtain I3. Like the substitution
method, Gauss-Jordan grows rapidly as the system size increases. The process tends to be formulaic though, and
thus easier to handle.

357
Determinants

Determinants revolve around the concept of a matrix which itself is little more than an ordered collection of
coefficients and/or constants. It is imperative that the unknowns be in the same order in each equation (i.e., I1
ascending to IX left to right) A simple coefficient matrix for the original 2x2 example is:

20 8
 8 4

The resultant value (properly referred to as the determinant) for a 2x2 matrix such as this may be solved using
Sarrus' Rule: Simply multiply the two values along the upper right-lower left diagonal and then subtract that
product from the product of the two values found along on the upper left-lower right diagonal. In this example
that's:

20*4 - 8*8 = 16

A solution involves dividing one determinant by another determinant (Cramer's Rule). That is, each matrix is
solved for its resultant value and then these two values are divided to determine the final answer. One of these
matrices will be the coefficient matrix just discussed. This will be placed in the denominator. The numerator
matrix is a modified version of the basic coefficient matrix. It is created by replacing one column of coefficients
with the constant values from the original system of equations. For example, the numerator matrix used to find
I1 would replace the first column (the I1 coefficients 20 and 8) with the constants 10 and 2:

10 8
 2 4

The resultant value is 40 - 16 or 24.

Similarly, the numerator matrix for I2 would replace the I2 coefficients in the second column (8 and 4) with the
constants 10 and 2:

20 10
 8 2

The resultant value is 40 - 80 or -40. To find any particular unknown, simply divide the modified matrix by the
basic coefficient matrix.

          10 8
            2 4

I1 = --------
          20 8
            8 4

          24
I1 = -----

          16

358
I1 = 1.5

In like fashion I2 is found:

          20 10
            8 2

I2 = --------
          20 8
            8 4

        -40
I2 = -----

          16

I2 = -2.5

Sarrus' Rule may also be used with a 3x3 matrix. This is achieved by extending the matrix. Fourth and fifth
columns are added to the right of the 3x3 matrix by simply making copies of the first two columns. This creates
three right to left diagonals with three values each and three left to right diagonals with three values each. The
three values along each diagonal are multiplied together. The three right to left products are then subtracted from
the sum of the three left to right products yielding a single resultant value (the determinant). To create the
modified numerator matrix, replace the coefficient column of interest with the constant terms and then replicate
columns one and two. For example, given these three equations:

10 = 20I1 + 8I2 + 3I3
 2 = 8I1 + 4I2 + 5I3
 7 = 3I1 + 5I2 + 6I3

The basic coefficient matrix (i.e., denominator) is:

20 8 3
 8 4 5
 3 5 6

The extended matrix is:
20 8 3 20 8

 845 84
 356 35

The result is:

20*4*6 + 8*5*3 + 3*8*5 - 3*4*3 - 20*5*5 - 8*8*6

Sarrus' Rule does not work beyond 3x3.

359
Expansion by Minors

Expansion by Minors is another method that may be used to generate a determinant solution. This involves
breaking the matrix into a series of smaller matrices (minors) that are combined using row-column coefficients.
The position of these coefficients will also indicate whether the determinant of any particular sub-matrix is
added or subtracted to the total.

The first step is to establish a single row or column from which to derive the coefficients. This can be any
horizontal row or vertical column (no diagonals). Each element of the chosen row or column determines the
associated minor (essentially, that which is left over). Consider the 3x3 used previously:

20 8 3
 8 4 5
 3 5 6

Choosing the top row yields coefficients of 20, 8 and 3. For each of these, blot out its row and column and see
what is left. This leaves three 2x2 matrices, one for each coefficient. Multiply each coefficient by the
determinant of its 2x2 matrix. To determine whether this result is added or subtracted to the others, the sign may
be found using the following map for the coefficients:

+ - + - etc.
- + - + etc.
+ - + - etc.

The origin in the upper left is positive and the signs continually alternate across from it and down from it. The
result using the top row for the coefficients is found thus (the 2x2 matrices are bold red for clarity):

     4 5  8 5        8 4

20 * 5 6 - 8 * 3 6 + 3 * 3 5

If the second column was used instead (8, 4, 5), the result is found like so:

     8 5  20 3       20 3

-8 * 3 6 + 4 * 3 6 - 5 * 8 5

In closing, whichever method is used, always look for null coefficient terms (that is, places in the equations and
matrices where the coefficients are zero). Smart use of these can considerably simplify the computations as there
are few mathematical operations easier than multiplying by zero. For example, if a particular row of a matrix
contains a few zeros, that would be a good candidate for the coefficient row when using expansion by minors
because some 2x2 minors need not be computed (they will just be multiplied by the zero coefficient).

360
Appendix C

                                Equation Proofs

Maximum Power Transfer: Refining the Maximizing Value of P = R/(R2+2R+1)

While the algebraic and graphing technique explored in Chapter 6 leads to a proper answer, it is incomplete. For
the ultimate value we can use a little differential calculus. Examining the curve of the function indicates a single
peak, and thus we may find the corresponding value by taking the first derivative of the function, setting it to
zero (i.e., find the point where the slope goes to zero), and solving for R. There are three basic techniques for
determining the derivative of the equation above: using quotient rule, using product rule, and using chain rule.
The quotient rule is perhaps the most obvious route although not necessarily the most efficient.

The quotient rule states that the derivative of a quotient is

          f (x)' g(x)  g(x)2 g(x) f '(x)  f (x)g'(x)

f(x) is R and therefore f '(x) is 1.

g(x) is R2+2R+1 and therefore g(x) is 2R+2.

Note that for simplicity, g(x) may also be written as (R+1)2.

Plugging these values into the quotient formula yields

     dP (R 1)2 1 R(2R  2)
         
     dR        (R 1)       4

This may be simplified to

     dP 1 R2
         
     dR (R 1)  4

For dP/dR to be zero, R must equal 1, meaning that maximum power is developed in the load when the load
resistance matches the resistance of the driving source.

QED

361
Exponential Charge and Discharge Equations

Utilizing a simple series RC circuit, such as depicted in the accompanying figure, we may write an expression
for the natural discharge of the capacitor using KCL. We shall assume that the capacitor has some initial starting
voltage, vC(0) = v0. Looking at node A, the total current entering and leaving this node must be 0. Expressing this
using the fundamental current/voltage relationships for capacitors and resistors gives us:

     C dvC + v 0 = 0
        dt R

Applying a little algebra:

     dvC + v 0 = 0
     dt R C

     dvC = - 1 dt
     v0          RC

Remember, the voltage at t = 0 is v0 and at time t is vC(t). Integrating will allow us to obtain an expression for
vC(t). Using x and y as variables of integration yields:

       vC(t)                     t
         dxx =- 1R C dy
     v0                          0

Using the rule regarding natural logs, this can be written as:

     ( ) ln vC (t ) =- 1 tv0
                            RC

And solving for vC(t) we discover:

                                           -t

            vC (t) = v0  RC

Finally, given that RC =  and that the starting voltage for the capacitor normally would be its fully charged
value; that of the associated voltage source E, we find:

     vC (t) = E -t                             (discharge phase)

The equation above also describes the shape of the current (and hence the resistor voltage) during the charge
phase, and therefore to satisfy KVL during this phase we find:

     vC  (t)  =  E  (1        -  t             (charge phase)

                        -        )

362
Appendix D

            Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Problems

                                      1 Fundamentals

1. 14.54, 30060, 76.90, 0.0008475                 3. 5.1002, 1020.8, 1.0054, 0.000045781

5. 2.361E1, 1.2E4, 7.632E3, 5.09E-3               7. 4.156E1, 9.54000E5, 8.4035E1, 1.632E-4

9. 12E3 (or 12 k), 470, 6.5, 1.98E-3 (or 1.98 m)  11. 33.2, 313.6, 43E3 (or 43 k), 76E-6 (or 76 )

13. 3.6E6, 16.74E3, 1.202E3, 217.3E3              15. 0.205, 1.21E-3, 301E3, 3.2E12

17. 482, 22.42, approx. 6.09E3 (6.08997E3), -4.14E6 19. 15.8, 4.734E3, 7E-3

21. 320E6, 667E3, 307E-6                          23. 2 kg·m

25. 3 km/s

363
     2 Basic Quantities

 1. 33.858 volts to 34.542 volts                     3. 2 volt, 20 volt and 200 volt scales
 5. 6.81 volts to 7.19 volts                         7. 1.602E-7 coulombs
 9. 1.248E20 electrons                               11. 0.4 amps
13. 0.5 coulombs                                     15. 0.2 volts
17. 20 joules                                        19. 1492 watts
21. 24 watts                                         23. 82.9%
25. 125 watts                                        27. 3 Ah
29. 1200 hours                                       31. 160 ohms
33. 8 ohms                                           35. 1200 ohms
37. 3.2 ohm-cm                                       39. yes, +2.26%
41. yes, -0.2%                                       43. 200 k, 68 k, 2.7 k
45. 3.3 M, 91, 390                                   47. 160 k to 240 k, 54.4 k to 81.6 k, 2.43 k to 2.97 k
49. 2.97 M to 3.63 M, 81.9 to 100.1, 370.5 to 409.5  51. yellow-violet-black-gold, red-red-orange-gold,

                                                         orange-white-yellow-gold, brown-red-orange-gold,
                                                     violet-green-brown-gold.

364
                                            3 Series Resistive Circuits

1. 120 mA                                                3. 1.44 W

5. 15 V                                                  7. 33 V

9. 20.6 k                                                11. 40 mA

13. 320 mW (200), 160 mW (100),                          15. 6 V (2 k), 12 V (4 k), -6 V
    480 mW (source)
                                                         19. 15 mA, + - left to right on 200, + - top to bottom
17. 0.25 mA                                                   on 100, + - right to left on 500, + - top to bottom
                                                              on source.

21. 180 mW                                               23. 2.5 V (50), 0.5 V (10), 3 V (60), Vc = 3 V,
                                                             Vac = 3 V, Va = 6 V

25. 200 mA, + - left to right on 25, + - top to bottom   27. 2 V (400), 1 V (200), Vb = 10 V, Vc = 1 V,
    on 10, + - right to left on 5, + - top to bottom on      Vac = 11 V
    source.

29. 3.6 V (2 k), 14.4 V (8 k), Vb = 9.6 V,               31. 35 mA, + - left to right on 400, + - right to left
    Vc = -14.4 V, Vac = 20.4 V                               on 200, + - top to bottom on 12 V source,
                                                             + - bottom to top on 9 V source.

33. 1.8 mA, + - left to right on 2 k, + - right to left  35. Vb = 14.4 V, Vc = 9 V, Vac = 6 V
    on 8 k, + - top to bottom on sources.

37. 1 V, it's lower                                      39. 20 V

41. 40 V (20), 100 V (50)                                43. 12 V (4), 30 V (10), 15 V (5)

45. 20 V at a, 0 V at b, 10 V halfway                    47. Change the 100 to 120

49. 5.5 V                                                51. R1 = 6 k, R2 = 1.5 k, R3 = 500

53. 19.2                                                 55. Yes, 10 k

365
     4 Parallel Resistive Circuits

1. 80                                            3. 14.3 

5. 4 mA down                                     7. 120 mA (200), 480 mA (50), 600 mA (source)

9. 219.5 mA (82), 264.7 mA (68),                 11. No. It is already the smallest current by an
   484.2 mA (source)                                 order of magnitude and this makes it smaller.

13. 333.3 A (each 36 k), 250 A (each 48 k)       15. 0.1915 mA (47 k), 1.765 mA (5.1 k),
                                                     5 mA (1.8 k)
17. 1.6 A (10), 0.4 A (40), 16 V
                                                 19. 50 mA (200), 25 mA (each 400), 10 V
21. 145.5 mA (3 k), 218.2 A (2 k),
    36.37 A (12 k), 0.4364 V                     23. 2.571 mA (each 25 k), 0.8571 mA (75 k), higher
                                                 because there is one less path for current flow.
25. 5.714 mA (5 k), 2.857 mA (each 10 k),        27. The voltage is larger but now negative, so it
    28.57 mA (1 k), 28.57 V
                                                      becomes more negative.
29. 11.25 mA (2 k), 3.75 mA (6 k), 5 mA (4.5 k)
                                                 31. 1.714 k
33. 6.667 mA
                                                 35. 857 
37. 3 k

366
     5 Series-Parallel Resistive Circuits

 1. 10 k with 30 k                                 3. None
 5. 200 with 300                                   7. None
 9. 12.5 k                                         11. 23.3 k
13. 106                                            15. 3 k
17. Va = 2 V, Vb = 1.34 V, Vab = 0.662 V           19. 0.4 mA (12 k), 0.4 mA (3 k), 0.8 mA (7.5 k)
21. Va = -18 V, Vb = -9.35 V, Vab = -8.65 V        23. 903 A (3.3 k), 602 A (10 k), 301 A (20 k)
25. Va = 100 V, Vb = 59.5 V, Vab = 40.5 V          27. 15 mA (1 k), 3.75 mA (2.2 k), 3.75 mA (1.8 k)
29. Vb = 2.87 V, Vc = 5.1 V, Vcb = 2.23 V          31. 4 mA (2 k), 0.702 mA (5.1 k), 4.702 mA (source)
33. Va = 10 V, Vb = 5.263 V                        35. 0.2222 mA (30 k), 0.3333 mA (36 k),

37. Yes, because they also have the same voltage.      0.8889 mA (source)
41. 191.5 A (47 k), 448.9 A (5.1 k),               39. Va = -22.4 V, Vb = -36 V, Vab = 13.6 V
                                                   43. Vb = 10.53 V, Vc = 7.643 V, Vd = 5.945 V
    1.72 mA (3.9 k)
45. 133.3 A (left), 66.67 A (middle),              47. Va = 22 V, Vb = 16 V, Vab = 6 V

    33.33 A (right)                                51. Va = 4.91 V, Vb = 3.27 V, Vab = 1.64 V
49. 375 mA (100 k), 125 mA (60 k),
                                                   55. Va = -1.2 V, Vb = -3.2 V, Vab = 2 V
    125 mA (240 k)                                 59. Yes, because they also have the same voltage.
53. 50 mA (200), 25 mA (400), 25 mA (100)          63. 878 A (1 k), 878 A (2.2 k), 122 A (18 k)
57. 1.2 mA (9 k), 0.6 mA (82 k)                    67. 4 mA (left), 2 mA (middle), 1 mA (right)
61. Va = 3.54 V, Vb = 35.4 V, Vab = -31.86 V       71. 110 
65. Va = -5.29 V, Vb = -3.31 V, Vab = -1.98 V      75. 1 A
69. 133.3 
73. 2.55 k
77. 4 mA

367
                                   6 Analysis Theorems and Techniques

1. 4.26 mA in parallel with 4.7 k                      3. 4.56 mA in parallel with 5.7 k

5. 26.4 V in series with 2.2 k                         7. -40 V in series with 800 

9. -18 V in series with 9 k                            11. 2.55 mA left to right

13. 49.5 V                                             15. 8.18 V

17. 2.55 mA                                            19. 4.2 V

21. 1.25 mA                                            23. 0.7 V

25. 8.09 mA                                            27. 42.7 V

29. 0.696 mA                                           31. Yes, it's only current sources and resistors in
33. 1.17 mA                                            parallel.

                                                       35. -15.65 V

37. -11.6 V                                            39. 4.03 mA (up)

41. 38.7 mV                                            43. 1.19 mA left to right

45. 7.2 V with 6.2 k                                   47. 2 mA with 3 k

49. 5.71 V with 1.71 k                                 51. 1.538 A with 13 

53. 66.7 A with 3 k                                    55. 1.92 mW. Yes, match Rthev.

57. 4.27 W. Yes, match Rthev.                          59. 3 k, 3 mW

61. 4 k, 4.44 W                                        63. Replace 10 V/2 k with 5 mA||2 k, and 24 V/10 k
                                                       with 2.4 mA||10 k
65. Replace 2 mA||20 k with 40 V + 20 k, and 0.4 mA||
3 k with 1.2 V + 3 k

368
                           7 Nodal & Mesh Analysis, Dependent Sources

1. Loop ordering is left to right
    9 = (1 k + 3 k)I1 - (3 k)I2
   -12 = - (3 k)I1 + (3 k + 2 k)I2

3. 0.818 mA left to right
5. 3.14 V
7. 50 = (200 + 40)I1 - (40)I2

   -120 = - (40)I1 + (40 + 75)I2
9. 1.03 A right to left
11. -2.3 V
13. First, combine the 4 k||12 k = 3 k

   -34 = (2 k + 10 k)I1 - (10 k)I2
   24 = - (10 k)I1 + (10 k + 3 k)I2
15. 0.696 mA (up)
17. 12.27 V
19. 60 = (100 + 200)I1 - (200)I2 - (0) I3 - (0) I4
    0 = - (200)I1 + (200 + 300 + 400)I2 - (400) I3 - (0) I4
    0 = - (0)I1 - (400)I2 + (400 + 500 + 600) I3 - (600) I4
   -150 = - (0)I1 - (0)I2 - (600) I3 + (600 + 700) I4
21. 47.7 mA right to left
23. -9.34 V
25. Loop 1 at top, then left to right.
   30 = (15 k + 10 k + 9 k + 3 k)I1 - (3 k)I2 - (9 k) I3 - (10 k) I4
   25 = - (3 k)I1 + (2 k + 3 k + 4 k)I2 - (4 k) I3 - (0) I4
   10 = - (9 k)I1 - (4 k)I2 + (4 k + 9 k + 5 k) I3 - (5 k) I4
   -10 = - (10 k)I1 - (0)I2 - (5 k) I3 + (5 k + 10 k + 7 k) I4
27. 0.86 mA left to right
29. -3.26 V

369
31. Loop ordering: left, top, bottom.
    24 = (2 k + 8 k)I1 - (2 k)I2 - (8 k) I3
     0 = - (2 k)I1 + (2 k + 22 k + 800)I2 - (22 k) I3
     0 = - (8 k)I1 - (22 k)I2 + (8 k + 22 k + 400) I3

33. 19.8 mA (down)
35. -22.4 V
37. 20 = (6.8 k + 10 k)I1 - (10 k)I2 - (0 k) I3

     0 = - (10 k)I1 + (10 k + 8.5 k + 30 k)I2 - (30 k) I3
     0 = - (0)I1 - (30 k)I2 + (30 k + 20 k + 70 k) I3
39. 0.34 mA left to right
41. 49.5 V
43. Current source converts to 10 V + 20 k.
   8 = (5 k + 4 k)I1 - (4 k)I2
   -10 = - (4 k)I1 + (4 k + 20 k)I2
45. 0.76 mA left to right
47. -2.73 V
49. -6 mA = (1/24 k + 1/12 k + 1/9 k)Va - (1/9 k)Vb
    -2 mA = - (1/9 k)Va + (1/9 k + 1/25 k)Vb
51. 4.03 mA (up)
53. -774 mV
55. Combine 15 k + 25 k = 40 k
     2 mA = (1/20 k + 1/40 k + 1/5 k)Va - (1/5 k)Vb
    0.4 mA = - (1/5 k)Va + (1/5 k + 1/3 k)Vb
57. 0.538 mA
59. 324 mV
61. (300 - 20)mA = (1/40 + 1/10 + 1/100)Va - (1/10)Vb - (1/40)Vc
    10 mA = - (1/10)Va + (1/10 + 1/50 + 1/250)Vb - (1/250)Vc
    (-300 - 50)mA = - (1/40)Va - (1/250)Vb + (1/250 + 1/25 + 1/40)Vc

                                                             63. 177 mA
65. 5.94 V

370
67. This is deceptively simple. First combine the parallel 36 k resistors to a single 18 k. There is only one node
     of concern, node a. The 4 mA source enters this node. Define an exiting current, I1, down through the 18 k.
     I1 = Va/18 k. Define an entering current from the voltage source, I2.
     I2 = (12 - Va)/30 k. From KCL, 4 mA + I2 = I1. Substitute the current expressions into the KCL equation,
     expand and simplify. This results in a single node equation: 4.4 mA = (1/30 k + 1/18 k) Va.

69. 1.25 mA left to right

71. 4.2 V

73. 240 V

75. 720 V

77. 441 mV

79. 6 V

1. 5 F                               8 Capacitors
5. 8 V across 10 F, 4 V across 20 F
                                               3. 2 F
9. 23. 1.5 V                                   7. 2 k gets 5.38 V, 5 F gets 0 V,
13. 13.2 V, 24 V
17. 10 V, 15 ms                                    4 k and 3 k get 4.62 V
21. Replace 100  with 2 k                     11. 20 s, 100 s
                                              15. 1 ms, 5 ms
                                              19. 3 ms, 15 ms
                                              23. 125 F

371
                                                  9 Inductors

1. 6 mH                                           3. 0.75 mH
5. 2 k gets 3.33 V, 5 F gets 0 V,
                                                  7. 2 k gets 3.33 V, 3 mH gets 0 V,
    4 k and 3 mH get 6.67 V                           4 k and 5 F get 6.67 V
9. 2 k gets 5.38 V, 5 mH gets 0 V,
                                                  11. 2 k, 10 k and 20 F get 0 V,
    4 k and 3 k get 4.62 V                            8 k and 12 mH get 20 V
13. 33 k gets 15 V, all other components get 0 V
17. 20 ms, 100 ms                                 15. 0.2 A
                                                  19. 0 V and 480 mA for both times.
21. 40 ns, 200 ns
25. 833 ns, 4.17 s                                    With 5 , 2 V and 400 mA for both times.
                                                  23. 3 mA, -60 V

                                                  27. Replace 25  with 250 .

1. 80 mA      10 Magnetic Circuits and Transformers
5. 160 turns
9. 2.42 A                                 3. 95 mA
                                          7. 20 mA
13. 324 mA                                11. Cast steel causes greater core losses so the
17. 1440 
                                               secondary current would be reduced.
                                          15. vload = 4 volts, iload = 40 mA, iprimary = 6.67 mA
                                          19. 45 VA

372
Appendix E

                                   Base Units

In Chapters 1 and 2, a variety of measurement units were introduced and defined, along with the metric system.
It is useful to understand that all of the units used are built from three foundational units. These units describe
the conceptual building blocks of the system. They are mass (kilograms, kg), length (meters, m) and time
(seconds, s). They are the foundation of the MKS system. Every other unit used, such as watts, volts or amps,
can be built from these three fundamental elements. For example, it is not arbitrary that ohms times amps yields
volts.

In Chapter 2 it was noted that power equals current times voltage, and that this can be derived from the
associated units. Current was defined as the rate of charge movement per unit time, and one amp equals one
coulomb per second. Similarly, voltage was defined as the energy required to move a certain charge, and one
volt equals one joule per coulomb. If we multiply the units together we get:

                      P = I ×V
                      P = Cs × JC
                      P= J

                            s

Joules per second is energy per unit time and that is the very definition of power, with one watt being equal to
one joule per second. But this brings up the question, "Then what is a joule in terms of the three fundamental
units?" Energy can be defined as a force working over a specified distance. One joule is defined as the force of
one newton working over a distance of one meter. This creates a new question, "Then what is a newton?"
Newton's second law of motion states that force is equal to mass times acceleration. Acceleration, in turn, is the
rate of change of velocity, or distance per unit time, per unit time. For these units, we find:

                      force = mass×acceleration
                      force = kg× s2 m
                      force = s2 kg m

                     energy = force×distance
                     energy = s2 kg m × m

                                  kg m2
                     energy = 2

                                     s

Thus, we verify that one joule is equal to one kilogram-meter2 per second2. If we apply this back to the
definition for power, we find that one watt is equal to one kilogram-meter2 per second3.

373
Appendix F

                                             "Could I do one more immediately?"
                                                           - Bill Bruford

374
