Introduction to Mechanical
     Engineering Design

                             JACQULYN A. BAUGHMAN

                                Iowa State University Digital Press
                                                  Ames, Iowa
Introduction to Mechanical Engineering Design Copyright  2023 by Jacqulyn A. Baughman is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

You are free to copy, share, adapt, remix, transform, and build upon the material, so long as you follow the terms of
the license.

This is a publication of the
Iowa State University Digital Press
701 Morrill Rd, Ames, IA 50011
https://www.iastatedigitalpress.com
digipress@iastate.edu
Contents

ME 2700 Introduction 1: Course Description, Objectives, and Module Overview  1

ME 2700 Introduction 2: Course Setup and Design Process (DFSS)               3

ME 2700 Introduction 3: DMADVR Phases and Tools within the DFSS Process      iv

ME 2700 Introduction 3a: DMADVR - Test for Understanding Activity            v

Module 00- Micro-economy Kit

Module 00: Overview                                                          7

Micro-economy Kit Overview                                                   11

Chapter 1: Developing Nations: Problems and Solutions                        14

Chapter 2: Sustainability                                                    17

Module 1 - Define

Module 1: Overview                                                           21

Define Phase                                                                 24

Chapter 1: Project Charter                                                   25

Chapter 2: Project Plan Development                                          26

Chapter 3: Industry Perspective                                              28

Example Project: Gearbox Subassembly, MPI, Drawing, and Video                29

Module 2 - Measure

Module 2: Overview                                                           31

Measure Phase                                                                35

Chapter 1: Customer Requirements                                             36
Chapter 2: Market Analysis                                                      40

Chapter 3: Engineering Characteristics/Specifications and Benchmarking          43

Module 3- Analyze

Module 3: Overview                                                              49

Analyze Phase                                                                   55

Chapter 1: Introduction to Form (Morphology) in Engineering Concept Generation  56

Chapter 2: Functional Analysis and Concept Generation                           61

Chapter 3: QFD (House of Quality w/Decision Matrix) - HoQ w/DM                  65

Chapter 4: Final Project Plan and Concept Presentation                          72

Module 4A - Design

Module 4A: Overview                                                             75

Design Phase                                                                    80

Chapter 1: Modeling                                                             82

Chapter 2: Design Failure Mode & Effects Analysis (DFMEA)                       86

Chapter 3: Engineering Drawings and MPIs                                        90

Module 4B - Design Continued

Module 4B: Overview                                                             99

Design Phase Cont'd                                                             105

Chapter 4: BOM, Purchase Order and Part Cost                                    106

Chapter 5: Profit and Loss                                                      107

Module 5 - Verify

Module 5: Overview                                                              109
Verify Phase                                         114

Chapter 1: Test Planning and Results                 115

Chapter 2: Prototype Manufacture/Fabricate/Assemble  117

Module 6 - Report Results

Module 6: Overview                                   120

Report Phase                                         127

Chapter 1: Design Results Reporting                  128

Appendix 1: Accessibility Assessment                 130
1 | ME 2700 INTRODUCTION 1: COURSE DESCRIPTION, OBJECTIVES, AND MODULE OVERVIEW

ME 2700 Introduction 1: Course Description,
Objectives, and Module Overview

ME 2700 Course Description

ME 2700: Introduction to Mechanical Engineering Design (3 Cr.)

Prereq: ME 1600 or (ABE 1600, AERE 1600, BME 1600, CE 1600, CHE 1600, CPRE 1850, EE
1850, ENGR 1600, IE 1480, or SE 1850); ME 1700 or ENGR 1700; PHYS 2310; PHYS 2310L

Course Description: Overview of mechanical engineering design with applications to thermal
and mechanical systems. Introduction to current design practices used in industry. Semester-
long team project focused on addressing societal needs. Past projects include designing human
powered charging systems and products for developing nations.

ME 2700 Course Learning Objectives/Outcomes (CLO)

   CLO1: Given an open-ended problem, students will apply the engineering design
      process and tools to generate a solution (Specific instructor sections)

   CLO2: Students will demonstrate effective teamwork and collaboration during the
      engineering design process

   CLO3: Students will be able to create technical reports that possess appropriate
      structure, grammar, and tone

   CLO4: Students will be able to identify ways that social, economic, and environmental
      issues (three legs of the sustainability table) impact or are impacted by the activities of
      the designer

Watch the video below for an example of a team testing their solution prototype! This video
has no sound.

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=4#oembed-1
                         ME 2700 INTRODUCTION 1: COURSE DESCRIPTION, OBJECTIVES, AND MODULE OVERVIEW | 2

     Module Objectives

         1. Module Objective 1: Students will be able to define syllabus components/statements and
             hybrid/flipped course setup (CL01)

         2. Module Objective 2: Students will be able to identify the design process (Design for Six
             Sigma, DFSS) and associated tools (CL01)

    Module Highlights

This module contains learning content that is to be read/reviewed and watched (videos). The
module contains interactive videos embedded within learning content, as well as, interactive
activities for students to test their own understanding of the material. The interactive materials
are not graded but for the students' own enhanced learning experience in testing their
understanding. This module is a prerequisite and completion is required to view the next
module's content learning content and associated activities.
In this module, students will gain an overall understanding of the course and the design
process utilized, Design for Six Sigma (DFSS). Students will be introduced to the DMADVR
toolbox that contains the DFSS tools/templates utilized throughout the semester in completing
design team assignments. The DMADVR toolbox video will provide students with an overview
and guidance to its location in Canvas.

    Materials, Activities and Assignments

   Read/review learning module content in sequential order as setup in Canvas
   Watch embedded videos within learning modules and associated parts (1-3a)
   Complete all interactive learning activities within the learning module
3 | ME 2700 INTRODUCTION 2: COURSE SETUP AND DESIGN PROCESS (DFSS)

ME 2700 Introduction 2: Course Setup and
Design Process (DFSS)

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=60#oembed-1

Course Setup and DFSS Process Video Transcript [doc]
Student Engineering Design Team at work: Watch the video: No Audio/script!

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=60#oembed-2
                                ME 2700 INTRODUCTION 3: DMADVR PHASES AND TOOLS WITHIN THE DFSS PROCESS | 4

ME 2700 Introduction 3: DMADVR Phases
and Tools within the DFSS Process

 Click on the audio play button and utilize the accordion to
go through the DFSS phases as they are explained

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=347#audio-347-1
An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=347#h5p-4

The DFSS tools are found within the ME 2700 DMADVR Toolbox!
5 | ME 2700 INTRODUCTION 3A: DMADVR - TEST FOR UNDERSTANDING ACTIVITY

ME 2700 Introduction 3a: DMADVR - Test for
Understanding Activity

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=502#h5p-2
                                                                                   MODULE 00- MICRO-ECONOMY KIT | 6

       MODULE 00-
MICRO-ECONOMY KIT
7 | MODULE 00- MICRO-ECONOMY KIT

Module 00: Overview

     Module 00 Objectives

         1. Module Objective 1: Students will be able to describe an engineering problem (CLO1)
         2. Module Objective 2: Students will recognize the three pillars of sustainability in design and

             impact on design decisions (CLO4)
         3. Module Objective 3: Students will be able to choose an appropriate design team role (CLO2)
         4. Module Objective 4: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2
         5. Module Objective 5: Students will be able to prepare engineering drawings using

             engineering graphics/CAD software (CL01)

    Module Highlights

This module contains learning content that is to be read/reviewed and watched (videos). The
module contains interactive videos embedded within learning content, as well as, interactive
activities to test for understanding. The interactive materials are not graded. These activities
are utilized for students' own enhanced learning experience. This module is a prerequisite
and completion is required in order to view the upcoming learning content and associated
activities.
In this module students will be able to recognize the 3 pillars of sustainability (sometimes
referred to as the three legs of the sustainability table). This module contains several videos
of innovative approaches that entrepreneurs took in solving a problem they discovered in
their own country or developing country. Identifying a need and designing a solution that
                                                                                                                              MODULE 00: OVERVIEW | 8

integrates sustainability while assisting impoverished populations. This module provides ideas
for impoverished populations in which students can identify a profound need within a target
market. This module will guide student teams in understanding the development of a micro-
economy kit. This module will allow students to communicate within their teams about their
own skillsets. Identification of team strengths and weakness will be identified in order to
allocate work for the semester long design project. The completion of this module is required
to reveal the next learning module and associated activities. This module contains a quiz to be
completed individually to prepare for teamwork.

Success involves team discussions around skill sets in order to allocate work throughout the
semester. Identification of team roles is key to allocation of the team workload. Teams will get
to practice this while completing assignments associated with this module.

    Materials, Activities and Assignments

   Read/review learning module content in order it is presented (setup in Canvas)
   Watch embedded videos within the learning modules parts
   Watch video with associated script at the end of the module
   Complete all interactive learning activities within the learning module
   DMADVR Toolbox templates associated with assignments
   Complete the associated learning module quiz to prepare for teamwork
   Submit associated Learning Module assignments per Canvas due dates

     Assignment: Team Norms

     This assignment will provide students the opportunity to determine their role and associated
     responsibilities will be within the team. This will be based on typical roles found in industry-
     based project teams, and students will be able to develop team-based skills. Students will
     interact with team members to discuss their skills, abilities, and preferences in determining
     roles within the team. These roles are crucial to team-based work allocation to ensure the design
     project work is completed during the semester
9 | MODULE 00- MICRO-ECONOMY KIT

     This assignment will help you to develop...
          Module 01 Objective 1: Students will be able to chose an appropriate design team role (CLO2)

    Task

     Students will need to review the roles provided in the assignment document and discuss their
     skills, knowledge, and preferences with other team members. Team members will collect contact
     information and determine how the team will interact, as well as, handle conflict.
     In order to successfully complete this assignment , students will need to discuss/interact and
     agree to the roles/responsibilities for each team member. This interaction may take place in the
     classroom and on Microsoft Teams. The team will complete the DMADVR toolbox template and
     submit it to Canvas. Only one team member submits the team-based assignments for the team.

    Grading Criteria

     Grading is based on the "Expectations of Deliverables" outlined in the assignment document.
     This is reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the assignment
     is opened.

     Assignment: Widget Drawing, Manufacturability, and Safety Training

     This activity is will help you to develop...
          Module Objective 1: Students will be able to describe an engineering problem (CLO1)
          Module Objective 2: Students will recognize the three pillars of sustainability in design and
             impact on design decisions (CLO1)
          Module Objective 4: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
          Module Objective 5: Students will be able to prepare engineering drawings using
                                                                                                                      MODULE 00: OVERVIEW | 10

        engineering graphics/CAD software (CL01)

Task

The team will review a provided drawing of a `widget' and modify it in order to manufacture a
minimum of 3 widgets. The team will work together to utilized Solidworks, a CAD software
program utilized in Mechanical engineering to correct the drawing of the `widget" and work
with manufacturing (Boyd Lab) to obtain approval for manufacturability. The equipment and
raw materials are contained in the Boyd Lab. The widget will be completed after the team
members who are going to manufacture it are trained in the appropriate Boyd Lab equipment
(typically the miter saw, drill press, and band saw). The team will determine at least 3 team
members that will received Shop Equipment Hands-on training, and all team members MUST
complete Shop Safety Fundamentals online. Teamwork and collaboration will be keys to success
with this assignment. The roles and responsibilities will allocate the workload as per team
consensus.

Grading Criteria

The grading rubric is based on the "Expectations of Deliverables" outlined in the assignment
document. The rubric is available on Canvas once the assignment is opened.
11 | MODULE 00- MICRO-ECONOMY KIT

Micro-economy Kit Overview

Student Design Team Goal in ME 2700: Create a
micro-economy kit (design project)

As an engineer, you directly touch people's lives by being instrumental in designing products! In
ME 2700, students work in teams and engaged in creating a micro-economy kit (project) that
encourages/promotes self-sustainability and economic growth for underdeveloped/developing
nations. In order to accomplish this task, your design team must:

 1. Perform research in order to identify a region/country and target population who are
      experiencing a basic need shortcoming/issue/concern.

 2. Design an engineering solution (a product or process) that would help the target population,
      and:

          Will allow them to redirect time and resources to a different activity that positively
            impacts quality of life

          Meets a basic need in a developing/underdeveloped nation
          Will improve or create a self-sustaining economic activity
          Will be made from a low cost kit, maximizing "local content/materials"
          Can be sold and serviced by local artisans
          Promotes and integrates sustainability

Start simple.

Use resources immediately available to you. Befriend Google, the ISU Library, and search
the following:
                                                                                                            MICRO-ECONOMY KIT OVERVIEW | 12

Review summaries at World Bank, United Nations, World
Health Organization, etc.

 1. TED videos can be inspiring                            Villagers in Nana Kenieba hook up
 2. Competitions (e.g., Dell Social Innovation Challenge)  12 V batteries for lighting.

      or Foundations (e.g., the Gates Foundation).
 3. Data sources: the CIA World Factbook, Global Issues,

      etc.

Recommendations

1. Choose something inspiring that excites your team.
2. Perform research.
3. Select and target ONE region with a focused scope. Not the entire world, but a target

    customer.
4. learn about the regions of your interest. Become familiar with their history, culture,

    geography, economy and find more specific resources
5. Things won't be perfect the first time, iteration is to be expected, and is a beneficial

    learning process.
13 | MODULE 00- MICRO-ECONOMY KIT

Dos and Don'ts of Your Team's Engineering Design Project:

DOS                                              DON'TS

Include moving parts                             Do not select a project that is "TOO easy" (such
                                                             as a stove, grain storage, etc)

Design must involve experimentation via testing
                       and learning

Design MUST fit in the provided totes(assembled      Water treatment/filtration (DIFFICULT and
OR disassembled) as a SCALED down functional     expensive to test functionality, so not feasible in this

             prototype of a larger product                                   course)

Practice Exercise

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=2232#h5p-1
                                                             CHAPTER 1: DEVELOPING NATIONS: PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS | 14

Chapter 1: Developing Nations: Problems and
Solutions

Poverty

Many developing countries suffer from extreme poverty. These are the statistics from the 2018
Human Development Report by the UN Development Program to show the multitude of ways
in which poverty impacts the quality of human life.

50% (3 billion people) of the     1.1 billion people in developing
world's population lives on less  countries have inadequate water
than $2.50 a day.                 access.

75% of the total world income is  1 in 7 (270 million) children live
accounted for by the richest 20%  with no access to health services.
of the population.

22,000 children die each day due  1 in 3 (640 million) children live
to poverty.                       without adequate shelter.

The Underlying Problem

People of developing countries engage in resourceful and self-sustaining practices
as a way to the cycle of poverty. Solutions to the problems of developing countries
must be affordable, locally-based and renewable. Below are just some examples.
15 | MODULE 00- MICRO-ECONOMY KIT

Developing Nations: Problems and Solutions

Problem 1: Lack of access to energy and electricity

   Solution: Use of wind to generate energy.
Watch TED TALK 1 by: Malawian inventor William Kamkwamba, who at 14 built an
electricity-generating windmill from spare parts, working from rough plans he found in a
library book.

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=29#oembed-1

How-I-built-a-windmill_Ted-Talk Transcript [DOC]

Problem 2: Lack of access to clean water

   Solution: Use of a nanotech filter that could save lives in emerging economies and
      disaster sites.

Watch TED TALK 2 by: Engineer Michael Pritchard invented the portable Lifesaver filter,
which can make the most revolting water drinkable in seconds.

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=29#oembed-2

Clean Water Everywhere Transcript [DOC]

Problem 3: Air pollution

   Solution: Use of clean-burning charcoal from farm waste in kitchens with open cooking
      fires.
                                                             CHAPTER 1: DEVELOPING NATIONS: PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS | 16

Watch TED TALK 3 by: Amy Smith, the MIT Engineer, who presented a solution that could
save 2 million children a year in the developing world.

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=29#oembed-3

Simple Designs To Save A Life Transcript [DOC]

Problem 4: Access to quality health care

   Solution: Use of an inexpensive small sleeping bag for premature babies.
Watch TED TALK 4 by: Jane Chen, who showcases a solution that is cheaper than expensive
incubators, but just as functional.

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=29#oembed-4

A Warm Embrace That Saves Lives Transcript [DOC]
17 | MODULE 00- MICRO-ECONOMY KIT

Chapter 2: Sustainability

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=520#h5p-37

Sustainability is defined as "development that meets the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs" (World Commission
on Environment and Development, 1987).
Sustainability occurs when all three pillars (social, economic, and environmental) are thriving!

Three Pillars Venn Diagram
                                                                                                                    CHAPTER 2: SUSTAINABILITY | 18

       For more information about the three pillars model for sustainability, check out the
       following resources:

             A Framework for Sustainability Indicators at EPA [PDF]
             EPA Sustainability Primer [PDF]

     Practice Exercise

     Drag the components into the sections they correspond with:

       An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
       https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=520#h5p-77

Customer Needs - Sustainability

Majd Mashharawi was walking through her war-torn neighborhood in Gaza when an idea flashed in
her mind: "What if she could take the rubble and transform it into building materials?"

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=520#oembed-1

How I made Bricks out of Ashes and Rubble _Ted Talks_Video Script [DOC]
   19 | MODULE 00- MICRO-ECONOMY KIT

       OPTIONAL: A Sustainability Guide by Dassault System's (c)
       (Solidworks)

          The idea of "Sustainable Design" is cropping up more and more in today's product design
          conversations. But what is sustainable design, and how do I do it? The Solidworks
          Sustainability Guide provides some answers to these questions.
          Note: Going through the entire Guide -- and playing with some of the examples on
          Solidworks -- should take about 5-7 hours, so it's a good idea to pace yourself.
          Did you complete the entire guide with Solidworks? You may be interested in taking the
          Solidworks CSWA-Sustainability Exam now.

                  "The completion of the Certified SOLIDWORKS Associate Sustainability (CSWA-
                  Sustainability) exam shows that you have successfully demonstrated your
                  understanding of the principles of environmental assessment and sustainable
                  design. Employers can be confident that an individual with this certification
                  understands the principles of environmental assessment and sustainable design. "1

1. Courtesy of Solidworks CSWA-Sustainability (c): https://www.solidworks.com/sw/support/14672_ENU_HTML.htm
                                                                                                   MODULE 1 - DEFINE | 20

MODULE 1 - DEFINE
21 | MODULE 1 - DEFINE

Module 1: Overview

      Module Objectives

         1. Module Objective 1: Students will be able to identify an engineering problem (CLO1)
         2. Module Objective 2: Students will be able to describe an engineer problem (CL01)
         3. Module Objective 3: Students will be able to apply project management tools to meet

             deadlines (CLO1, CLO2)
         4. Module Objective 4: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
         5. Module Objective 5: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool

             use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar, and tone (CLO3)

    Module Highlights

In this module, student teams will review/read materials and watch videos embedded into
the learning content. This module contains an e-book that will provide a background on
poverty, and also contains an important industry-based video on the Project Charter and
project planning (Vermeer Co.). There are interactive videos and students will be able to
individually prepare by completing the module in sequential order as setup in Canvas. By
utilizing the non-graded test for understanding interactive activities, students will be prepared
to work in their teams on the assignments in order to turn them in on the due date provided
in Canvas. The student teams will use the DMADVR toolbox, provided in Canvas, to complete
the necessary template(s) for the Project Charter. The student teams will complete their initial
project plan utilizing Microsoft Project Professional. Teams will progress through the team
development process, and implement their roles/responsibilities in the project plan. Student
team will complete an initial project plan using MS Project Professional. An example project
is also provided that includes: Gearbox Subassembly, MPI, Drawing, and Video.
                                                                                                                              MODULE 1: OVERVIEW | 22

Teams will review and discuss available project areas for the semester provided in Canvas
(Project Areas for the semester) to reach consensus in order to select a semester project, and
perform research to fully complete their Project Charter.

    Materials, Activities and Assignments

Required materials, activities and assignments

   Read/review Module 1 content in sequential order as setup in Canvas to obtain visibility
      of associated Quiz and Assignment(s)

   Watch embedded videos within Module content
   Complete the module quiz by Canvas due date
   Discussions in-class and on MS Teams regarding the project ideas, and select semester

      project through consensus
   DMADVR Toolbox Template(s) associated with Assignment(s)
   Complete and submit the Module 1 assignment:

     Project Charter and Initial Project Plan

     This assignment will entail completing a project charter and project plan, which is the
     foundation for the design project. This guides the team's semester work, and is a living
     document. This assignment will help you to develop...

          Module Objective 1: Students will be able to identify an engineering problem (CLO1)
          Module Objective 2: Students will be able to describe an engineer problem (CL01)
          Module Objective 3: Students will be able to apply project management tools to meet

             deadlines (CLO1, CLO2)
          Module Objective 4: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
          Module Objective 5: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool

             use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone (CLO3)
23 | MODULE 1 - DEFINE

    Task

     It is important for the team's success to develop a charter to guide your semester work. Gaining
     experience in achieving consensus on the charter and initial project plan content is crucial in
     the team development process. The completion of the foundation pieces of the project, the
     charter and project plan, will ensure successful guidance is provided for the rest of the team's
     work during the semester. The Project Charter and Plan are living documents utilized to guide
     the student design team work. Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool
     use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone. The team will utilize the
     DMADVR Project Charter template and MS Project Professional, as well as the assignment
     document, which are key in completing and submitting the assignment on time.

    Grading Criteria

     The grading/assessment is outlined in the assignment document's "Expectations of
     Deliverables", which is reflected in the rubric. The rubric is provided on Canvas and can be
     reviewed once the assignment is opened.
              DEFINE PHASE | 24

Define Phase

Define the project. Identify a target region and population. Understand the voice of the
customer (VOC) to identify their needs. Provides a purpose/reason for the project with
quantifiable data and measurable target.

This phase starts by defining customer needs. The customer in most cases is an external
entity, but customers can also be internal. For example, when designing a process that feeds
components to another in-house process, the customer is internal.

The best sources for this information are the customers themselves. Make note of what they
say they want, as well as what their own objectives are. For example, a customer may say a
left-handed widget is needed, but after listening to what they need the widget to do, you might
determine that a Teflon-coated left-handed widget might be a better solution. Discuss your
ideas with the customer to define the best possible solution for the customer's actual needs.

Information that can be used to define what the customer needs might also come from industry
research, historical data, sales department, and research your team has done. Whatever the
source of information, the objective is to have the product design be primarily driven by what
the customer needs and is willing to pay for.
25 | MODULE 1 - DEFINE

Chapter 1: Project Charter

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=298#h5p-18

     Practice Exercise

       An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
       https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=298#h5p-20
                                                                                              CHAPTER 2: PROJECT PLAN DEVELOPMENT | 26

Chapter 2: Project Plan Development

A project plan is often presented as a Gantt chart (schedule) showing the timeline or due dates.
All projects have clearly defined start and end dates! A project plan is comprised of both the
work breakdown structure (WBS) and the Gantt chart. These are two foundation parts needed
in developing a project plan. It serves as a roadmap showing the project phases, key activities,
and their start and end dates, dependencies between tasks, and project milestones. Project
plans are typically presented as just the Gantt chart as a summary format to various audiences.

Watch the interactive video below:

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=384#h5p-38

In ME 2700:

   The project phases are:
          Define,
          Measure,
          Analyze,
          Design,
          Verify, and
          Report (DMADVR)

   The details of tasks/activities are commonly referred to as the work break down structure
      (WBS), to ensure responsibilities and deadlines are identified.

   In MS project the WBS drives Gantt chart development.
   In developing a full project plan:

          The WBS is determined
          The GANTT chart is developed (as a result of WBS inputs)
   At Iowa State University students have access to MS Project in computer rooms,
      classroom computers, and the ability to download it to laptops/tablets through the IT
      services website. It is a great professional tool to have in a design engineer's toolkit. It
      will be a great bonus to place on your resume as you seek internships, co-ops, and your
27 | MODULE 1 - DEFINE

      first employment opportunity upon graduation.

     Practice Exercise

     Check your understanding with the activity below:

       An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
       https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=384#h5p-42
                                                                                                        CHAPTER 3: INDUSTRY PERSPECTIVE | 28

Chapter 3: Industry Perspective

The Vermeer corporation explains their perspective on the use of project charters and Gantt
charts in the videos below:

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=467#oembed-1

Vermeer Project Charter Video Script [DOC]

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=467#oembed-2

Vermeer Project Plan and Gantt Charts [DOC]
29 | MODULE 1 - DEFINE

Example Project: Gearbox Subassembly, MPI,
Drawing, and Video

   Drwg - AN00009 (Gearbox Subassembly) [PDF]
   MPI - AN00009 (GEARBOX SUBASSEMBLY)C[PDF]
   ME270_Solidworks Video Tutorials Suggested List - S20 [DOC]

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=1933#oembed-1

AN00009 - Gearbox Subassembly_Video Script [DOC]
                                                                                                      MODULE 2 - MEASURE | 30

MODULE 2 - MEASURE
31 | MODULE 2 - MEASURE

Module 2: Overview

     Module Objectives

         1. Module Objective 1: Students will be able to define customer requirements (CLO1)
         2. Module Objective 2: Students will be able to perform a market/competitive analysis (CLO1)
         3. Module Objective 3: Students will be able to develop engineering specifications CLO1)
         4. Module Objective 4: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
         5. Module Objective 5: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool use

             and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone (CLO3)

    Module Highlights

This module consists of material to review/read and videos that consist of both interactive
and quiz-based activities. All module interactive activities provide the students to test their
understanding, and is not graded. Students need to progress through the material in sequential
order, as setup in Canvas. Once the module is completed, the quiz and associated assignments
become visible, and are to be completed per Canvas due date. This module's material contains
learning content about developing customer requirements, market/competitive analysis
(benchmarking), and engineering specifications This allows student teams to work on
measuring their project by defining their target market's requirements, perform a market
research and analysis (benchmarking), and develop engineering specifications. The module
also provides students with an industry perspective (Vermeer Co.).
In this module student teams will continue to work through the DFSS process by utilizing
the templates/forms found in the DMADVR toolbox to complete their assignments. Teams
will be successful by utilizing roles/responsibilities and allocating the workload to successfully
complete the assignment(s) on time in order to submit to Canvas. Student teams frequently
                                                                                                                              MODULE 2: OVERVIEW | 32

forget to complete their summary, which is part of their final report. Success will hinge on
completing the module and completing the quiz to be ready for teamwork!

    Materials, Activities and Assignments

   Read/review the module in sequential order
   Watch embedded videos in the module
   Complete interactive activities and quiz-based videos in the module
   Discuss assignment requirements and allocate workload within the team to complete

      assignments via in-class and MS Teams
   Submit associated assignments to Canvas due dates:

     Customer Requirements_ Market Analysis

     This assignment will provide students the opportunity to research and record customer
     requirements, and market competition. The teams need to allocate workload on the tasks, based
     on roles/responsibilities. This assignment provides the opportunity for consensus building and
     team collaboration completing the associated DMADVR toolbox templates.
     This assignment will help you to develop...

          Module Objective 1: Students will be able to define customer requirements (CLO1)
          Module Objective 2: Students will be able to perform a market analysis(CLO1)
          Module Objective 3: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
          Module Objective 4: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool use

             and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone (CLO3)

    Tasks

     Teams will work on developing customer requirements based on research (guided by -customer needs)
     to guide design. Teams need to utilize their roles and responsibilities to allocate work on this
     assignment. The second part of this assignment is for teams to analyze the market based on target
33 | MODULE 2 - MEASURE

     customers and to identify potential competitive products/ services. The team will gain information
     from this competitive analysis to consider how and if the customer needs are being met by the
     competition, and this will be valuable for teams in developing their own design. This will be used as
     input into the Engineering Specifications and Benchmarking assignment. Determining gaps in the
     market in meeting customer needs is key in future work in developing an engineering solution/design.
     Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool use and results that possess
     appropriate structure, grammar and tone. Teams will gain experience with consensus building and
     work allocation. Teams will complete the associated DMADVR toolbox templates associated with the
     assignment(s).
     Keys to success on this project include teamwork. Determining work allocation after a team
     discussion and review of assignment requirements, and utilizing the DMADVR toolbox
     templates to complete the work. Inside and outside class discussion and work may be warranted
     to ensure due date is met. Ensuring all aspects of the assignment are completed. Success will
     hinge on completing the module and associated quiz to be ready for teamwork!

    Grading Criteria

     Grading is based on the "Expectations of Deliverables" outlined in the assignment document.
     This is reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the assignment
     is opened.

     Engineering Specification and Benchmarking

     The next step in the design process is to build a technical list of metrics and features that satisfy
     your customer requirements can be satisfied. In this assignment the team will work to build the
     list of metrics and features to satisfy the customer requirements. Customer requirements was
     developed previously in 03, and this serves as the WHAT, and in this assignment, teams need to
     develop the HOW those requirements will be satisfied.
     This assignment will help you to develop...
                                                                                                                       MODULE 2: OVERVIEW | 34

     Module Objective 3: Students will be able to develop engineering specifications (CLO1)
     Module Objective 4: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
     Module Objective 5: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool use

        and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone (CLO3)

Tasks

This assignment will consist of teams acquiring information that will be used for decision
making and product testing. Teams will determine the technical specifications required to meet
customer requirements. Teams will research existing/competitive products on the market, and
clearly define how they meet customer requirements. This benchmarking endeavor will be
utilized as input into developing engineering specifications. Teams will be successful in
collaborating and having discussions to determine work allocation by utilizing roles/
responsibilities. Teams will need to complete the associated DMADVR toolbox template and
allocate work to complete the assignment on time. Success will hinge on completing the module
and associated quiz to be ready for teamwork!

Grading Criteria

Grading is based on the "Expectations of Deliverables" outlined in the assignment document.
This is reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the assignment
is opened.
35 | MODULE 2 - MEASURE

Measure Phase

The second process step in Design for Six Sigma process, DMADVR, it is used to determine
the definition of what the customer wants to create a specification. The specification defines
the product or service in a way that is measurable, allowing data to be collected and compared
with the specified requirements. This is essential for ensuring the final product meets the
customer needs, defined in the first step
Measure the customer requirements. Understanding customer needs/wants, and translating
into measurable design requirements. This phase includes development of Customer
Requirements, Market Analysis, Engineering Specifications, and Benchmarking.

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=2249#oembed-1

Customer Needs - Part 1 Video Script [doc]
                                                                                                   CHAPTER 1: CUSTOMER REQUIREMENTS | 36

Chapter 1: Customer Requirements

The Voice of the Customer

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=257#h5p-54

Watch Amos Winter's video below on the Leveraged Freedom Chair. The engineering design
team's research revealed that:

   40 million people in the developing world in dire need of functional inexpensive
      wheelchairs. Tanzania is one example of a target market

   By listening to the Voice of The Customer (VOC), design team identified customer wants/
      needs. These "raw" needs/wants were translated into Customer Requirements (CRs)

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=257#oembed-1

The cheap all-terrain wheelchair_Ted Talks a_Video Script [DOC]

Customer requirements:

   Technical or non-technical descriptions of what a customer wants, needs, and/or
      desires.

   Not meeting customer requirements leads to market failure.
37 | MODULE 2 - MEASURE

     Customer Needs vs Customer Requirements

       Customers have needs and requirements. A customer need establishes the relationship between
       the organization and the customer (Example: "I need/want an iPad.")
       Requirements are those characteristics that determine whether or not the customer is happy.
       (Examples: iPad is user-friendly, has to be fast in data storage and retrieval, light-weight,
       long battery life, etc.)
       You can measure user-friendliness with a Likert scale (1-5), measure download/upload in
       megabits per second or load times in fractions of seconds, light-weight can be a % or amount
       measured as a reduction from current weight.

Voice of the Customer (VOC) and translation to
specifications:

If you asked your customers what they wanted from your design, how would they answer? They often
use descriptive, rather than quantifiable, words for voicing specifications:

   People considering a new car may want a "roomy" vehicle to store groceries, luggage, etc.
   People typically don't provide specific quantification for "roomy", such as interior volume or

      interior geometry in mind.
   Do not shy away from including qualitative requirements.

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=257#h5p-19

Understand Your Customers

Design teams must understand the target market customers well in order to meet their
expectations. Examples of not meeting the target customers' expectations are seen as glaring
                                                                                                   CHAPTER 1: CUSTOMER REQUIREMENTS | 38

market failures. These can cost a company $$! It takes significant amounts of time, money, and
effort to overcome the negative image of market failures.

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=257#oembed-2

Domino's Pizza Greatest Turnaround_Video Script [DOC]

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=257#oembed-3

Customer Needs - Part 2_Video Script [DOC]

       IN ME 2700, ONLY THE RANKING NUMBERS: 1,3,9 are used to
                                 rank customer requirements!

     Practice Exercise

    Let's Look at MIRE TECH

     To build a House of Quality, your team must determine customer requirements and then
     perform a market analysis. Below, match a customer need with a customer requirement:

       An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
       https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=257#h5p-21
39 | MODULE 2 - MEASURE

     Practice Exercise

       An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
       https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=257#h5p-22

     Practice Exercise

    Customer Requirements

     Customers provided importance rankings for their requirements and the top 2 were:
           Good Texture
           Generous Portions.

     Appetizing Appearance was least important.
     Finally, Good Taste and Low Prices were moderately important.
     Given this information, rank your CRs (items of the same rank will be in the same order as was
     just listed):

       An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
       https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=257#h5p-23
                                          CHAPTER 2: MARKET ANALYSIS | 40

Chapter 2: Market Analysis

Research Market Competitors - Benchmarking

In researching the market, your team needs to understand the customer's experience(s) with
existing products on the market. These competitors are then assessed using CRs. The idea is
for your design team to understand the customer's current experiences, or what products they
are using to satisfy their requirements. This gives the opportunity for your design team to see
what kind of product you can design to better satisfy the customer, so you can capture the
market!

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=259#oembed-1

Benchmarking_Video Script [DOC]

Let's take a look at MIRE_TECH's competitor assessment/
analysis from the HoQ:

The team identified four competitors to assess using the customer requirements with rankings of 1,
3, and 9:

                  Table 1. Stove Reviews

Chitetezo mbaula  Weber-741001 Grill  Greenfire Stove  Rocket Stove
           9                                                   9
           9      1                       1                    3
           9                                                   3
           9      3                       9                    3
           3                                                   9
           3      9                       9                    3

                  9                       3

                  9                       3

                  1                       1
41 | MODULE 2 - MEASURE

                                                 A screenshot of the same data
                                                 from above, as it would
                                                 appear in the DMADVR
                                                 spreadsheet.

The team's assessment shows that Chitetezo mbaula as the highest performing competitor or
the competitor that met the customer requirements with the highest score! The team can use
this information to analyze the top-scoring competitor. This provides the team with knowledge
about where they can either meet or exceed customer expectations in their designs!
The Chocolate Chip Cookie design team also researched the competition and reviewed how
they stacked up:
                                       CHAPTER 2: MARKET ANALYSIS | 42

              Table 2. Cookie Reviews

Mrs. Field's  Girl Scout's  Starbucks  Cinnabon
       3                                     9
       3      3             3                3
       3                                     3
       3      3             3                1
       3                                     9
              3             3

              1             1

              3             9

Practice Exercise

Answer this practice question about the cookie design team's assessment:

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=259#h5p-52

Occasionally, ranking numbers besides 1, 3, 9 are used by different entities. In ME design, we
ONLY use 1, 3, and 9 for ranking.

Practice Exercise

Watch the following interactive video: Developing a Deep Understanding of the
Customer - Tools and Methods

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=259#h5p-80
43 | MODULE 2 - MEASURE

Chapter 3: Engineering Characteristics/
Specifications and Benchmarking

Benchmarking and Engineering Specification

Click on the left arrow to see each definition!

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=309#h5p-48

Determining the How

Once the design team has identified the WHO (customer) and WHAT (customer
requirements), the next step is to determine the HOW. As engineers, the team will need to
develop engineering characteristics/features/functions to satisfy the customer.
For example, consider designing a new vehicle. A stated need/want by the customer might be,

       "I need a lot of room in my car because I have two kids and a dog and we take cross-
       country trips".
This translates into the customer requirement :
       The car must be roomy.
To engineer a vehicle that meets this customer requirement, we must cast "roomy" into
quantitative metrics or design features that we can:

 1. Assess "on paper" using our modeling skills;
 2. Measure once prototypes and production versions of our design are built;
 3. Justify our choices to management.

Suitable "metrics" might be:
                            CHAPTER 3: ENGINEERING CHARACTERISTICS/SPECIFICATIONS AND BENCHMARKING | 44

   "Rows of seats (#)"
   "Interior volume (cubic feet)"
   "Headroom (inches)," etc.
A corresponding feature might be:
   "Fold down seats."
Note each metric has an associated unit. Specific features may or may not exist, and thus have
no units. The list of design criteria should be based on careful analysis of the customer's wants/
needs, analysis of existing products and systems, and extensive discussion amongst the team.
In summary, HOW refers to:
The technical features, functionality, and characteristics that meet customer requirements,
which form the "attic "of the house or How to Satisfy the Customer. The Relationship Matrix
room of the House is used to assess these using the Customer Requirements using 1, 3, and 9.
This is shown in your DMADVR Toolbox, in the tab titled, QFD w_DM.

                      House of Quality Rooms
45 | MODULE 2 - MEASURE

Let Us Revisit MIRE TECH

The MIRE TECH design team first developed their customer requirements (CR) and rankings.
Next, the team brainstormed engineering features/characteristics/functions that would satisfy
these customer requirements. Asking HOW around the CRs assisted the team in developing
the engineering features/characteristics/functions. The team brainstormed a list of quantifiable
metrics and/or features that can be correlated to the customer requirements. Each metric must
have an associated unit. If there is an "industry standard" definition of a particular metric, use
the standard metric.

Specifications and their Importance

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=309#h5p-56

Now let's take another look at our design team's development of a new chocolate chip cookie.
The design team gathered information from the voice of the customer and determined the
Customer Requirements and their rankings.

Now the Chocolate Cookie Design (CCD) team can brainstorm around Engineering
Specifications (functions/features/characteristics) to determine HOW the CRs will be satisfied
by your CCD engineering team.

                            Voice of the Customer: Customer Requirements

Ranking                     Based on Customers' needs/wants, Define
                                       Customer Requirements

                         9  Good Texture

                         9  Generous Portions

                         3  Taste Good

                         3  Low Price

                         1  Appetizing Appearance

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=309#h5p-49
                            CHAPTER 3: ENGINEERING CHARACTERISTICS/SPECIFICATIONS AND BENCHMARKING | 46

Now, the team needs to relate the customers' requirements to the engineering metrics and
features. This is a team decision based on thoughtful discussions and research in order to
justify the correlations. This is sometimes referred to as the correlation or relationship
matrix of the House of Quality.

MIRE TECH Design Team used the following scale to assess/rank the relationship between
CRS (What) and the Engineering Specifications, Features, Functions, and Characteristics:

   9 - Strong relationship
   3 - Moderate relationship
   1 - Little to no relationship

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=309#h5p-70

House of Quality: How It is Built

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=309#h5p-59

Units of Measurement

Additionally, each /function/characteristic can be assessed in terms of their "direction", up
or down. In other words, from an engineering perspective, are you increasing or decreasing
performance when meeting each Customer Requirement. A House Of Quality format is not
always uniform. Some formats place units in the attic (top center) or foundation (bottom
center). Some use up and down arrows vs. +/-. It is important that you review the form provided
in the course to ensure compliance.

Target Values

The House of Quality (HoQ) provides a foundation to use benchmarked or target values as
objective measurements to evaluate each characteristic, forming the basement of the house (8.).
Compare competition by benchmarking against Engineering Specifications.
47 | MODULE 2 - MEASURE

Mire Tech Team has calculated the ranking shown in the spreadsheet below, Mire_Tech_QFD
(House of Quality_with DM). Download the spreadsheet below. Review how the rankings are
automatically calculated based on your assessments already provided for the WHAT and HOW
in the middle top area of the House of Quality (HoQ). Remember that the WHAT is the
customer requirements or What the customer Wants! Also, the HOW is how your design team
will satisfy or address What the Customer wants!

   Click this link to download/view the MIre Tech_QFD(House of Quality) _with DM
      [XLSX]

MIRE_TECH completed sections 1, 2, 6, 7, 4, and 8. At the bottom of 4. Competition and
Concepts are the scores for each of the Competitors and Concepts (Your team's). In green
highlight are the high scorers, and can be used to develop the Benchmarking data!

Review the WHAT (Customer Requirements on the left side. There are two customers: the
end user and the entrepreneur. Reviewing the spreadsheet from left to right the Customer
Requirements or the WHAT rows are addressed by the HOW columns. This is the process for
engineering design teams to understand WHAT the customer requires/wants and HOW the
team will address this in their design.

       Occasionally, company cultures allow more than 1,3,9 ranking. It is rare, and won't be
       used for ME design courses.

This ranking of the engineering features/functions/characteristics/metrics allowed the team
to then identify the ones that have the biggest impact on customer requirements. Additionally,
the team may identify target values for each metric and indicate whether each feature listed
should be present or absent. Achieving each of the targets should mean that the customer(s)
will be satisfied with the team's design.The bottom part of the table is for Benchmarking or
quantifying each competing product/system against engineering features/functions/
characteristics/metrics the team developed (HOW). If a particular metric or feature doesn't fit
with a particular competitor, this may mean the team's list is incomplete. Use appropriate
sources. The team may need to make an educated guess and clearly identify that you have
guessed. This area allows the team to determine where (measurable) their design needs to be in
terms of specifications in moving forward with their selected concept.
                                                                                                     MODULE 3- ANALYZE | 48

MODULE 3- ANALYZE
49 | MODULE 3- ANALYZE

Module 3: Overview

     Module Objectives

         1. Module Objective 1: Students will be able to prepare a functional analysis by
             decomposing key functions required for the engineering design prototype (CLO1)

         2. Module Objective 2: Students will be able to develop concepts using morphology and
             sub-function analysis (form and function) (CLO1)

         3. Module Objective 3: Students will be able to generate feasible concepts using functional
             analysis and morphological connections (CLO1)

         4. Module Objective 4: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
         5. Module Objective 5: Students will be able to evaluate (give examples of good) teamwork

             contribution and collaboration (CLO2)
         6. Module Objective 6: Students will be able to justify own (self) teamwork contribution

             and collaboration (CLO2)
         7. Module Objective 7: Students will be able to seek assistance for teamwork and conflict

             resolution (CLO2)
         8. Module Objective 8: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool

             use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar, and tone (CLO3)
         9. Module Objective 9: Students will able to explain/communicate the final design concept

             process to diverse audiences using written and oral presentation methods (CLO4)
       10. Module Objective 10: Students will be able to apply project management tools to meet

             deadlines (CLO1, CL02)
       11. Module Objective 11: Students will be able to justify a final design concept proposal by

             assessing the generated concepts (CLO4)
                                                                                                                              MODULE 3: OVERVIEW | 50

    Module Highlights

In this module students will review/read content, which includes watching videos. Some
videos are quiz-based and/or interactive. The module ends with an industry perspective on
the content (Vermeer Co.). There will be activities that will test for understanding of module
content. In this module the content will prepare students to work in their design teams
to analyze by performing a functional analysis and developing morphology (form). These
are key inputs in concept generation. Teams will work to develop 3-4 conceptual ideas by
connecting the functional analysis and morphological matrix. The result of this module will
be to assess the 3-4 concepts generated in the House of Quality Decision Matrix (HoQ w/
DM) to determine the final concept that will become a prototype at the end of the semester.
Additionally, students will update their original "draft" project plan to include more defined
work that can be distributed based on final design decision form the HoQ. Students will
be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool use and results that possess appropriate
structure, grammar and tone. Teams will experience consensus building as they work through
the assignments associated with this module, and utilize DMADVR toolbox templates to
complete associated assignments.

Teams will complete Peer Review 1. Students will individually complete a peer review to assess
team members(s) and self performance regarding teamwork.

Teams can ensure success in this module by completing the team-based assignments, utilizing
the DMADVR toolbox templates. Teams need to determine workload allocation, ensure
consensus building both in-class and on MS Teams if needed. The key to success is to allocate
the workload and follow-up to ensure completion of tasks by team members. This module is
critical for the team to develop concepts and assess them to determine the final design the team
will work on for the remainder of the semester.

    Materials, Activities and Assignments

   Read/review module content in sequential order per Canvas setup
   Watch embedded videos that contain quizzes and/or interactive activities
   Work through the interactive activities to test your understanding of the content to

      prepare for team work
   Use associated DMADVR templates as outlined in the assignment document.
51 | MODULE 3- ANALYZE

   Use CATME to complete Peer Review 1
   Submit assignments by Canvas due dates:

     Functional Analysis and Morph Charts: Concept Generation

     This assignment will provide students to maximize their roles/responsibilities in completing the
     team-based assignments. Teams will work together to generate ideas and analyze functionality
     needed based on customer requirements. Teams will use the customer needs, engineering
     specifications, market analysis and benchmarking results as the basis for generating design
     concepts. The final report section will be completed as an initial draft. This will serve as a
     foundation in order for teams to select their final design.
     This module also provides the opportunity to prepare structured summaries that are an initial
     draft of the final report.
     This assignment will help you to develop...

          Module Objective 1: Students will be able to prepare a functional analysis by
             decomposing key functions required for the engineering design prototype (CLO1)

          Module Objective 2: Students will be able to develop concepts using morphology and
             sub-function analysis (form and function) (CLO1)

          Module Objective 4: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
          Module Objective 8: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool

             use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone (CLO3)

    Tasks

     The teams will complete tasks as follows:

          Develop/build a function tree and process flowcharts
          Develop functional block diagrams
          Identify inputs/outputs/controls for the flow of energy/matter/information for each

             function
          Create/develop a morphological chart for each of the lowest level sub-functions in process
                                                                                                                       MODULE 3: OVERVIEW | 52

        flowcharts
     Generate 4 complete, feasible concepts from morphological chart. Sketch the concepts

        and provide a name.
     Complete an initial draft of final report section

Grading Criteria

The grading rubric is based on the "Expectations of Deliverables" outlined in the assignment
document. The rubric is available on Canvas once the assignment is opened.

Concept Selection Presentation & Design Work Plan

The next step is to evaluate your generated product concepts against the customer requirements
and engineering specifications. Based on the results of this evaluation, the team selects a final
product concept to present/pitch to instructor, TAs, and peers. The QFD with Decision Matrix is
used to guide, justify, and document the selection process. The final report section will be
completed as an initial draft.
This module also provides the opportunity to prepare structured summaries that are an initial
draft of the final report.
This assignment will help you to develop...

     Module Objective 3: Students will be able to generate feasible concepts using functional
        analysis and morphological connections (CLO1)

     Module Objective 8: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool
        use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone (CLO3)

     Module Objective 9: Students will able to explain/communicate the final design concept
        process to diverse audiences using written and oral presentation methods (CLO3)
53 | MODULE 3- ANALYZE

          Module Objective 10: Students will be able to apply project management tools to meet
             deadlines (CLO1)

          Module Objective 11: Students will be able to justify a final design concept proposal by
             assessing the generated concepts

    Tasks

     The teams will complete tasks as follows:
          Evaluate your product concepts using the QFD w_DM tab of the DMADVR toolbox:
                   Evaluate your product concepts
                   Select a concept
          Use MS Project to update and finalize the team's work plan and schedule
                   Use the initial project plan as the foundation for updating to create a Final Project
                      Plan
          Prepare and present your work in class via Power point presentation
                   All team member participate (either in person or online)
          Write a final report draft of this section

    Grading Criteria

     The grading rubric is based on the "Submission of Deliverables -Expectations" outlined in the
     assignment document. The rubric is available on Canvas once the assignment is opened.

     Peer Review 1
                                                                                                                       MODULE 3: OVERVIEW | 54

This assignment will help your learn more about how your peers perceive:

     Contributions to teamwork
     Interaction with Teammates
     Efforts to keep team on Track
     Expectations for quality
     Conflict resolution skills, etc.

This assignment will help you to develop...

     Module Objective 5: Students will be able to evaluate (give examples of good) teamwork
        contribution and collaboration (CLO2)

     Module Objective 6: Students will be able to justify own (self) teamwork contribution
        and collaboration (CLO2)

     Module Objective 7: Students will be able to seek assistance for teamwork and conflict
        resolution (CLO2)

Tasks

   1. Complete a peer review/assessment survey. A link to the survey will be provided in an e-
        mail to be sent to each student from a system referred to as CATME. It is the student's
        responsibility to ensure they do not block email from "@CATME.org". Be sure to read and
        follow the instructions carefully. MUST answer all questions.

   2. Please be honest in your responses. It is reasonable that a peer may meet or exceed
        expectations ins several categories but it is unrealistic to rank him or her as exception in
        every area.

   3. Provide written comments describing contributions for each team member and what is
        working well and not working well for your team. This section is especially important
        because it is an opportunity for you to be both instructive(teach)and constructive(build)in
        your evaluation of your team and teammates.

Grading Criteria

The grading rubric is based on the " Expectations of Deliverables" outlined in the assignment
document. The rubric is available on Canvas once the assignment is opened.
55 | MODULE 3- ANALYZE

Analyze Phase

In this phase, typically the proposed process or product is analyzed and studied to determine
whether there are better ways to achieve the desired results. The customer information captured
is translated into measurable design performance or function requirements. The requirements can
be converted into system, sub-system, and component level design requirements.
A quality function deployment (QFD) tool, the House of Quality (HoQ), is used to translate customer
needs into engineering specifications. This phase includes concept development and selection tools
such as a function tree, concept form development(morphology), functional analysis, and HoQ. It
also includes a final project plan developed to further breakdown the work tasks and timeline (Gantt
chart). The Final Design is selected.
           CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION TO FORM (MORPHOLOGY) IN ENGINEERING CONCEPT GENERATION | 56

Chapter 1: Introduction to Form (Morphology)
in Engineering Concept Generation

In Engineering, function takes the stage before form! It may look "cool" but if it doesn't
function, customers will reject it!

Oakley Thump, Oakley (2005)

                        Sunglasses with a built-in mp3 player (Oakley Thump, 2005). Too
                        expensive ($495 in 2005 dollars), cheap-feeling, weak sound, and
                        terribly unfashionable.

Form or Function?

   What if the product form is appealing, yet the form does not function?
   Who would buy them or be impressed by them?
   Would you buy them?
   They look good, but do they perform the way you expect them to?

Form Follows Function in Product Design

In generating product concepts, the design team MUST keep functionality at the forefront!
If a product looks great but doesn't work, will consumers choose to re-purchase the product
after potentially experiencing buyer's remorse?
57 | MODULE 3- ANALYZE

Would you re-purchase a product that doesn't work, even if given a refund? How would that
change your mind about the product and the company?

First, what do we want the product to do? Then, how do we want it to
look?

What if the weight of a hotdog model on this vehicle had a dramatic impact on fuel economy?

                            Oscar Mayer Weinermobile (Image Source: (c) AirBnb)

What if your team's concept design never makes it to the market?

                            Mazda Furai Concept Car, 2008 (Image Source: Wikimedia
                            Commons)
           CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION TO FORM (MORPHOLOGY) IN ENGINEERING CONCEPT GENERATION | 58

What if your design team's concept is listed as one of the most beautiful cars by Car and
Driver?

                            2020 Mazda 3 Hatch (Image Source: (c) Car and Driver)

Conceptual Design

Your design team has worked on understanding the design problem to solve this semester.
Your design team:

   Utilized customer input, engineering specifications & benchmarking, along with
      marketing analysis/information to establish the basis for generating concepts leading to
      the selection of final design.

   Needs to clearly understand functionality before designing a product's form.

Concept

A concept is an idea that is sufficiently developed to evaluate the physical principles governing
the design's behavior. It is necessary to confirm that the concept works and functions per
customer needs.
In order to abstract what might someday be a product launched into the marketplace, concepts
can be represented using the following methods:

   Rough sketches or flow diagrams
59 | MODULE 3- ANALYZE

   A proof-of-concept prototype
   A set of calculations or notes
In all cases, functionality MUST be ensured.

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=311#oembed-1

Boat Hulls Designed for Speed_Video Script [DOC]

     Practice Exercise

       An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
       https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=311#h5p-71

Conceptual design for a toothbrush
     CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION TO FORM (MORPHOLOGY) IN ENGINEERING CONCEPT GENERATION | 60

Practice Exercise

Concept Development: Watch the interactive video below and answer the questions that
appear.

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=311#h5p-60
61 | MODULE 3- ANALYZE

Chapter 2: Functional Analysis and Concept
Generation

Watch the video below: French Press Coffee Function (No Audio)

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=313#oembed-1

Function Tree for a French Press

The following represents a function tree with visible functions and hidden sub-functions for
the French Press, whose primary function is "Make Coffee."

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=313#h5p-26

Morphology Matrices/Charts

Below is an example of a morphological chart for a vegetable collection system:
   On the left side of the chart, the functions are listed
   On the right side, different mechanisms that can be used to perform the functions listed
      are drawn
   The chart is a visual aid used to come up with different ideas
   Idea generation is accomplished by creating single systems from different mechanisms
                                                            CHAPTER 2: FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS AND CONCEPT GENERATION | 62

      illustrated in the morphological chart.
          It is advised to generate several feasible designs using different mechanisms for each
            function for each concept.

Based on this team's research, the best option for each function was selected: the scoop for
picking vegetables, the conveyor belt for placing them, the water from a well for dirt sifting,
the bowl for packaging, a track system for transportation, and wind-blown power.
These options are outlined in red on a copy of the morphological chart from above:
63 | MODULE 3- ANALYZE

                 Concept 1 utilizes the morphology of the best options identified by the team.

Concept 1: Vegetable Collection System
                                                            CHAPTER 2: FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS AND CONCEPT GENERATION | 64

Concept 1 is represented in order through the image above.

In product design, there are two templates used to develop
morphology:

 1. A matrix is as outlined in the video, and
 2. a morphological chart is as shown above.
The morphological chart provides visual representations of functions that need to be achieved,
and select concepts to be brought forward for further analysis. We will be utilizing the
morphological chart in ME 2700.

     Practice Exercises

       An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
       https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=313#h5p-28

       An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
       https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=313#h5p-29
65 | MODULE 3- ANALYZE

Chapter 3: QFD (House of Quality w/Decision
Matrix) - HoQ w/DM

Introduction

Your team developed an expansive list of design solution concepts for basic
product functions identified using function trees/functional decomposition
and morphology.

Next steps

Use House of Quality (QFD) with Decision Matrix to guide, justify, and document your
decision in final concept selection:

 1. Identify and select a full product concept to take into the detailed design;
 2. Synthesize the basic function of generated concepts;
 3. Evaluate concepts against engineering metrics and features (and thus the customer

      requirements);
 4. Select a product concept to take into detailed design.

Evaluating Generated Concepts: How to pick the best option

   Utilize the House of Quality Decision Matrix - Engineering Specifications: features,
      functions, and characteristics, directly linked to Customer Requirements.

   Evaluate only your top 3-4 concepts (review assignment requirements).
                                                 CHAPTER 3: QFD (HOUSE OF QUALITY W/DECISION MATRIX) - HOQ W/DM | 66

MIRE TECH Team Final Stove: An Example

Let's take a look at MIRE TECH's Functional Analysis and Morphological Charts/Matrices in
generating their final stove design.

The team used Functional Analysis to determine which functions are critical for the stove to achieve
the main functionality.

The functional analysis of the hex stove is a model that follows energy, more specifically heat, from
the inputs to the outputs of the system. It is a very broad overview of the path the energy takes
through the system but is expanded upon in greater detail in the mathematical model. The math
model accounts for all energy changes and transfers while the functional analysis ignores all losses
for simplification.
67 | MODULE 3- ANALYZE

Based on the team's morphological charts, the top 4 designs below (Concept Selection) were brought
forward:

                                    Stove concepts for selection - Concept 1
                                    morphology. Options include a rocket stove, skirt
                                    stove, closed-bottom stove, and an open-bottom
                                    stove.

     Example Exercise

     Watch the interactive video below and answer the questions: HoQ w/Decision Matrix

       An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
       https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=315#h5p-61

     House of Quality with Decision matrix_Video Script [PDF]
              CHAPTER 3: QFD (HOUSE OF QUALITY W/DECISION MATRIX) - HOQ W/DM | 68

Look at MIRE TECH team's evaluation of their four top concepts:

   Table 1. MIRE TECH team's stove concepts evaluation

Rocket Stove  Skirt Stove  Closed Bottom  Open Bottom

9             9            9                            9

9             9            9                            3

9             9            9                            9

3             3            9                            9

3             9            9                            9

3             3            9                            9

The highest scoring design is the MIRE-TECH team's choice to move forward with, and the
selected concept!

The cut-out image below shows what the DMADVR toolbox view once it is completed in the
House of Quality w/Decision Matrix tab completed for the engineering team's concepts. The
Closed Bottom is the winner!
69 | MODULE 3- ANALYZE

Final design: Closed Bottom (Hex Stove)

Though each stove was a significant improvement from a three-
stone ring fire, the closed bottom design scored the highest and was
chosen for development.
The closed bottom concept is a simple design where the fire is
completely contained within the stove and not burning on the ground. It is made from clay (low
cost), contains all flames making it safe to use, is lightweight for portability, has minimal
features for assembly, is very easy to operate, and is much more efficient than the three-stone
method.

Download a pdf of the decision matrix to enlarge and review [PDF]
                                                 CHAPTER 3: QFD (HOUSE OF QUALITY W/DECISION MATRIX) - HOQ W/DM | 70

This House of Quality with Decision Matrix shows the Now vs. What. The Now area is the
current products on the market that the engineering design team has researched. The What
area is what the team concepts are for solving the design need. The numbers are how both
the Now products on the market and the engineering design team's concept assessments based
on the customer requirement assessment of 1, 3, 9. How does the team know which of their
concepts is the top one or the design they are most likely to select? Well, the highest scorer is
the one they need to consider as the recommended final design, and this would be the score
of 2277 for the Lightning Bug Design. You can also see this in the image below. The Firefly's
design team's final concept assessment indicates the Lightning Bug is the design they will
move forward with based on an objective high score. The scoring removes subjectivity as much
as possible in order to allow the team to make an objective decision based on their assessment
analysis. However if the the top 2-3 designs scored within 10% of each other, the team should
consider reviewing their assessment and to determine of re-scoring is needed. Another option
is for teams to consider combining the best elements and then re-score to determine the best
design choice with the highest score.

See below a cut-out image of the final scoring assessment where the team has scored The
Lightning Bug as the final design. This decision was based on the highest score!

Reminder: In ME 270, only use 1, 3, 9 values are used to assess within the House of Quality
(HoQ/QFD). This Firefly Team example deviates from this but it is an illustration of the process
of completing a HoQ.
71 | MODULE 3- ANALYZE

Firefly Team's Concept Assessment:

                                    Click on the image to enlarge and review

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=315#h5p-30
                                                            CHAPTER 4: FINAL PROJECT PLAN AND CONCEPT PRESENTATION | 72

Chapter 4: Final Project Plan and Concept
Presentation

1. Teams develops a final project plan!

   Update the initial project plan developed and submitted with the Project Charter using
      MS Project!

   The final project plan will reflect more of the team's roles and allocation of team
      resources to design, build, test, and report out regarding the team's prototype.

Example from DMADVR Toolbox for team review

Click on the project plan example to enlarge and review the image.

This project plan image is an example from MS Project 2019. As MS Project progresses to the
next version, students will need to populate the columns and rows as per that version. A video
providing information on modifications or changes due to the newest version of MS Project
Professional provided by ISU that impacts the course will be posted by the instructor.
The final project plan will be updated based on the results from the Concept Review. The
details can be added based on work tasks that need to be added and/or more specific detail
73 | MODULE 3- ANALYZE

added in order to complete the design project on time. The detail in the ID columns 18 and
19 are based on detailed tasks that need to be completed in order for Assignment 08A to be
complete and the timeline adjusted to ensure that the tasks are completed on time. These
lower-level tasks are indented to the right to indicate that they are associated with the main
Assignment 08A to indicate a rollup to this larger task.

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=1064#h5p-72

2. Teams develop a presentation for "Concept Review"

   Review assignment for content requirements! All Teams present! All Team
     members participate!

Watch the comedy video below!

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=1064#oembed-1

Death by PowerPoint_Video Script [DOC]
                                                                                                    MODULE 4A - DESIGN | 74

MODULE 4A - DESIGN
75 | MODULE 4A - DESIGN

Module 4A: Overview

     Module Objectives

         1. Module Objective 1: Students will be able to create a math model representing the
             engineering design functionality (CLO1)

         2. Module Objective 2: Students will be able to perform a design failure modes and effects
             analysis (DFMEA) on the engineering design prototype (CLO1)

         3. Module Objective 3: Students will be able to prepare engineering drawings using
             engineering graphics/CAD software for the final design (CLO1, CLO2)

         4. Module Objective 4: Students will identify the appropriate manufacturing/assembly
             processes for building a functional prototype (CLO1)

         5. Module Objective 5: Students will identify/locate locally sourced materials to use in the
             final engineering design prototype (CL01, CLO4)

         6. Module Objective 6: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool
             use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone (CLO3)

         7. Module Objective 7: Students will prepare a product cost calculation using a bill of
             materials and within budgetary constraints for the prototype (CLO1)

    Module Highlights

In this module, students will review/read the content, including watching videos. Students
will watch quiz-based/activity-based videos and complete test for understanding activities.
This will prepare students for the teamwork activities of completing a design risk assessment
(DFMEA), set of drawings with bill of materials (BOM) for one sub-assembly, and associated
manufacturing process instructions (MPIs). The selected sub-assembly will be reviewed by
manufacturing (Boyd Lab), and teams will make necessary updates to obtain design
manufacturability approval from Boyd Lab. Students will work in their teams and arrange
                                                                                                                            MODULE 4A: OVERVIEW | 76

work in accordance with the workplace based on roles/responsibilities in allocation of work to
complete assignment. Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool use and
results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone

Materials, Activities and Assignments

   Read/review module content in sequential order as setup in Canvas
   Watch embedded and associated module videos
   Discuss in-class and on MS Teams the work progress to ensure work is completed and

      submitted per Canvas due date
   Utilize Canvas templates to complete work as outlined in assignment document
   Utilize Solidworks to complete CAD work as outlined in assignment document
   Consult and work with Boyd Lab regarding design and part/components for sub-

      assembly and related manufacturing process to obtain approval for sub-assembly design
   Submit module assignment(s):

     Math modeling and failure analysis

     Student teams will use analysis skills to create an engineering math model, brainstorm possible
     failure modes for your design, and plan for future actions to eliminate failure modes. Students
     will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool use and results that possess appropriate
     structure, grammar and tone.
     In order to successfully complete this assignment , teams will need to allocate work, considering
     roles/responsibilities. This interaction may take place in the classroom and on Microsoft Teams.
     The team will complete the DMADVR toolbox template(s) and submit it to Canvas. This
     assignment will require teams to work together to get the major tasks completed.
     This activity will help you to develop...

          Module Objective 1: Students will be able to create a math model representing the
             engineering design functionality (CLO1)

          Module Objective 2: Students will be able to perform a design failure modes and effects
77 | MODULE 4A - DESIGN

             analysis (DFMEA) on the engineering design prototype (CLO1)
          Module Objective 6: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool

             use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone (CLO3)

    Task

     Teams will have a refined/completed math model, completed QFD(House of Quality), completed
     DFMEA and draft report of this section for your final report. Teams need to analyze how the
     selected product concept will actually meet the specifications and avoid serious failures.
     Constructing a mathematical model allows the team to assess the concept's ability to meet the
     specifications. The math model casts product functions as mathematical relationships between
     inputs, outputs, and control variables. The team will utilize a Design Failure Modes Effect
     Analysis (DFMEA) to (i) identify potential failure modes in the design and (ii) reduce or
     eliminate their likelihood of impact on performance, reliability or safety through planned
     action. Lastly, you will complete or modify section 8 (Engineering Specifications and
     Benchmarking) and section 9 (the roof) in your QFD. Teams will write a draft of this section of
     your final report on the modeling process and failure analysis.

    Grading Criteria

     Grading is based on the "Submission Deliverables Expectations" outlined in the assignment
     document. This is reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the
     assignment is opened.

     Sub-assembly Design Package Review

     Student teams will utilize their roles/responsibilities in this assignment to prepare a set of
     engineering drawings and manufacturing instructions for one sub assembly. The bill of
                                                                                                                     MODULE 4A: OVERVIEW | 78

materials (BOM) will be drafted, and analytical skills will be utilized to prepare an initial total
prototype cost.
In order to successfully complete this assignment, the teams must interact/discuss both in-class
and on MS Teams (if needed) the roles/responsibilities that will lead to workload allocation in
this assignment. This assignment relies heavily on allocation tasks in order for teams to come
work on individual tasks, and come together to complete and submit the assignment. CAD skills
are a key success factor, as are analytical and writing skills. Teams will need to select a
subassembly strategically, and this will be a consensus building activity. The Boyd Lab and the
instructor are resources for teams to discuss their subassembly determination. The strategic
decision will impact the team's work tasks regarding the entire prototype design, assembly/
manufacturing, cost, and testing plan. Student teams will be utilize all appropriate DMADVR
toolbox templates to completed work.
This activity will help you to develop...

     Module Objective 3: Students will be able to prepare engineering drawings using
        engineering graphics/CAD software for the final design (CLO1, CLO2)

     Module Objective 4: Students will identify the appropriate manufacturing/assembly
        processes for building a functional prototype (CLO1)

     Module Objective 5: Students will identify/locate locally sourced materials to use in the
        final engineering design prototype (CLO4)

     Module Objective 6: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool
        use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone (CLO3)

     Module Objective 7: Students will prepare a product cost calculation using a bill of
        materials and within budgetary constraints for the prototype (CLO1)

Task

Teams will design a subassembly design package for review by the Boyd Lab (manufacturing) to
obtain approval of it's manufacturability. Teams will produce a simple CAD or hand sketch of
the prototype to ensure sizing requirements of the assignment are met (will fit entirely in the
team's storage tote at all stages of the class, and can be placed in the tote unassembled at the end
of each class period). No other storage is available. This will be an important step in moving
towards approval of the final prototype. A completed and approved set of CAD drawings will be
produced for ONE subassembly. Also develop and initial draft of the entire prototype's bill of
79 | MODULE 4A - DESIGN

     materials (BOM) with all parts accounted for that are known at the time. Bill of materials will be
     used as input into the initial Purchase Order draft to be reviewed by Boyd Lab and/or instructor
     to include parts/components only from the approved vendor list. All costs must be within the
     budget as outlined in the assignment document. A draft of this section of the final report will be
     produced. The DMADVR toolbox templates that are outlined in the assignment document will
     be completed by the teams.

    Grading Criteria

     Grading is based on the "Submission Deliverables Expectations" outlined in the assignment
     document. This is reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the
     assignment is opened.
              DESIGN PHASE | 80

Design Phase

Begin detailed design work for selected Final Design

This includes:

   math modeling
   risk assessment & mitigation (DFMEA -design failure mode & effects analysis)
   bill of materials (BOM),
   purchase order,
   part cost determination
   profit/loss (P/L) statement
   mfg process instructions (MPIs)
   both a sub-assembly
   final product design (Solidworks) approval process resulting in a final engineering design

      package submittal
   final prototype design is manufactured/built/assembled
   may also result in ECNs (engineering change notices) as a result of the manufacturing/

      build/assembly process prior to testing

Definition of a prototype

   An original module on which something is patterned; archetype.
   An individual that exhibits the essential features of a later type.
   A standard or typical example.
   A first full-scale and usually functional form of a new type or design of a construction.

Your team's prototyping goal

Build/manufacture/assemble a team-designed "functional" device, and test essential performance
measures of the product design.
81 | MODULE 4A - DESIGN

Why build a prototype?

1. Conceptualization: Demonstrate feasibility/practicality.
2. Verification and Testing: Verify performance modeling. Prove/disprove assumptions made.
3. Development - Refine the Design: Identify design deficiencies/improvement. Suggest a mass

    manufacturing process.

Time                     Cost  Table. Prototype Constraints  Personnel   Tote Sizes
                                  Materials Tools/Process

 Planning:      $85 if        Stock        Boyd Lab       Team       Width x
   1.5 weeks       purchased      from shop     only            members     Depth x
                                                (Requires                   Height
 Fabrication:   $50 if        Approved       training)                   (Measure
   2.5 weeks       donated        vendors                                   for
                                  (See Boyd                                 yourself)
 Testing: 1                      Lab)
   week
                                Grainger,
                                  McMaster,
                                  typically
                     CHAPTER 1: MODELING | 82

Chapter 1: Modeling

Modeling

Now that your design team has selected a product concept:

   Developed a function tree tree, and ensured sub-functions are broken down via a function
      block diagram

   Continue work from functional analysis to develop a math model to accomplish these
      functions

Watch the interactive video below: Math Models- Basic Part 1

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=678#h5p-63

Your design team will assess the ability of your selected concept to meet the specifications by
constructing a mathematical model that casts product functions as mathematical relationships
between inputs, outputs, and control variables.

Math Modeling

Watch the interactive video below: Math Model-Basic Part 2

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=678#h5p-62

     Practice Exercise
83 | MODULE 4A - DESIGN

     Use the figure below and text your understanding with the french coffee press:

       An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
       https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=678#h5p-31

Example Math Modeling: ME 2700 Seeder Project

Click here to view and download the template of the System Model _Final Concept Process
Flow with math model(Arens) example in DMADVR Toolbox [XLS]
The downloadable excel sheet is from the DMADVR Toolbox Template for System Modeling.
The left side shows the process flow for the team's final selected design. it indicates the Inputs,
Outputs, and controls the process flow for the functions of the Seeder. The boxes indicate the
function with their inputs, outputs, and controls. Once these are identified the math modeling
can be developed. The colored boxes (yellow, green, and purple) show the variables, values, and
units for the Inputs, outputs, and controls. The box in the upper right corner identifies the
variables, provides a description and identifies the units used. The functions in the process
flowchart are used to determine the conversion equations(and thus the variables) associated
with the functionality needed. The equations are shown to the right of the colored boxes. The
conversion equations can be used to predict performance and verify this during the testing
process. Also in this System Model template, the sources for equations and information need
to be cited at the bottom of the Model as shown here.
                                                                                                                            CHAPTER 1: MODELING | 84

QFD/House of Quality(HoQ): Roof (Trade-offs)

Design Team will use information gained from your mathematical model to fill in the Roof of the
QFD matrix (correlations/trade-offs). This indicates which features/functions of your design are
complementary or in conflict.

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=678#oembed-1

Correlations -House of Quality Roof_Video Script [DOC]

Seeder HoQ Roof Example from DMADVR Toolbox Template

House of Quality Roof Seeder Roof Example from the DMADVR Toolbox Template (click to enlarge)

All Product Features (functions and characteristics) in each column will be assessed with
another column to determine the relationship (trade-offs). As the Key indicates the levels of
impact range from No impact (0) to Strong Positive (2) or Strong Negative (-2). The design team
utilizes the roof to review the relationship and the impact. For example the weight of a car
impacts the fuel efficiency(gas mileage). Heavy weighted vehicles have a moderate to strong
negative impact on fuel efficiency for example. Generally an inverse relationship is negative
but not always. The relationship depends upon the design and what the HOW is address in the
WHAT for the design team's customers. This is a team exercise and the discussions drive the
85 | MODULE 4A - DESIGN

decisions on the Trade-offs! This form is in the DMADVR Toolbox, and is part of the HoQ(the
roof!).
                                                              CHAPTER 2: DESIGN FAILURE MODE & EFFECTS ANALYSIS (DFMEA) | 86

 Chapter 2: Design Failure Mode & Effects
 Analysis (DFMEA)

 Headlines on Product Failures:

                                         XBOX 360

  "Microsoft said Thursday that it will take a $1 billion charge as it extends the warranty on the
  Xbox 360, after an investigation showed the game console can be prone to hardware failures.
  `As a result of what Microsoft views as an unacceptable number of repairs to Xbox 360
  consoles, the company conducted extensive investigations into potential sources of general
  hardware failures,' Microsoft said in a statement."1

1. Fried, I. 2007. "Microsoft to extend Xbox 360 warranty, take $1 billion hit." CNET. https://www.cnet.com/tech/tech-industry/
   microsoft-to-extend-xbox-360-warranty-take-1-billion-hit/
87 | MODULE 4A - DESIGN

                         FitBit Force, FitBit (2014)

This version of the activity-tracking device was causing skin irritation and even blisters so
severe that it resulted in a class-action lawsuit in California.2

                         Galaxy Note 7, Samsung (2016)

  Launched in August of 2016, the Note 7 boasted powerful hardware and had consumers

2. CB Insights. 2021. "When Corporate Innovation Goes Bad -- The 164 Biggest Product Failures Of All Time."
   https://www.cbinsights.com/research/corporate-innovation-product-fails/
                                                              CHAPTER 2: DESIGN FAILURE MODE & EFFECTS ANALYSIS (DFMEA) | 88

  chomping at the bit to get their hands on them. The anticipation quickly faded, though, as
  reports of Note 7s catching fire started hitting the news.
  By September 2, Samsung had stopped sales of the device. Next came a formal recall in the US
  on September 15th and a worldwide recall on October 10th. The product was completely
  abandoned on October 11th.3

 Watch the Interactive Video: DFMEA 1

  An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
  https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=680#h5p-64

 Watch the Interactive Video: DFMEA 2

  An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
  https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=680#h5p-65
  An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
  https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=680#h5p-51

 Watch the Video: DFMEA Step-by-Step Example

  One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
  https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=680#oembed-1

  DFMEA Example 1-Video Script [DOC]

3. Fisk, P. 2020. "Innovation Failures of the 21st Century ... Amazon Fire and Google Allo, Mercedes Home Battery and
   Nike FuelBand ... without failure, we don't learn how to be better." https://www.peterfisk.com/2020/06/innovation-failures-
   of-the-21st-century-amazon-fire-and-google-allo-mercedes-home-battery-and-nike-fuelband-without-failure-we-dont-learn-
   how-to-be-better/
89 | MODULE 4A - DESIGN

Ball Point Pen DFMEA EXAMPLE:

                               Ballpoint pen
                               DFMEA example
                               picture image.
                               Click this link to
                               view the full-size
                               Ballpoint pen
                               DFMEA example
                               in the DMADVR
                               Toolbox

       Click on the links below to find two examples of math modeling and DFMEA documentation
       for both the MIRE TECH and Cassava Grinder ME 2700 design teams:

             MIRE_TECH_math model and DFMEA EXAMPLE [PDF]
             cassava_math model EXAMPLE [PDF]

CAUTION: DFMEA template in the DMADVR Toolbox is slightly different but the
process is the same! Read the assignment and follow the DMADVR Toolbox template!

DFMEA _Seeder Example

                                                                                                                  Click this image
                                                                                                                  to view the
                                                                                                                  full-size Seeder
                                                                                                                  DFMEA from the
                                                                                                                  DMADVR
                                                                                                                  Toolbox image
                                                                                      CHAPTER 3: ENGINEERING DRAWINGS AND MPIS | 90

Chapter 3: Engineering Drawings and MPIs

Subassembly & MPIs

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=717#h5p-66

The Process for Assigning Part Numbers

   Assemblies start with AN
   Parts start with N
   Part numbers are not Item numbers (balloon callouts)
   Part numbers are not Part descriptions
91 | MODULE 4A - DESIGN

Part Tree: An Example of Part Number Hierarchy

This image of the ME 2700 Part Hierarchy starts with the prototype part number as the top box and
resembles an organizational chart. The top box is the prototype part number and it flows down into the
individual part numbers (starts with N) and sub-assemblies/ assemblies (start with AN). Typically the
sub-assemblies/assemblies will flow down to incorporate more assemblies and also parts that makeup
assemblies. The lowest levels are part numbers. Click on the image to view or download.

Engineering Drawing Guidelines for ME 170 and 270

Definition of an engineering drawing:
   A formal and precise way of communicating information about the shape, size, features,
      and precision of the item to be manufactured.
   Drawings are the universal language of engineering.
   Working drawings serve as a guide for the manufacture and assembly of your prototype

Installation of Solidworks Templates:

 1. Place this file at root directory of U: drive SOLIDWORKS.zip (External link)
 2. Right click to extract files to U: drive root directory and place as shown below. It must be
                                                                                      CHAPTER 3: ENGINEERING DRAWINGS AND MPIS | 92

      exactly at U:\_SOLIDWORKS\_Solidworks_Templates.

Settings in Solidworks

Solidworks needs to have some settings made. One of the parameters locates the above
templates for Solidworks.

   If you are on an ISU computer, right click "swSettings.sldreg" to "Create Shortcut" on the
      desktop. Then double click the shortcut each time before running Solidworks. Because
      ISU uses floating profiles, the information contained in the swSettings.sldreg disappears
      when one logs off an ISU computer. Each time you login, you must double click the icon
      and accept the default settings.

   If on your own personal computer, double click "swSettings.sldreg" and accept the
      default settings. This sets your PC defaults and will not need to be repeated.

Getting Solidworks on Your PC

 1. VDI (Virtual Desktop Interface). is the only way to go for a Mac user and for many PC
      users.

 2. Solidworks Install (Get Latest Version Available).
 3. Home Directories (aka the U: drive). should be used to store your homework and the

      templates for Solidworks. Files are securely stored with backups and revision tracking.
      If your computer crashes, your homework won't be lost.

Off-campus Access

If you run Solidworks outside the ISU network, you must gain access to the network for
Solidworks licensing (and home files). Use the Iowa State VPN (Virtual Private
Network) before starting Solidworks or VDI. VPN is also required for Home Directories (U:
drive) if off campus.

Drawing Standards

   ANSI/ ASME Y14.1 - Y14.100 standards (Third Angle of Projection).
   ANSI/ ASME Y14.5 standard covers dimensioning and tolerancing rules.
93 | MODULE 4A - DESIGN

   The ANSI/ ASME standards, conventions, and guidelines must be applied to read/create a
      proper working drawing.

Basic Information

   Projected Views show as many sides as needed for completeness.
   Cross Sections for showing interior features.
   Dimensions and tolerances which are the most important and most complicated part of

      the drawing.
   Titleblock at the lower right corner, with material information, part name, designer, etc.

Examples:

Sub Assembly: Exploded and Assembled Drawings

                                                                                    Exploded View & Balloons
                 CHAPTER 3: ENGINEERING DRAWINGS AND MPIS | 94

This picture/image is a engineering drawing example of a gearbox subassembly. It shows an exploded
view, numbered part balloons, and sectioning. It also includes the title block in lower right corner of the
drawing. Click on picture/image to review and/or download.

Assembled view 

                 Parts list (BOM) 
95 | MODULE 4A - DESIGN

This picture/image shows a fully assembled gearbox engineering drawing example with bill of materials
(BOM) in the upper right corner and title block in the lower right corner. Click on picture/image to
review and/or download. Click on picture/image to review and/or download. I
               CHAPTER 3: ENGINEERING DRAWINGS AND MPIS | 96

Part Drawing:

This picture/image is a Gearbox side 1 example part engineering drawing with dimensions for each
angle Shows the isometric view in the upper right corner, title block in the lower right corner, and
dimensioned part in center area of the drawing. Click on the picture/image to view and/or download.
Click on picture/image to review and/or download.

Drawing title block fields:

 1. Part number - must be in the lower right area of the template (make it long, because by
      default the filename becomes the drawing number in Solidworks. Our filenames are long)

 2. Drawing Size
 3. Drawing Revision Number or Letter
 4. Sheet # of # - In ME 170, it is unlikely we get to multiple sheets. But, it could happen.
 5. Description, Title or Name
 6. Drawn by (Name and Date)
 7. Checked by (Name and Date) - may be left blank
 8. Drawing Scale
97 | MODULE 4A - DESIGN

 9. Material for part drawings. Left blank for assembly drawings.
10. The words, "INTERPRET GEOMETRIC TOLERANCING PER ASME Y14.5"
11. Graphic or note indicating "3rd Angle Projection."
12. Tolerance block
13. A company would want to include a note, such as a Proprietary and Confidential info

      block that might say, "The information contained in this document is the property of
      [Company Name]. This document may not be reproduced in any manner without written
      permission." This note is optional in ME 170.

Note: All required fields must have data/text in them unless specified by the instructor

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=717#h5p-73
                                                                                MODULE 4B - DESIGN CONTINUED | 98

MODULE 4B - DESIGN
      CONTINUED
99 | MODULE 4B - DESIGN CONTINUED

Module 4B: Overview

     Module Objectives

         1. Module Objective 1: Students will be able to prepare engineering drawings using
             engineering graphics/CAD software for the final design (CLO1)

         2. Module Objective 2: Students will identify the appropriate manufacturing/assembly
             processes for building a functional prototype (CLO1)

         3. Module Objective 3: Students will create a purchase order for outsourced materials
             within approved budgetary constraints for prototype (CL01)

         4. Module Objective 4: Students will develop a plan for manufacturing and distributing with
             estimated associated costs based on prototype (CLO1)

         5. Module Objective 5: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
         6. Module Objective 6: Students will be able to evaluate (give examples of good) teamwork

             contribution and collaboration (CLO2)
         7. Module Objective 7: Students will be able to justify own (self) teamwork contribution and

             collaboration (CLO2)
         8. Module Objective 8: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool

             use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone (CLO3)
         9. Module Objective 9: Students will identify locally sourced materials to use in the final

             engineering design prototype (CLO4)
       10. Module Objective 10: Students will be able to generate an expected profit and loss

             analysis using estimate costs and sales revenue (CL01)

    Module Highlights

In this module, students will review/read the content, including watching videos. Students
will watch quiz-based/activity-based videos and complete test for understanding activities.
                                                                                                                          MODULE 4B: OVERVIEW | 100

This will prepare students for the teamwork activities of completing. Prior to fabrication/
manufacture, the prototype design package must be reviewed to ensure manufacturability and
costing are aligned with constraints provided (prototype fits in rubber/tote container). Prior to
fabrication/assembly, a full design-drawing package and corresponding fabrication plan MUST
be reviewed and approved by Boyd Lab and Instructor/TA. Additionally a final prototype cost
needs to be completed, along with a final BOM. Purchased parts must be approved and then
entered into the Purchase Order form. A written draft of this section (structured summary)
of the final report will be completed, as well as Peer Review 2. All student teams will need
to be focused on utilizing roles/responsibilities and workload allocation per project plan. An
industry perspective video (Vermeer Co.) on the design tools is included in this module.

Materials, Activities and Assignments

   Read/review module content in sequential order as setup in Canvas
   Watch embedded and associated module videos
   Discuss in-class and on MS Teams the work progress to ensure work is completed and

      submitted per Canvas due date
   Utilize Canvas templates to complete work as outlined in assignment document
   Utilize Solidworks to complete CAD work as outlined in assignment document
   Consult with and obtain approval from Boyd Lab on final prototype design review

      package that includes prototype drawings AND MPIs
   Perform research and utilize cost analysis to complete P/L statement
   Submit module assignment(s):

     Prototype Final Design Review

     The team must be focused on roles/responsibilities to complete this assignment. The
     subassembly design, MPIs and BOM with initial purchase order completed in Module 4A are
     critical input into this assignment. The Boyd Lab is the reviewer and approver of the
     engineering design drawing package. Consult with Boyd Lab as much as needed in order to
     obtain the final approval, without this, the prototype cannot be built. The team will need fully
101 | MODULE 4B - DESIGN CONTINUED

     utilize the roles/responsibilities to complete this assignment, which includes the approval of the
     final design package. The final prototype cost will be completed and will be used as input into
     the P/L statement for the prototype to determine profit or loss, as well as manufacturing and
     distribution plan.
     In order to successfully complete this assignment , teams will need to allocate work, considering
     roles/responsibilities. This interaction may take place in the classroom and on Microsoft Teams.
     The team will complete the DMADVR toolbox template(s) and submit it to Canvas. This
     assignment will require teams to work together to get the major tasks completed. A key to
     success is consultation with the Boyd Lab on the engineering drawings and MPIs. As the
     experts in the Boyd Lab manufacturing equipment and capabilities, they will assist all teams in
     ensuring success during this process. Without Boyd Lab approval, the assignment is incomplete
     and no prototype building can be done. Consult with the Boyd Lab during class time as much as
     needed, based on availability of personnel. The teams will need to be respectful of other team
     sections, and do the consulting with Boyd only during this section, unless Boyd Lab allows it at
     another time. There are multiple sections and teams consulting with Boyd during their own
     sections class time, so please be aware of this constraint. It is important to focus on getting the
     design package completed and approved! The prototype build depends upon this! Time
     management is critical and the final report draft of this section (structured summary) is a
     component of the assignment that must be planned for as well!
     This activity will help you to develop...

          Module Objective 1: Students will be able to prepare engineering drawings using
             engineering graphics/CAD software for the final design

          Module Objective 2: Students will identify the appropriate manufacturing/assembly
             processes for building a functional prototype

          Module Objective 5: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
          Module Objective 8: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool

             use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone
          Module Objective 9: Students will identify locally sourced materials to use in the final

             engineering design prototype

    Task

     In this assignment the teams will create engineering drawing package for final prototype design,
                                                                                                                    MODULE 4B: OVERVIEW | 102

follow the design package review process with Boyd Lab, develop final bill of materials (BOM)
needed to build/fabricate prototype, and determine final prototype cost (material and
manufacturing costs), profit and loss, manufacturing & distribution plan. Prior to fabrication/
manufacture, the prototype design package must be reviewed to ensure manufacturability and
costing are aligned with constraints provided (prototype fits in rubber/tote container). Prior to
fabrication/assembly, a full design-drawing package and corresponding fabrication plan MUST
be reviewed and approved by Boyd Lab and Instructor/TA. Additionally a final prototype cost
needs to be completed, along with a final BOM. Purchased parts must be approved and then
entered into the Purchase Order form. The teams will prepare a written draft of this section of
their final report.

Grading Criteria

Grading is based on the "Submission Deliverables Expectations" outlined in the assignment
document. This is reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the
assignment is opened.

Profit and Loss

Student teams will utilize their roles/responsibilities in this assignment to develop a plan for
manufacturing and distribution of your product, estimate associated costs of running the
business, estimate sales volumes needed to realize a net profit in the fourth year of the business,
evaluate the sustainability of the business venture, and develop a draft of the final report for this
section. The profit and loss statement summary will require teams to write about changes they
would make to reduce costs and the how the current prototype supports the three pillars of
sustainability.
In order to successfully complete this assignment, the teams must interact/discuss both in-class
and on MS Teams (if needed) the roles/responsibilities that will lead to workload allocation in
103 | MODULE 4B - DESIGN CONTINUED

     this assignment. The previous work in Modules 4A and 4B will be key inputs into this
     assignment, and completing the DMADVR toolbox template by utilizing the instructions
     outlined in the assignment document will be critical to success. Developing the manufacturing
     and distribution plan will rely heavily on research about the target market and area from
     previous assignments in Modules 1 and 2. Also manufacturing equipment needed will also rely
     on previous Modules 4A and 4B.
     This activity will help you to develop...

          Module Objective 4: Students will develop a plan for manufacturing and distributing with
             estimated associated costs based on prototype

          Module Objective 5: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role
          Module Objective 8: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool

             use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone
          Module Objective 10: Students will be able to generate an expected profit and loss

             analysis using estimate costs and sales revenue (CL01)

    Task

     Teams will complete a Profit and Loss statement utilizing the DMADVR toolbox templates. This template
     will require input from work in this module, as well as Module 4A on costing. Teams will make calculations
     based on the inputs, volumes are estimated which result is a profit by year 3 of production, and net prof and
     units sold are plotted versus years (See sample plot in the assignment). For the final report draft, the profit
     and loss template is analyzed, and an analysis of the sustainability of the design and the proposed business.
     The manufacturing and distribution plan is also discussed. In addition the team will need to discuss what
     changes they would make to reduce the total cost. The assignment requirements for all components is
     outlined in Parts A and B, as well as the Expectations of Assignment Deliverables.

    Grading Criteria

     Grading is based on the "Expectations of Assignment Deliverables" outlined in the assignment
     document. This is reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the
     assignment is opened.
               MODULE 4B: OVERVIEW | 104

Peer Review 2

Students will be assessing themselves and their team colleagues in Peer Review 2. The same set
of evaluation questions as Peer Review 1. This Peer Review 2 assumes students have read
through and reviewed the results from Peer Review 1. The students can address comments and
the quantitative evaluation portions of the assessment. The students have the opportunity to
discuss with the instructor at any time once they receive their results from any Peer Review.
Peer Reviews are an important component of professional/team development.

This activity will help you to develop...

     Module Objective 5: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
     Module Objective 6: Students will be able to evaluate (give examples of good) teamwork

        contribution and collaboration (CLO2)
     Module Objective 7: Students will be able to justify own (self) teamwork contribution and

        collaboration (CLO2)
     Module Objective 10: Students will to seek assistance for teamwork and conflict

        resolution (CL02)

Task

Students will individually complete the CATME peer review online and follow the instructions
outlined in the email sent to their ISU account from catme.org. The quantitative assessment
must be completed, as well as, the qualitative assessment comments. The qualitative comments
justify/explain the quantitative ratings for both team colleagues and self. Professional comments
are important and need to be connected to the quantitative assessment given to all.

Grading Criteria

Grading is based on the "Expectations Deliverables" outlined in the assignment document. This is
reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the assignment is
opened.
105 | MODULE 4B - DESIGN CONTINUED

Design Phase Cont'd

This portion of the Design phase will be focused on using estimated costs to develop a Profit/
Loss statement (P&L statement). The BOM and prototype costing completed in Module 4A
assignments will be key input into the P/L template. The determination of profitability will be
completed in this phase.

A profit and loss statement (P&L), or income statement or statement of operations, is a
financial report that provides a summary of a company's revenues, expenses, and profits/losses
over a given period of time. The P&L statement shows a company's ability to generate sales,
manage expenses, and create profits. It is prepared based on accounting principles that include
revenue recognition, matching, and accruals, which makes it different from the cash flow
statement.

Typical Structure of the Profit and Loss Statement

A company's statement of profit and loss is portrayed over a period of time, typically a month,
quarter, or fiscal year. The main categories that can be found on the P&L include:

   Revenue (or Sales)
   Cost of Goods Sold (or Cost of Sales)
   Selling, General & Administrative (SG&A) Expenses
   Marketing and Advertising
   Technology/Research & Development
   Interest Expense
   Taxes
   Net Income
                                                                              CHAPTER 4: BOM, PURCHASE ORDER AND PART COST | 106

Chapter 4: BOM, Purchase Order and Part
Cost

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=684#h5p-69
An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=684#h5p-34
An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=684#h5p-35

                Prototype Costing Analysis Accuracy

In order to develop an accurate parts cost for the prototype, all parts MUST be accounted
for on the BOM:

 1. Purchased Parts
 2. Donated Parts
 3. Fabricated parts

Review CANVAS Assignments 08A and 08B to see what is needed for a Subassembly and
Assembly review:

 1. The student design teams will have one formal in-class preliminary review prior to the
      final review date.

 2. However, the teams are encouraged to reach out to the Boyd Lab as much as needed to
      ensure the final design review is approved on the due date!

 3. Both Subassembly and Final Prototype Designs MUST be approved on time in order for
      the Boyd Lab to order materials for the manufacturing/assembly process.
107 | MODULE 4B - DESIGN CONTINUED

Chapter 5: Profit and Loss

Watch the Interactive Video Below:

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=690#h5p-81
                                                                                                 MODULE 5 - VERIFY | 108

MODULE 5 - VERIFY
109 | MODULE 5 - VERIFY

Module 5: Overview

     Module Objectives

         1. Module Objective 1: Students will be able to develop a prototype testing plan and analysis
             procedure (CLO1)

         2. Module Objective 2: Students will apply a test analysis procedure for prototype testing
             (CLO1)

         3. Module Objective 3: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool
             use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone (CLO3)

         4. Module Objective 4: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
         5. Module Objective 5: Students will identify the appropriate manufacturing/assembly

             processes for building a functional prototype (CL04)

    Module Highlights

In this module, students will review/read the content, including watching videos. Students will
watch quiz-based/activity-based videos and complete test for understanding activities. This
will prepare students for the teamwork activities of completing. The teams will be developing
a test plan to test in order to test performance of their prototype. The testing plan can use
the team's math model and/or DFMEA. The test plan will be implemented once the prototype
is manufactured/assembled. The testing results will be analyzed and summarized. Two final
report summaries(structured summary as part of final report) will be produced for this section.
An industry perspective video (Vermeer Co.) on the design tools is included in this module.
                                                                                                                            MODULE 5: OVERVIEW | 110

Materials, Activities and Assignments

   Read/review module content in sequential order as setup in Canvas
   Watch embedded and associated module videos
   Discuss in-class and on MS Teams the work progress to ensure work is completed and

      submitted per Canvas due date
   Utilize Canvas templates to complete work as outlined in assignment document
   Consult with Boyd Lab about your testing plan to ensure equipment available
   Develop a test plan and implement it, and adjust testing if needed based on findings and/

      or other issues found during fabrication/manufacturing and testing
   Complete an ECN when changes are made during testing
   Submit module assignment(s):

     Testing Plan

     The team must be focused on roles/responsibilities to complete this assignment. In order to
     successfully complete this assignment , teams will need to allocate work, considering roles/
     responsibilities. This interaction may take place in the classroom and on Microsoft Teams. The
     team will complete the DMADVR toolbox template(s) and submit to Canvas. A key to success is
     consultation with the Boyd Lab on test plans to ensure feasibility and equipment availability.
     The teams will need to be respectful of other team sections, and consult with Boyd only during
     this section or discuss with lab personnel. There are multiple sections and those teams also are
     consulting with Boyd during their class time. Time management is critical in getting testing
     completed & analyzed, and the final report drafts of this section.
     Hint: Team roles and responsibilities are important and critical particularly at this part of the
     design process. Teams may have team members allocated to working on testing results &
     analysis, profit and loss assignment (previous module), and drafting summaries.
     This activity will help you to develop...

          Module Objective 1: Students will be able to develop a prototype testing plan and analysis
             procedure (CLO1)
111 | MODULE 5 - VERIFY

          Module Objective 3: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool
             use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone (CLO3)

          Module Objective 4: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)

    Task

     In this assignment the teams will create a test plan. The test plan may be based on the team's
     math model, specifications and DFMEA. Team will develop tests that will collect important
     information needed to verify/refine design concept, propose step-by-step testing procedures,
     material requirements, equipment needed, test schedules, safety procedures, and data collection
     methods. The team is required to develop 3 tests for their prototype. A minimum of two test
     MUST be quantitative and one can be quantitative. Teams will need to identify independent and
     dependent variables, and are encouraged to create "dummy" graphs showing this to be
     populated when testing is completed. Students will be able to prepare structured summaries (final
     report section/summary) of design tool use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar
     and tone
     Keys to success are the team's allocation of work on tasks based on roles/responsibilities. The
     testing plan will also be more successful with consultations with the Boyd Lab to ensure the test
     is feasible and that equipment is available to perform a test. The test plan identifies specific test
     objectives, procedures, equipment, schedules, and expected outcomes to confirm the prototype
     design will function as intended. Test plan should provide enough detail so that a technician
     could take your plan and implement the tests without further instruction from you.

    Grading Criteria

     Grading is based on the "Submission Deliverables Expectations" outlined in the assignment
     document. This is reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the
     assignment is opened.

     Prototype Fabrication Results and Testing Analysis
                                                                                                                      MODULE 5: OVERVIEW | 112

In this assignment, teams will document the fabrication process, any revisions made to that
process, and testing results. During the fabrication process, the team may discover that a change
needs to be made, this may or may not impact the testing plan. If changes need to be made
teams will complete an Engineering Change Notice (ECN) and obtain signature from the
instructor to approve the change. All changes will be documented and included in the written
summary(structured summary as portion of final report). This documents the results of both the
fabrication process and testing. This is documentation that design teams need in industrial
settings, and is important for record-keeping!
In order to successfully complete this assignment, the teams must interact/discuss both in-class
and on MS Teams (if needed), focused on roles/responsibilities to determine workload allocation
for successful completion. During the fabrication process, if changes need to be made to the
design, and/or testing, this must be completed and documented. This will involve an
Engineering Change Notice (ECN), located in DMADVR Toolbox. This is a critical portion of
the design process, as key information/data are utilized to make changes, as needed. This may
result in improvements and a better understanding of the prototype design. The team will learn
about their design during the fabrication/manufacturing, testing and analysis.
This activity will help you to develop...

     Module Objective 2: Students will apply a test analysis procedure for prototype testing
        (CLO1)

     Module Objective 3: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool
        use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone (CLO3)

     Module Objective 4: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
     Module Objective 5: Students will identify the appropriate manufacturing/assembly

        processes for building a functional prototype (CL04)

Task

Teams will complete the fabrication/manufacturing of the designed prototype and document any changes
to the design, as well as, make the changes (CAD, materials, processes, etc.) utilizing an ECN. If changes
impact the testing plan, teams must document this as well (ECN). This is critical in performance
determination. Prior to any changes, consult with instructor/Boyd Lab and complete an ECN. A written
summary of this section for the final report will also be completed.
113 | MODULE 5 - VERIFY

    Grading Criteria

     Grading is based on the "Expectations of Assignment Deliverables" outlined in the assignment
     document. This is reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the
     assignment is opened.
                                                        VERIFY PHASE | 114

Verify Phase

During the Verify Phase, the team introduces the design of the product or process and
performs the validation testing to verify that it does meet customer and performance
requirements. A prototype testing plan is developed and results obtained. After the prototype
is built/assembled, the testing plan is implemented to verify the design meets customer and
performance requirements developed per the plan. This phase includes development of a test
plan, implementation of the test plan on a manufactured/built/assembled prototype, results
obtained and analyzed, and may also include ECN (engineering change notice) from testing
results and/or manufacturing (build) process.

Engineering design testing  Engineering Design Testing
115 | MODULE 5 - VERIFY

Chapter 1: Test Planning and Results

Watch the Interactive Video: Test Planning Overview

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=1482#h5p-67

Testing Inferences

Suppose you tested your prototype with independent variable "A" at level a, and an observed
dependent variable "B" at level b.
What happens for other levels of A? Did you measure for everything that changed, which may
have been more than just A?
Looking back at the studying example, your independent variables of study time and location
may affect more than just your test score. For example, they may also affect your homework
scores. Could the result simply be due to "random chance"?

Hypotheses

A hypothesis is a testable statement that predicts observable phenomena. It comprises two
parts:

   What happens to B when A is changed?
   What happens to B when A is not changed?

A famous hypothesis is that objects of different weights fall at the same rate. A hypothesis we
can make about studying is that studying longer with peers will improve your test score.
When evaluating a hypothesis, it can be accepted (true) or rejected (false).
Hypotheses give us testable and systematic explanations for observable phenomena and
help to focus our attention during testing. The knowledge gained from testing a hypothesis
                                                                                             CHAPTER 1: TEST PLANNING AND RESULTS | 116

provides rigorous support for further experiments and design decisions. The data gained can
prove or disprove a hypothesis using statistical analysis.

Watch the Video: Test Plan Example

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=1482#h5p-68

Three Test Plans and Results: Corn Grinder Prototype
Example in ME 2700

Click on the link below to download and review three examples of test plans and results using
the ME 2700 DMADVR toolbox template. The test plan is the first item shown, and scrolling
down that same page are the testing results for each of the tabbed tests #1-3. This example is
also available Canvas Modules 0 & 00, Module 1 Quiz and Assignments, and Resources.

Three test plans and results examples

Data Analysis

Once the data is collected from the tests, it can be subjected to data analysis. Some common methods
of statistical analysis are:

   Measures of central tendency- mean, median, and mode
   Measures of deviation from central tendency- variance, standard deviation
   Regression- Fitting models to data, linear, log-linear, log-log, etc.

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=1482#h5p-76
117 | MODULE 5 - VERIFY

Chapter 2: Prototype Manufacture/Fabricate/
Assemble

Addressing "Issues" Found during the Manufacturing
Process: An ECN Form

When purchased parts are arrive, the Boyd Lab typically places them in the team totes. Check
your totes to see if your purchased parts have come in within a week or perhaps earlier. If you're
missing something, please contact the Boyd Lab.

During the building of your prototype, there are typically issues with dimensions or materials
or even manufacturing processes. If this occurs, a Engineering Change Notice (ECN) is
required, and please see the DMADVR Toolbox for the ECN form. It requires a review with the
team and signature of the instructor.

ECNs are common during initial builds(manufacturing, processing, etc.) and sometimes testing
in industry settings. This helps to improve our design, manufacturing, and testing of our
product (prototype) . It can also improve performance of our final design/product.

ECN FORM -Click down the left side to preview content areas of
the form

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=1507#h5p-82
                                                             CHAPTER 2: PROTOTYPE MANUFACTURE/FABRICATE/ASSEMBLE | 118

               Provided here is an example of what the Engineering Change Notification (ECN)
               Form looks like.

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=1507#h5p-75
119 | MODULE 6 - REPORT RESULTS

        MODULE 6 - REPORT
                  RESULTS
                    MODULE 6: OVERVIEW | 120

Module 6: Overview

     Module Objectives

         1. Module Objective 1: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
         2. Module Objective 2: Students will be able to evaluate (give examples of good) teamwork

             contribution and collaboration (CLO2)
         3. Module Objective 3: Students will be able to justify own (self) teamwork contribution and

             collaboration (CLO2)
         4. Module Objective 4: Students will able to explain the final design concept process to

             others using written and oral presentation methods (CLO2)
         5. Module Objective 5: Students will be able to explain/communicate the engineering

             design process results to diverse audiences (CLO2, CLO3, CLO4)
         6. Module Objective 6: Students will be able to seek assistance for teamwork and conflict

             resolution (CLO2)
         7. Module Objective 7: Students will be able to prepare structured summaries of design tool

             use and results that possess appropriate structure, grammar and tone(CLO3)
         8. Module Objective 8: Students will be able to explain/communicate the impact of

             incorporating the three pillars of sustainability in the final design (CLO4)

    Module Highlights

In this module, students will review/read the content, including watching videos. Students will
watch quiz-based/activity-based videos and complete test for understanding activities. This
will prepare students for the teamwork activities/tasks to complete assignments. This module
is focused teams preparing to communicate the design process and results. Teams will present
their design process results to diverse audiences using presentation and written methods. This
module is the culmination of the semester's journey for the teams, and the resultant output.
121 | MODULE 6 - REPORT RESULTS

Materials, Activities and Assignments

   Read/review module content in sequential order as setup in Canvas
   Watch embedded and associated module videos
   Discuss in-class and on MS Teams the work progress to ensure work is completed and

      submitted per Canvas due date
   Utilize Canvas templates to complete work as outlined in assignment document
   Develop a poster and schedule for the ME Design Expo, final presentation, and report
   Submit module assignment(s):

     Design Expo Poster

     The team must be focused on roles/responsibilities to complete this assignment. In order to
     successfully complete this assignment , teams will need to allocate work, considering roles/
     responsibilities. The poster will be a summary of the semester's design journey by the team. The
     DFSS process will be summarized and the DMADVR tools will be highlighted.
     This activity will help you to develop...

          Module Objective 1: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
          Module Objective 4: Students will able to explain the final design concept process to

             others using written and oral presentation methods (CLO2)
          Module Objective 5: Students will be able to explain/communicate the engineering

             design process results to diverse audiences (CLO2, CLO3, CLO4)
          Module Objective 8: Students will be able to explain/communicate the impact of

             incorporating the three pillars of sustainability in the final design (CLO4)

    Task

     The Department of Mechanical Engineering hosts a DESIGN EXPO every semester allowing
     student design teams to show off the work they have accomplished. It is also an opportunity for
     the department to show others (students, faculty, and public) what mechanical engineering
     design is about. This is your team's best opportunity to market your design to others. In this
                                                                                                                      MODULE 6: OVERVIEW | 122

assignment the teams will create a ME Design Expo poster that summarizes the design process
results. This poster will be presented to diverse audiences and the team will also have their
prototype at the Design Expo. The team members will have a schedule for different team
members to staff their Design Poster and Prototype location. The Design Expo includes all
sections of ME 2700.
Keys to success on this assignment is to allocate work and to maximize the roles/responsibilities
within the team. The team's schedule will be key to ensure that there is coverage at their ME
Design Expo location to answer questions that might be asked by a diverse audience.
The Team must submit a poster using the PPTX template provided in Canvas and provide a
schedule indicating who will be transporting the prototype to the EXPO, who will be staffing
your stand/display at given times for the DESIGN EXPO, and who will clean up. Each team must
assist in breaking down the displays and returning projects to classroom.

Grading Criteria

Grading is based on the "Submission Deliverable(s) Expectations" outlined in the assignment
document. This is reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the
assignment is opened.

Final Presentation with Voice-Over Video

In this assignment, teams will develop a final presentation that will include the incorporation of
a voice-over video that highlights the functionality of the design. Teams have flexibility with the
voice-over video. The video could be completed by utilizing CAD animation/motion study or a
video of the prototype's functionality while going through the testing process.
In order to successfully complete this assignment, the teams must interact/discuss both in-class
and on MS Teams (if needed) the roles/responsibilities that will lead to workload allocation in
this assignment. The teams have a lot of flexibility in the video production, and are encouraged
to share ideas in consultation with the instructor. The assignment provides the time constraints
123 | MODULE 6 - REPORT RESULTS

     and specific instructions. A key success factor is to follow the instructions in the assignment
     and consult with the instructor when questions/concerns arise, and clarity is needed.
     This activity will help you to develop...

          Module Objective 1: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
          Module Objective 4: Students will able to explain the final design concept process to

             others using written and oral presentation methods (CLO2)
          Module Objective 5: Students will be able to explain/communicate the engineering

             design process results to diverse audiences (CLO2, CLO3, CLO4)
          Module Objective 8: Students will be able to explain/communicate the impact of

             incorporating the three pillars of sustainability in the final design (CLO4)

    Task

     Teams will develop a presentation of a final design based on work throughout the semester.
     Teams develop a voice-over video highlighting prototype functionality. The final presentation
     will include the incorporation of the video. The final presentation format and content is outline
     in the assignment document.

    Grading Criteria

     Grading is based on the "Expectations of Assignment Deliverables" outlined in the assignment
     document. This is reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the
     assignment is opened.

     Final Report and Template

     In this assignment, teams will develop a final report utilizing the provided template. Teams will
     incorporate previous assignments structured summaries of design tool use and results that possess
     appropriate structure, grammar and tone to develop the final report. To complete the assignment,
                                                                                                                      MODULE 6: OVERVIEW | 124

teams must interact/discuss both in-class and on MS Teams (if needed) the roles/responsibilities
that will lead to workload allocation in this assignment. Proper documentation and reporting is
extremely important for design engineering projects. In ME 2700, you are reporting on your
project at the Design Expo, a final presentation, and a final report. These documents will be
used by future students who can learn from your work. Your audience for the report are key
stakeholders or people who have technical knowledge of mechanical engineering, and/or are
familiar with your project throughout the semester.
Keys to success are to allocate the work tasks and to utilize the summaries that have been
developed throughout the semester. These are key inputs into the final report. Following the
template provided ensure that the content required is included in the report. The team will have
components that were completed by the previous allocation of work task based on the roles/
responsibilities, and completing the final report will be a team-based effort.
This activity will help you to develop...

     Module Objective 1: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
     Module Objective 4: Students will able to explain the final design concept process to

        others using written and oral presentation methods (CLO2)
     Module Objective 5: Students will be able to explain/communicate the engineering

        design process results to diverse audiences (CLO2, CLO3, CLO4)
     Module Objective 8: Students will be able to explain/communicate the impact of

        incorporating the three pillars of sustainability in the final design (CLO4)

Task

Teams will develop a engineering design team final report based on the results of the semester's
journey. The team will propose a final design based on improvements/modifications that needed
to be made during the fabrication and/or testing phase. The team will create a business plan to
document viability and development of the design. The final report will document the DFSS
design process, and communicate this project, results, and proposed design improvements.

Grading Criteria

Grading is based on the "Expectations of Assignment Deliverables" outlined in the assignment
125 | MODULE 6 - REPORT RESULTS

     document. This is reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the
     assignment is opened.

     Peer Review 3

     In this assignment, students will individually complete a peer assessment of team colleagues and
     self. This assignment will help you learn more about how your peers perceive your contributions
     to teamwork, interaction with teammates, efforts to keep team on track, and expectations for
     quality.
     Keys to success on this assignment are for students to both quantitatively rate their team
     colleagues and themselves, and qualitatively by providing comments to back up their ratings.
     This activity will help you to develop...

          Module Objective 1: Students will be able to function effectively in selected role (CLO2)
          Module Objective 2: Students will be able to evaluate (give examples of good) teamwork

             contribution and collaboration (CLO2)
          Module Objective 3: Students will be able to justify own (self) teamwork contribution and

             collaboration (CLO2)
          Module Objective 6: Students will be able to seek assistance for teamwork and conflict

             resolution (CLO2)

    Task

     Students will individually complete the online peer review using CATME, and follow the
     instructions sent to their ISU email account from catme.org. The peer ratings and comments are
     both required to ensure a professional focused final peer review is completed.

    Grading Criteria

     Grading is based on the "Expectations of Deliverables" outlined in the assignment document. This
                                                                                                                      MODULE 6: OVERVIEW | 126

is reflected in the grading rubric available to students on the Canvas once the assignment is
opened.
127 | MODULE 6 - REPORT RESULTS

Report Phase

When working in engineering, you will often need to discuss plans or designs with others. The
ability to clearly communicate is essential to collaborative work. It is particularly important
when working with non-engineers, as the engineer must take technical information and convey
it clearly to those without advanced technical knowledge. This way, progress and options are
understood by everyone involved.

Proper documentation and reporting is extremely important for design engineering projects.
In ME 2700, you are reporting on your project at the Design Expo, a final presentation, and a
final report. These documents will be used by future students who can learn from your work.
Your audience for the report are key stakeholders or people who have technical knowledge of
mechanical engineering, and/or are familiar with your project throughout the semester.
                                                                                               CHAPTER 1: DESIGN RESULTS REPORTING | 128

Chapter 1: Design Results Reporting

Reporting Results

This phase includes reporting results of the DFSS journey throughout the semester. These results are
typically presented to diverse stakeholder audiences via:

ME Design Expo poster with prototype display

Poster: Visual Representation of the Design Process and Final Design Result to a diverse
audience reviewing your poster! Example Poster: Grinder Poster [PDF]

Final presentation

   PowerPoint Guidelines to improve presentation quality: WOVE [ppt]
   Final Presentation Example (Not Perfect) but Content is important. This presentation

      was completed prior the the WOVE guidelines provided above: Final Presentation ME
      2700-1 Example [ppt]

Watch this humorous presentation by an engineer and comedian!

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/me270baughman/?p=2103#oembed-1

My Favorite Charts - Humor_Video Script [DOC]

Final report

   Propose a final design based on your work throughout the semester
   Create a business plan to document the viability and development of your design
   Prepare a final report that clearly documents DFSS design process
   Communicate and document the DFSS design project, results, and proposed design

      improvements
129 | MODULE 6 - REPORT RESULTS

The team's audience for the report include key stakeholders or people who have technical
knowledge of mechanical engineering, and/or are familiar with your project throughout the
semester. Proper documentation and reporting is extremely important for design engineering
projects. Professional written communication of your semester's design work and results!

Follow the Final Design Report Assignment Document for final report development and
submission
                                                                                               APPENDIX 1: ACCESSIBILITY ASSESSMENT | 130

Appendix 1: Accessibility Assessment

Below is a short assessment of eight key areas where accessibility has been assessed during
the production process of this textbook. The accessibility checklist has been drawn from the
BCcampus Open Education Accessibility Toolkit. While a checklist such as this is just one
part of a holistic approach to accessibility, it is one way to begin our work on embedded good
accessibility practices in the books we support.
Wherever possible, we have identified ways in which anyone may contribute their expertise to
improve the accessibility of this text.
We also welcome any feedback from students, instructors or others who encounter the book
and identify an issue that needs resolving.
131 | APPENDIX 1: ACCESSIBILITY ASSESSMENT

               Accessibility Checklist

Category Item                                                                                    Status
                                                                                                    X
Organizing Content is organized under headings and subheadings
Content                                                                                             X

Organizing  Headings and subheadings are used sequentially (e.g. Heading 1, Heading 2,              X
Content     etc.) as well as logically (if the title is Heading 1 then there should be no other     X
            Heading 1 styles as the title is the uppermost level)                                   X

Images      Images that convey information include Alternative Text (alt-text) descriptions         X
            of the image's content or function                                                      X
                                                                                                    X
Images      Graphs, charts, and maps also include contextual or supporting details in the           X
            text surrounding the image                                                              X
                                                                                                    X
Images      Images, diagrams, or charts do not rely only on color to convey important               X
            information                                                                             X
                                                                                                    X
Images      Images that are purely decorative contain empty alternative text descriptions.
            (Descriptive text is unnecessary if the image doesn't convey contextual content         X
            information)
                                                                                                  N/A
Tables      Tables include column headers, and row headers where appropriate                      N/A
                                                                                                  N/A
Tables      Tables include a title or caption
                                                                                                    X
Tables      Tables do not have merged or split cells

Tables      Tables have adequate cell padding

Weblinks    The weblink is meaningful in context, and does not use generic text such as
            "click here" or "read more"

Weblinks Weblinks do not open new windows or tabs

Weblinks    If weblinks must open in a new window, a textual reference is included in the
            link information

Embedded A transcript has been made available for a multimedia resource that includes
Multimedia audio narration or instruction

Embedded    Captions of all speech content and relevant non-speech content are included
Multimedia  in the multimedia resource that includes audio synchronized with a video
            presentation

Embedded Audio descriptions of contextual visuals (graphs, charts, etc.) are included in
Multimedia the multimedia resource

Formulas Formulas have been created using MathML

Formulas    Formulas are images with alternative text descriptions, if MathML is not an
            option

Font Size Font size is 12 point or higher for body text
           APPENDIX 1: ACCESSIBILITY ASSESSMENT | 132

Category   Item                                            Status
Font Size  Font size is 9 point for footnotes or endnotes     X
Font Size  Font size can be zoomed to 200%                    X
