Sustainable Mobility
SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY

SHAMS TANVIR
Mavs Open Press

Arlington
Sustainable Mobility Copyright © 2024 by Shams Tanvir is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
CONTENTS

About the Publisher                                              vii

Mavs Open Press

About This Project                                               viii

Preface                                                          ix

About the Author                                                 x

About the Institution                                            xi

Copyright                                                        xii

Acknowledgements                                                 xiii

Introduction And Learning Objectives                             1

Chapter 1: The Basics of Sustainable Mobility                    2

Chapter 2: Transportation and Climate Change                     15

Chapter 3: Design of Bicycle Facilities                          29

Chapter 4: Design of Pedestrian Facilities                       40

Chapter 5: Energy Consumption and Emissions from Transportation  48

Chapter 6: Introduction to Zero Emissions Vehicles               67

Chapter 7: Design of Charging Infrastructure                     83

Chapter 8: Shared Mobility and Automation                        100

Chapter 9: Sustainable Freight                                   113

Links by Chapter                                                 125

References                                                       130

Image Credits                                                    139

Derivative Notes                                                 142

Errata and Versioning History                                    144

Mavs Open Press
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER

MAVS OPEN PRESS

ABOUT MAVS OPEN PRESS
Creation of this resource was supported by Mavs Open Press, operated by the University of Texas
at Arlington Libraries (UTA Libraries). Mavs Open Press, operated by the University of Texas at
Arlington Libraries (UTA Libraries), offers no-cost services for UTA faculty, staff, and students who
wish to openly publish their scholarship. The Libraries' program provides human and technological
resources that empower our communities to create or adapt open educational resources (OER).
Course materials published by Mavs Open Press are openly licensed using Creative Commons
licenses to allow for revision and reuse and are offered in various digital formats free of charge. Mavs
Open Press also supports the publication of open-access journals authored and edited by UTA faculty,
staff, and students.
ABOUT OER
OER are free teaching and learning materials that are licensed to allow for revision and reuse. They
can be fully self-contained textbooks, videos, quizzes, learning modules, and more. OER are distinct
from public resources in that they permit others to use, copy, distribute, modify, or reuse the content.
The legal permission to modify and customize OER to meet the specific learning objectives of a
particular course make them a useful pedagogical tool.
ABOUT PRESSBOOKS
Pressbooks is an open source, web-based authoring tool based on WordPress, and it is the primary
tool that Mavs Open Press uses to create and adapt course materials. Pressbooks should not be used
with Internet Explorer. The following browsers are best to use with Pressbooks:

     · Firefox
     · Chrome
     · Safari
     · Edge
CONTACT US
Information about open education at UTA is available online. Contact us at library-
open@listserv.uta.edu for other inquires related to UTA Libraries publishing services.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY VII
ABOUT THIS PROJECT

The development of this textbook was made possible by the support of the U.S. Department of
Education, which in January 2021 awarded the three-year funded project: OERTransport: Enabling
Transportation Planning Professional Advancement (P116T200033) to the University of Texas-
Arlington (UTA) in consortium with California Polytechnic State University (Cal Poly) and the
University of South Florida (USF).

   This open textbook is part of the OERTransport collection of six transportation planning OER
textbooks and their respective graduate course implementation at each of the three collaborating
universities. The creation of each textbook benefitted from an independent industry advisory board's
review and the savvy contributions of each institution's OER librarians.

   The contents of this textbook were developed under an Open Textbooks Pilot grant from the Fund
for the Improvement of Postsecondary Education (FIPSE), U.S. Department of Education. However,
those contents do not necessarily represent the policy of the Department of Education, and no
endorsement by the Federal Government should be assumed.

VIII SHAMS TANVIR
PREFACE

This textbook and OER material cover tools and basic knowledge required to prepare transportation
engineers and planners to contribute towards a carbon-neutral mobility future. In addition, we
will explore the potential for vehicle electrification, automation, connectivity, and ridesharing to
reduce the carbon impacts of automobility. The textbook modules are intended to inform and teach
students how to design streets for modes that have almost no carbon emissions. The goal of the
textbook is to train engineering students on existing tools and policy levers that can be used to
incorporate emerging transportation technologies in a sustainable, equitable, and efficient manner.
The course is designed for graduate transportation engineering, and city and regional planning
students. The undergraduate seniors will be able to absorb the materials given they have already taken
fundamental courses on transportation engineering and planning, including traffic engineering and
highway design.

                                                                                                                                                                       SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY IX
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Shams Tanvir, Ph.D.
   Dr. Shams Tanvir is an assistant professor in the Department of Civil Engineering and

Construction Engineering Management (CECEM) at California State University - Long Beach.
Previously, he was an assistant professor at Cal Poly and a research faculty member at the Center
for Environmental Research and Technology at the University of California Riverside. His research
aims at the development and characterization of transportation technologies that minimize energy
consumption and emissions while enhancing mobility efficiency and equity. Dr. Tanvir is a member
of the Transportation Research Board committee on Highway Capacity and Quality of Service, and
Transportation Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Mitigation. He chairs the Sustainable Transportation
Committee at the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE). Currently, he is leading projects
sponsored by the US Department of Transportation, the California Air Resources Board (CARB), the
US Department of Education, and the California Department of Transportation. Dr. Tanvir received
his Ph.D. in Transportation Systems Engineering from North Carolina State University. He received
a B.S. and M.S. in Civil Engineering from Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology,
Dhaka.

X SHAMS TANVIR
ABOUT THE INSTITUTION

California Polytechnic State University (Cal Poly) is located in San Luis Obispo on California's
Central Coast, about halfway between Los Angeles and San Francisco. Cal Poly was founded in 1901
and has been consistently named the best public, master's-level university in the West by U.S. News &
World Report since the late 1990s. It is part of the 23-campus California State University system and
is well-known for its learn-by-doing pedagogy.

                                                                                                                                                                       SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY XI
COPYRIGHT

Sustainable Mobility by Shams Tanvir is licensed under a Creative Commons, Attribution,
NonCommercial, ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted. (CC BY NC
SA)

XII SHAMS TANVIR
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

US DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

     · Stacey A. Slijepcevic, Ph.D., FIPSE Senior Program Manager/HIS STEM Senior Program
         Manager, U.S. Department of Education

     · Kurrinn Cusumano-Abrams, MA, Education Program Specialist, Hispanic-Serving
         Institutions (HSI) Division, Program Lead, Open Textbooks Pilot (OTP) Program, U.S.
         Department of Education, Office of Postsecondary Education.

PROJECT INDUSTRY ADVISORY BOARD

     · Beth Alden, M.P., AICP, Executive Director, Hillsborough Metropolitan Planning
         Organization, Tampa, FL.

     · Ann Foss, Ph.D., AICP, Planning and Programming Manager, Transportation Department,
         City of Arlington, TX.

     · Brian Guenzel, MCRP, Senior Planner, City of Midlothian, TX.
     · David L. Hutchinson, Executive Director of the Sarasota/Manatee, Metropolitan Planning

         Organization (MPO), Sarasota, FL.
     · Muhammad A Khan, Ph.D., Transportation Planning and Urban Planning Specialist with the

         Government of Pakistan.
     · John Liu, M.S., Deputy District Director, Maintenance and Operations, at Caltrans. Clovis,

         CA.
     · David Weinreich, Ph.D., Postdoctoral Fellow in Urban Governance and Sustainable

         Transformation, University of Bergen, Norway.

    · James Wood, Ph.D., Planner., Project Manager at the Dallas-Fort Worth
       International Airport.

PROJECT DIRECTION

     · Ivonne Audirac, Ph.D., Professor, City and Regional Planning Program and Associate Director
         for Education, Center for Transportation, Equity Decisions, and Dollars CTEDD, University
         of Texas at Arlington (UTA). OERTransport Project PI.

     · Jay M. Rosenberger, Ph.D., Professor, Industrial Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington
         (UTA). OERTransport Project Co-PI.

     · Amber Raley, M.A., Urban Planning and Public Policy Ph.D. Student, University of Texas at
         Arlington (UTA). OERTransport Project Co-PI.

                                                                                                                                                                     SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY XIII
PROOFREADERS AND EDITORS
     · Dr. Anurag Pande, Ph.D in Civil Engineering (Transportation).
     · Dr. Ahmed Farid, Ph.D in Civil Engineering.
     · Peyton Ratto, M.S./MCRP, Civil Engineering and City and Regional Planning with a
         specialization in Transportation Planning.
     · Anne Regan, M.A., English, Creative Commons (CC) License Certified.
     · Morgan White, M.A., English.

PROJECT OER LIBRARIANS
     · Michelle Reed, M.S.I.S.
     · Katherine Chapline, M.S.
     · Jessica McClean, M.S.I.S.
     · UTA Libraries OER Department Staff, University of Texas at Arlington (UTA)

INSTITUTION OER SPECIALIST
     · Anne M. Regan, M.A., English, Creative Commons (CC) License Certified.

PROJECT TRAINING IN COURSE DESIGN
     · Ann M.L. Cavallo, Ph.D. and Dr. Andrew M. Clark, Ph.D. UTA, Center for Research
         Excellence in Teaching and Learning (CTRLE), University of Texas at Arlington (UTA)

OTHER PROJECT PERSONNEL
     · Liana Saker, Undergraduate Research Assistant, Cal Poly

OTHER ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
     · US Department of Education for funding this effort
     · The support of the PI and her team at UTA
     · Collaborators at USF and Cal Poly for sharing their textbook templates and knowledge
     · Ms. Anne Regan, OER Coordinator at Cal Poly, for supporting the development of OER
         material
     · Ms. Morgan White for helping transfer the content of the OER into Pressbooks

ABOUT THE COVER
Anne Regan, OER Specialist Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo, designed the cover for this OER. The image
used "Bike Group & Bus on 3rd Ave" by SDOT Photos is licensed under CC BY-NC 2.0.

XIV SHAMS TANVIR
INTRODUCTION AND LEARNING OBJECTIVES

The purpose of this book is to prepare students to contribute towards a carbon-neutral mobility
future. A major part of this book focuses on designing streets for modes that have almost no carbon
emissions: walking and cycling, with an emphasis on cycling, since bicycle trips have the greatest
potential to replace car trips. The second part of the book discusses different pathways for vehicle
electrification and sharing to reduce the carbon impacts of automobility. The third part of the book
introduces students to actionable tools and policies to shape transportation choices that prevent
climate change.

   Learning Objectives:
   By following the lessons outlined in the textbook, students will be able to:

     · Explain the concept of Sustainable Mobility and list the drivers of transportation-related
         climate change.

     · Design bike facilities - calculate Level of Service (LOS) for bike facilities, understand the safety
         features, design bike and scooter share facilities, intersection control for bicycle.

     · Design pedestrian facilities - calculate LOS, intersection management for pedestrians,
         conceptualize and implement components of complete streets.

     · Estimate energy consumption and emissions from automobility.
     · Explain the concepts of light-duty and heavy-duty vehicle electrification.
     · Analyze and design transportation and charging infrastructure in alignment with expanding

         electrification needs
     · Formulate policies for alternate fuel vehicles and shared mobility.
     · Emphasize the needs of disadvantaged communities and environmental justice.
     · Calculate the energy and environmental footprints of the existing scenario and the proposed

         improvements.

                                                                                                                                                                        SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 1
CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS OF SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY

Sustainability has a broad definition and it varies from one discipline to another. This textbook
defines sustainable mobility from the perspective of transportation engineering. We will train
students to plan, design, operate, and maintain transportation-related infrastructure with the lens
of sustainability as the primary focus. Th textbook was designed to use with a course that aims to
teach students the current tools and technologies that have already been proven to reduce energy
consumption and emissions from the transportation system. At the same time, we will introduce
students to a blueprint to characterize, enhance, and integrate transportation technologies into
transportation systems. This chapter lays down the overarching concept of this book.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
The term "Sustainable Mobility" can be broken down into the terms "sustainable" and "mobility".
While sustainability has been defined in the literature in many ways, the meaning of sustainability in
terms of mobility has specific nuances. In this chapter, we will start with the broader definition of
sustainability. We will drill further down into specific transportation strategies that can improve the
sustainability of the transportation system.

Chapter Topics

    1. Pillars of sustainability
    2. Sustainable transportation
    3. Reasons for unsustainable transportation
    4. Sustainable mobility strategies

                                                 Learning Objectives

      At the end of the chapter, the reader should be able to do the following:
          · Summarize the three pillars of sustainability.
          · Acquire a basic facility for using the IPAT equation.
          · Identify the strategies to promote sustainability in the transportation sector.
          · Classify different metrics of sustainable transportation.
          · Explain why the automobile-based system of transportation is unsustainable in terms of inputs,
              outputs, and social impacts
          · Explain why transportation is a derived demand and how making transportation sustainable
              depends on land use as well as vehicles and infrastructure.

2 SHAMS TANVIR
          · Differentiate between accessibility and mobility by comparing how they are currently treated by
              our transportation system

          · Analyze how a more sustainable system might address accessibility and mobility.

SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability is derived from two Latin words: sus which means up and tenere which means to hold. In
its modern form it is a concept born out of the desire of humanity to continue to exist on planet Earth
for a very long time, perhaps the indefinite future. Sustainability is, hence, essentially and almost
literally about holding up human existence. Possibly, the most succinct articulation of the issue can be
found in the Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development. The report entitled
"Our Common Future" primarily addressed the closely related issue of Sustainable Development.
The report, commonly known as the Brundtland Report after the Commission Chair Gro Harlem
Brundtland, stated that "Humanity has the ability to make development sustainable to ensure that it
meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs." Following the concept of Sustainable Development, the commission went on to add "Yet
in the end, sustainable development is not a fixed state of harmony, but rather a process of change
in which the exploitation of resources, the direction of investments, the orientation of technological
development, and institutional change are made consistent with future as well as present needs. We
do not pretend that the process is easy or straightforward. Painful choices have to be made. Thus, in
the final analysis, sustainable development must rest on political will." Sustainability and the closely
related concept of Sustainable Development are, therefore, very human constructs whose objective is
to insure the very survival of humanity in a reasonably civilized mode of existence.
PILLARS OF SUSTAINABILITY
Achieving the goals of Sustainability requires a balance among three different bottom lines (shown in Figure
1.1), which are linked in very intricate ways. For example, the Great Recession of 2008 resulted
in a temporary decrease of carbon emissions. However, tentative improvements in the economy
have been accompanied by proportionally larger increments in emissions. Stricter regulations on
the mining industry in the developed world resulted in mass migration of extractive industries
to the developing world, with a net increment in environmental degradation and larger losses of
environmental resources.

                                                                                                                                                                        SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 3
     Figure 1.1: Three pillars of sustainability by Neyda Abreu under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

The Environmental Bottom Line limits the extraction and harvesting to levels at or below the Optimal
Sustainable Yield and it addresses critical environmental concerns:

    1. Emissions. Minimize emission from fossil fuels and the impact of these emissions on global
         climate.

    2. Resources. Reverse the loss of environmental resources.

    3. Biodiversity. Decrease the rate of decline of biodiversity.

The Social Bottom Line addresses the ethical management of resources, issues of social stability, and
the preservation of aesthetic and cultural values. Social stability requires universal access to:

   Food. Feeding the world's population, which is projected to reach over 9 billion by 2050, requires
a large increment of agricultural output. This is particularly important in the developing world,
where production is limited and most of the population growth is predicted to occur. However,
modern agricultural methods require vast losses of wild lands, drastic changes in ecosystems, and the
introduction of large amounts of fertilizer and pesticides.

   Safe drinking water and basic sanitation. Access to water that is microbially, chemically and
physically safe for human and animal consumption, sanitation and hygiene remains a challenge in the
developing world. In addition, depletion and pollution of surface and ground waters are an increasing
concern in many developed nations including the United States.

   The Economic Bottom Line aims at preserving the Direct Value of commodities present in an
ecosystem. Sustainable economies are focused on curving poverty and incentivizing fair trade.

4 SHAMS TANVIR
THE IPAT EQUATION

As attractive as the concept of sustainability may be as a means of framing our thoughts and goals,
its definition is rather broad and difficult to work with when confronted with choices among specific
courses of action. Here we introduce one general way to begin to apply sustainability concepts: the
IPAT equation.

   As is the case for any equation, IPAT expresses a balance among interacting factors. It can be stated
as

   Equation:
   I = P × A × T
   where I represents the impacts of a given course of action on the environment, P is the relevant
human population for the problem at hand, A is the level of consumption per person, and T is impact
per unit of consumption. Impact per unit of consumption is a general term for technology, interpreted
in its broadest sense as any human-created invention, system, or organization that serves to either
worsen or uncouple consumption from impact. The equation is not meant to be mathematically
rigorous; rather it provides a way of organizing information for a "firstorder" analysis.
   Suppose we wish to project future needs for maintaining global environmental quality at present
day levels for the mid-twenty-first century. For this we need to have some projection of human
population (P) and an idea of rates of growth in consumption (A).
   The global population in 2050 will grow from the current 8 billion to about 9.2 billion, an increase
of 35%. Global GDP (Gross Domestic Product, one measure of consumption) varies from year to year
but, using an annual growth rate of about 3.5% seems historically accurate (growth at 3.5%, when
compounded for forty years, means that the global economy will be four times as large at mid-century
as today).
   Thus if we wish to maintain environmental impacts (I) at their current levels, then
   Equation:
   P2023 x A2023 x T2023 = P2050 x A2050 x T2050
   Or
   Equation:

   This means that just to maintain current environmental quality in the face of growing population
and levels of affluence, our technological decoupling will need to reduce impacts by about a factor
of five. So, for instance, many recently adopted "climate action plans" for local regions and
municipalities, such as the Chicago Climate Action Plan, typically call for a reduction in greenhouse
gas emissions (admittedly just one impact measure) of eighty percent by mid-century. The means to
achieve such reductions, or even whether or not they are necessary, are matters of intense debate;
where one group sees expensive remedies with little demonstrable return, another sees opportunities
for investment in new technologies, businesses, and employment sectors, with collateral
improvements in global and national well-being.

WHAT IS SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION?

Transportation is a tricky thing to analyze in the context of sustainability. It consists in part of the
built environment: the physical infrastructure of roads, runways, airports, bridges, and rail lines that

                                                                                                                                                                        SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 5
makes it possible for us to get around. It also consists in part of individual choices: what mode we use
to get around (car, bus, bike, plane, etc.), what time of day we travel, how many people we travel with,
etc. Finally, it also is made up of institutions: federal and state agencies, oil companies, automobile
manufacturers, and transit authorities, all of whom have their own goals and their own ways of
shaping the choices we make.

   Most importantly, transportation is complicated because it's what is called a derived demand. With
the exception of joyriding or taking a walk or bicycle ride for exercise, very rarely are we traveling
just for the sake of moving. We're almost always going from Point A to Point B. What those points
are--home, work, school, shopping--and where they're located--downtown, in a shopping mall, near
a freeway exit--influence how fast we need to travel, how much we can spend, what mode we're likely
to take, etc. The demand for transportation is derived from other, non-transportation activities. So
in order to understand transportation sustainability, we have to understand the spatial relationship
between where we are, where we want to go, and the infrastructure and vehicles that can help get us
there.

   Is our current transportation system in the U.S. sustainable? In other words, can we keep doing
what we're doing indefinitely? The answer is clearly no, according to professional planners and
academics alike. There are three main limitations: energy input, emissions, and social impacts (Black,
2010).

Energy Inputs

The first reason that our current transportation system is unsustainable is that the natural resources
that power it are finite. The theory of peak oil developed by geologist M. King Hubbert suggests that
because the amount of oil in the ground is limited, at some point in time there will be a maximum
amount of oil being produced (Deffeyes, 2002). After we reach that peak, there will still be oil to drill,
but the cost will gradually rise as it becomes a more and more valuable commodity. The most reliable
estimates of the date of peak oil range from 2005 to 2015, meaning that we've probably already passed
the point of no return. New technologies do make it possible to increase the amount of oil we can
extract, and new reserves, such as the oil shale of Pennsylvania and the Rocky Mountains, can supply
us for some years to come (leaving aside the potential for environmental and social damage from fully
developing these sites). However, this does not mean we can indefinitely continue to drive gasoline-
powered vehicles as much as we currently do.

   Scientists are working on the development of alternative fuels such as biofuels or hydrogen, but
these have their own limitations. For example, a significant amount of land area is required to produce
crops for biofuels; if we converted every single acre of corn grown in the U.S. to ethanol, it would
provide 10% of our transportation energy needs. Furthermore, growing crops for fuel rather than
food has already sparked price increases and protests in less-developed countries around the world
(IMF, 2010). Is it fair to ask someone living on less then two dollars a day to pay half again as much
for their food so we can drive wherever and whenever we want?

Emissions or Outputs

The engine of the typical automobile or truck emits all sorts of noxious outputs. Some of them,
including sulfur dioxides, carbon monoxide, and particulate matter, are directly harmful to humans;
they irritate our lungs and make it hard for us to breathe. (Plants are damaged in much the same way).
These emissions come from either impure fuel or incomplete burning of fuel within an engine. Other

6 SHAMS TANVIR
noxious outputs cause harm indirectly. Nitrous oxides (the stuff that makes smog look brown) from
exhaust, for example, interact with oxygen in the presence of sunlight (which is why smog is worse in
Los Angeles and Houston), and ozone also damages our lungs.

   Carbon dioxide, another emission that causes harm indirectly, is the most prevalent greenhouse
gas (GHG), and transportation accounts for 23% of the CO2 generated in the U.S. This is more than
residential, commercial, or industrial users, behind only electrical power generation (DOE, 2009). Of
course, as was explained above, transportation is a derived demand, so to say that transportation itself
is generating carbon emissions is somewhat misleading. The distance between activities, the modes
we choose to get between them, and the amount of stuff we consume and where it is manufactured,
all contribute to that derived demand and must be addressed in order to reduce GHG emissions from
transportation.

Social Impacts

If the definition of sustainability includes meeting the needs of the present population as well as the
future, our current transportation system is a failure. Within most of the U.S., lack of access to a
personal automobile means greatly reduced travel or none at all. For people who are too young, too
old, or physically unable to drive, this means asking others for rides, relying heavily on under-funded
public transit systems, or simply not traveling. Consider, for example, how children in the U.S. travel
to and from school. In 1970, about 50% of school-aged children walked or biked to school, but by
2001, that number had dropped to 15% (Appleyard, 2005). At the same time that childhood obesity
and diabetes are rising, children are getting less and less exercise, even something as simple as walking
to school. Furthermore, parents dropping off their children at school can increase traffic levels by 20
to 25%, not just at the school itself, but also throughout the town in question (Appleyard, 2005). At
the other end of the age spectrum, elderly people may be functionally trapped in their homes if they
are unable to drive and lack another means of getting to shopping, health care, social activities, etc.
Finally, Hurricane Katrina made it clear that access to a car can actually be a matter of life or death:
the evacuation of New Orleans worked very well for people with cars, but hundreds died because they
didn't have the ability to drive away.

   Another serious social impact of our transportation system is traffic accidents. Road accidents and
fatalities are accepted as a part of life, even though 42,000 people die every year on the road in the
U.S. This means that cars are responsible for more deaths than either guns, drugs, or alcohol (Xu et al.,
2010). On the bright side, there has been a steady reduction in road fatalities over the last few decades,
thanks to a combination of more safety features in vehicles and stricter enforcement and penalties for
drunk or distracted drivers. Nevertheless, in many other countries around the world, traffic accidents
are in the top ten or even top five causes of death, leading the World Health Organization to consider
traffic accidents a public health problem.

   An additional problem with our current unsustainable transportation system is that much of
the rest of the world is trying to emulate it. The U.S. market for cars is saturated, meaning that
basically everyone who can afford or is likely to own a car already has one. This is why automobile
manufacturers vie so fiercely with their advertising, because they know they are competing with each
other for pieces of a pie that's not getting any bigger. In other countries such as China and India,
though, there are literally billions of people who do not own cars. Now that smaller, cheaper vehicles
like the Tata are entering these markets, rates of car ownership are rising dramatically. While the same
problems with resources, emissions, and social impacts are starting to occur in the developing world,

                                                                                                                                                                        SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 7
there are also unique problems. These include a lack of infrastructure, which leads to monumental
traffic jams; a need for sharing the road with pedestrians and animals; and insufficient regulation to
keep lead and other harmful additives out of gasoline and thus the air.
WHAT WOULD MAKE TRANSPORTATION SUSTAINABLE?
The circular answer to the question is to meet our current transportation needs without preventing
future generations from meeting theirs. We can start by using fewer resources or using the ones
we have more efficiently. One way to do this is by increasing the efficiency of new vehicles as they
are manufactured. Since 1981, automotive engineers have figured out how to increase horsepower
in the average American light-duty vehicle (cars and SUVs) by 60%, but they haven't managed to
improve miles per gallon at all (see Figure World Oil Production - History and Projections). As gas
prices continue to rise on the downside of the oil peak, consumers are already demanding more fuel-
efficient cars, and federal legislation is moving in this direction to raise the Corporate Average Fuel
Economy (CAFE) standards.

                          Figure 1.2: World Oil Production- History and Projections by Tom Ruen is under the Public
                          Domain via Wikimedia Commons

However, simply producing more fuel-efficient vehicles is not sufficient when we consider the
embodied energy of the car itself. It takes a lot of energy to make a car, especially in the modern
"global assembly line," where parts come from multiple countries for final assembly, and that energy
becomes "embodied" in the metal, plastic, and electronics of the car. A study in Europe found that
unless a car is over 20 years old, it does not make sense to trade it in for a more efficient one because
of this embodied energy (Usón et al., 2011). Most Americans trade in their cars after about a third of
that time. A related concept is true for electric cars. In their daily usage, they generate zero carbon
emissions, but we should also consider the source of power used to recharge the vehicle. In most parts
of the U.S., this is coal, and therefore the emissions savings are only about 30% over a traditional
vehicle (Marsh, 2011).

   If transportation is a derived demand, another way to meet our current transportation needs is by

8 SHAMS TANVIR
changing the demand. There are two related aspects to this. First, there is a clear causal link between
having more transportation infrastructure and more miles traveled on that infrastructure, and greater
economic growth. This is true between regions of the world, between individual countries, and
between people and regions within countries. This causal connection has been used as a reason
to finance transportation projects in hundreds of different contexts, perhaps most recently in the
American Reinvestment and Recovery Act that distributed federal funds to states and localities to
build infrastructure in the hopes that it would create jobs. Policymakers, businesspeople, and citizens
therefore all assume that we need more transportation to increase economic growth.

   However, it is also true that more transportation does not automatically mean more economic
growth: witness the state of West Virginia, with decades' worth of high-quality road infrastructure
bestowed upon it by its former Senator Robert Byrd, but still at the bottom of economic rankings
of states. Furthermore, at some point a country or region gains no significant improvements from
additional infrastructure; they have to focus on making better use of what they already have instead.
We therefore need to decouple economic growth from transportation growth (Banister and
Berechman, 2001). We can substitute telecommunication for travel, work at home, or shop online
instead of traveling to a store (although the goods still have to travel to our homes, this is more
efficient than each of us getting in our own cars). We can produce the goods we use locally instead
of shipping them halfway around the world, creating jobs at home as well as reducing resource use
and emissions. All of these options for decoupling are ways to reduce the demand for transportation
without also reducing the benefits from the activities that create that demand.

   The other way to think about changing the derived demand of transportation is via the concepts
of accessibility and mobility. Mobility is simply the ability to move or to get around. We can think
of certain places as having high accessibility: at a major intersection or freeway exit, a train station,
etc. Company headquarters, shopping malls, smaller businesses alike decide where to locate based on
this principle, from the gas stations next to a freeway exit to the coffee shop next to a commuter rail
station. At points of high accessibility, land tends to cost more because it's easier for people to get
there and therefore more businesses or offices want to be there. This also means land uses are usually
denser: buildings have more stories, people park in multi-level garages instead of surface lots, etc.

   We can also define accessibility as our own ability to get to the places we want: where we shop,
work, worship, visit friends or family, see a movie, or take classes. In either case, accessibility is
partially based on what the landscape looks like--width of the roads, availability of parking, height
of buildings, etc.--and partially on the mode of transportation that people have access to. If a person
lives on a busy four-lane road without sidewalks and owns a car, most places are accessible to him.
Another person who lives on that same road and doesn't have a car or can't drive might be literally
trapped at home. If her office is downtown and she lives near a commuter rail line, she can access her
workplace by train. If her office is at a major freeway intersection with no or little transit service, she
has to drive or be driven.

   Unfortunately, in the U.S. we have conflated accessibility with mobility. To get from work to the
doctor's office to shopping to home, we might have to make trips of several miles between each
location. If those trips are by bus, we might be waiting for several minutes at each stop or making
many transfers to get where we want to go, assuming all locations are accessible by transit. If those
trips are by car, we are using the vehicle for multiple short trips, which contributes more to air
pollution than a single trip of the same length. Because of our land use regulations, which often
segregate residential, retail, office, and healthcare uses to completely different parts of a city, we have

                                                                                                                                                                        SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 9
no choice but to be highly mobile if we want to access these destinations. John Urry has termed this
automobility, the social and economic system that has made living without a car almost impossible in
countries like the US and the UK (2004).

   So how could we increase accessibility without increasing mobility? We could make it possible
for mixed uses to exist on the same street or in the same building, rather than clustering all similar
land uses in one place. For example, before a new grocery store opened in the student neighborhood
adjacent to the University of Illinois campus in Champaign, people living there had to either take the
bus, drive, or get a friend to drive them to a more distant grocery store. Residents of Campustown
had their accessibility to fresh produce and other products increase when the new grocery store
opened, although their mobility may have actually gone down. In a large scale example, the Los
Angeles Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA) was sued in the 1990s for discriminating against
minorities by pouring far more resources into commuter rail than into buses. Commuter rail was
used mainly by white suburbanites who already had high levels of accessibility, while the bus system
was the only means of mobility for many African American and Hispanic city residents, who had
correspondingly less accessibility to jobs, shopping, and personal trips. The courts ruled that the
transit authority was guilty of racial discrimination because they were providing more accessibility
for people who already had it at the expense of those who lacked it. The MTA was ordered to provide
more, cleaner buses, increase service to major job centers, and improve safety and security. More
sustainable transportation means ensuring equitable accessibility -- not mobility -- for everyone now
and in the future.

STRATEGIES FOR SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION

How do we go about making transportation more sustainable? There are three main approaches:
inventing new technologies, charging people the full costs of travel, and planning better so we
increase accessibility but not mobility.

New Technology

This is the hardest category to rely on for a solution, because we simply can't predict what might
be invented in the next five to fifty years that could transform how we travel. The jet engine totally
changed air travel, making larger planes possible and increasing the distance those planes could reach
without refueling, leading to the replacement of train and ship travel over long distances. However,
the jet engine has not really changed since the 1960s. Is there some new technology that could provide
more propulsion with fewer inputs and emissions? It's possible. But at the same time, it would be
unreasonable to count on future inventions magically removing our sustainability problems rather
than working with what we already have.

   Technology is more than just machines and computers, of course; it also depends on how people use
it. When the automobile was first invented, it was seen as a vehicle for leisure trips into the country,
not a way to get around every day. As people reshaped the landscape to accommodate cars with wider,
paved roads and large parking lots, more people made use of the car to go to work or shopping, and it
became integrated into daily life. The unintended consequences of technology are therefore another
reason to be wary about relying on new technology to sustain our current system.

Charge Fuel Costs

The economist Anthony Downs has written that traffic jams during rush hour are a good thing,

10 SHAMS TANVIR
because they indicate that infrastructure is useful and a lot of people are using it (Downs, 1992). He
also notes that building more lanes on a highway is not a solution to congestion, because people who
were staying away from the road during rush hour (by traveling at different times, along different
routes, or by a different mode) will now start to use the wider road, and it will become just as
congested as it was before it was widened. His point is that the road itself is a resource, and when
people are using it for free, they will overuse it. If instead, variable tolls were charged depending on
how crowded the road was--in other words, how much empty pavement is available--people would
choose to either pay the toll (which could then be invested in alternative routes or modes) or stay off
the road during congested times. The point is that every car on the road is taking up space that they
aren't paying for and therefore slowing down the other people around them; charging a small amount
for that space is one way of recovering costs.

   Traffic congestion is an example of what economists call externalities, the costs of an activity that
aren't paid by the person doing the activity. Suburbanites who drive into the city every day don't
breathe the polluted air produced by their cars; urban residents suffer that externality. People around
the country who use gasoline derived from oil wells in the Gulf of Mexico didn't experience oil
washing up on their beaches after the BP disaster in 2010. By charging the full cost of travel via taxes
on gas or insurance, we could, for example, pay for children's hospitalization for asthma caused by the
cars speeding past their neighborhoods. Or we could purchase and preserve wetland areas that can
absorb the floodwaters that run off of paved streets and parking lots, keeping people's basements and
yards drier. Not only would this help to deal with some of the externalities that currently exist, but
the higher cost of gas would probably lead us to focus on accessibility rather than mobility, reducing
overall demand.

                         Figure 1.3: Freeway Traffic by User Minesweeper via Wikimedia Commons is under the following
                         Creative Commons license: CC-BY-SA-3.0

Planning Better for Accessibility

The other way we can produce more sustainable transportation is to plan for accessibility, not

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 11
mobility. Many transportation planners say that we've been using the predict and provide model for
too long. This means we assume nothing will change in terms of the way we travel, so we simply
predict how much more traffic there is going to be in the future and provide roads accordingly.
Instead, we should take a deliberate and decide approach, bringing in more people into the planning
process and offering different options besides more of the same. Some of the decisions we can make
to try and change travel patterns include installing bike lanes instead of more parking, locating retail
development next to housing so people can walk for a cup of coffee or a few groceries, or investing in
transit instead of highways.

   For example, the school district in Champaign, Illinois, is considering closing the existing high
school next to downtown, to which many students walk or take public transit, and replacing it with a
much larger facility on the edge of town, to which everyone would have to drive or be driven. The new
site would require more mobility on the part of nearly everyone, while many students and teachers
would see their accessibility decrease. As gas prices continue to rise, it will cost the school district and
parents more and more to transport students to and from school, and students will be more likely to
drive themselves if they have access to a car and a driver's license. Putting the new school in a more
accessible location or expanding the existing one would keep the school transportation system from
becoming less sustainable.

   You may have noticed that these proposed changes to increase transportation sustainability aren't
really things that one person can do. We can certainly make individual choices to drive less and walk
or bike more, to buy a more fuel-efficient car, or to use telecommunications instead of transportation.
In order to make significant changes that can reduce overall energy usage and emissions production,
however, the system itself has to change. This means getting involved in how transportation policy is
made, maybe by attending public meetings or writing to city or state officials about a specific project.
It means contacting your Congressional representatives to demand that transportation budgets
include more money for sustainable transportation modes and infrastructure. It means advocating for
those who are disadvantaged under the current system. In means remembering that transportation is
connected to other activities, and that focusing on how the demand for transportation is derived is
the key to making and keeping it sustainable.

                                                     Key Takeaways

          · Achieving the goals of Sustainability requires a balance among three different bottom lines -
              economy (profit) , environment (planet), and society (people).

          · The demand for transportation is derived from other, non-transportation activities.

          · There are three major dimensions of unsustainable transportation- dependence on non-
              renewable fuel, emissions of deleterious materials, and social impacts or externalities such as
              congestion, crashes, etc.

          · More sustainable transportation means ensuring equitable accessibility -- not mobility -- for
              everyone now and in the future.

          · There are three main approaches to increase transportation sustainability: inventing new
              technologies, charging people the full costs of travel, and planning for multimodal accessibility.

12 SHAMS TANVIR
                                                         Self-Test

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                          https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=29#h5p-1

                                                  GLOSSARY: KEY TERMS
Accessibility: In transportation, a measure of the ease with which people are able to get places they
want or need to go.

   Derived demand: Demand for a good or service that comes not from a desire for the good or
service itself, but from other activities that it enables or desires it fulfills.

   Embodied energy: The sum of all energy used to produce a good, including all of the materials,
processes, and transportation involved.

   Externality: Cost of an activity not paid by the person doing the activity.
   Mobility: The ability to move or to get around.
   Sustainable development: Development that meets the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.

                                                           MEDIA ATTRIBUTIONS
                · Figure 1.1: Three pillars of sustainability by Neyda Abreu is under the following

                    Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
                · Figure 1.2: World Oil Production- History and Projections by Tom Ruen is under the

                    Public Domain via Wikimedia Commons
                · Figure 1.3: Freeway Traffic by User Minesweeper via Wikimedia Commons is under the

                    following Creative Commons license: CC-BY-SA-3.0

                                                          REFERENCES
     · Appleyard, B. S. 2005. Livable Streets for School Children: How Safe Routes to School

         programs can improve street and community livability for children. National Centre for
         Bicycling and Walking Forum, available online: https://www.safetylit.org/citations/
         index.php?fuseaction=citations.viewdetails&citationIds[]=citjournalarticle_476088_9
     · Banister, D. and Berechman, Y. 2001. Transport investment and the promotion of economic
         growth. Journal of Transport Geography 9:3, 209-218.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 13
     · Black, W. 2010. Sustainable Transportation: Problems and Solutions. New York: Guilford
         Press.

     · Deffeyes, K. 2002. Hubbert's Peak: The Impending World Oil Shortage. Princeton, NJ:
         Princeton University Press.

     · DOE (Department of Energy). 2009. Emissions of greenhouse gases report. DOE/EIA-0573,
         available online: http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/1605/ggrpt/carbon.html

     · Downs, A. 1992. Stuck in Traffic: Coping With Peak-Hour Traffic Congestion. Washington,
         DC: Brookings Institution Press.

     · IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2010. Impact of high food and fuel prices on developing
         countries. Available online: http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/faq/ffpfaqs.htm

     · Marsh, B. 2011. Kilowatts vs. Gallons. New York Times, May 28. Available
         online: http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2011/05/29/weekinreview/volt-
         graphic.html?ref=weekinreview

     · Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development: Our Common Future.
         1987. www.un-documents.net/wced-ocf.htm.

     · UPI (United Press International). 2011. Global biofuel land area estimated. Available
         online: http://www.upi.com/Science_News/2011/01/10/Global-biofuel-land-area-
         estimated/UPI-97301294707088/

     · Urry, J,. 2004. The `System' of Automobility. Theory Culture and Society 21:4-5, 25-39.
     · Usón, A.A., Capilla, A.V., Bribián, I.Z., Scarpellini, S. and Sastresa, E.L. 2011. Energy efficiency

         in transport and mobility for an eco-efficiency viewpoint. Energy 36:4, 1916-23.
     · Xu, J., Kochanek, K., Murphy, S., and Tejada-Vera, B. 2010. Deaths: Final Data for 2007.

         National Vital Statistics Reports, 58:19, available online: http://www.cdc.gov/NCHS/data/
         nvsr/nvsr58/nvsr58_19.pdf

                                                        ATTRIBUTIONS
     · Foundations in Sustainability Systems (EME 504) by Neyda Abreu is licensed under CC BY-

         NC-SA 4.0
     · Sustainability: A Comprehensive Foundation by Tom Theis and Jonathan Tomkin is licensed

         under CC BY 4.0

14 SHAMS TANVIR
CHAPTER 2: TRANSPORTATION AND CLIMATE CHANGE

CHAPTER OVERVIEW

In this chapter, we specifically focus on the carbon emissions aspects of transportation policies,
technologies, and investments. We start with the historical backdrop of the broader discussion on
climate change. Then, we narrow down the discussion in the realm of transportation. Broadly, this
chapter classifies the actions to be taken in the transportation sector to mitigate climate change as
follows - short term (1-10 years), medium term (11- 30 years), and longer term (30+ years). Within
each block, the actions are classified in (a) steps that reduce travel (b) increase efficiency (c) change the
energy pathways (d) reduce exposure or increase resiliency.

   In October of 2018, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released the Special
Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C. The IPCC report found that any increase in average global
temperatures would have negative health and economic impacts on people throughout the world.
They also found that limiting global warming to temperature increases of no more than 1.5°C above
pre-industrial levels could reduce the number of people who would experience those impacts by up to
several hundred million. In order to limit temperature increases to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels,
we would need to reduce human-generated carbon emissions by 45 percent over the next decade or
so, and by 100 percent by 2050.

   Transportation represents about 15 percent of all carbon emissions globally (Center for Climate
and Energy Solutions 2017) and about 28 percent of all carbon emissions in the United States
(Environmental Protection Agency 2015). It is clear that the way we are currently meeting our
mobility needs is unsustainable. We urgently need to reduce our mobility dependence on carbon.

Chapter Topics

    1. Basics of Climate Change Science

    2. Impact of Transportation Sector on Climate Change Related Emissions

    3. Relation of Emissions with Vehicle Activity

    4. Actions to Mitigate Climate Change Impacts from Transportation

    5. Impacts of Climate Change on Transportation

                                                 Learning Objectives

At the end of the chapter, the reader should be able to do the following:
   1. Explain the basic concepts of climate change science.
   2. Discuss the anthropogenic drivers of climate change.

                                                                           SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 15
         3. Identify the transportation decisions and activities contributing to climate change.

         4. Select actions to address climate change within the transportation sector considering the
              economic implications and technological maturity.

CLIMATE CHANGE

The Earth's climate is continually changing. If we are to understand the current climate and predict
the climate of the future, we need to be able to account for the processes that control the climate. One
hundred million years ago, much of North America was arid and hot, with giant sand dunes common
across the continent's interior. Six hundred and fifty million years ago it appears that the same land
mass--along with the rest of the globe--was covered in a layer of snow and ice. What drives these
enormous changes through Earth's history? If we understand these fundamental processes we can
explain why the climate of today may also change.

Weather Vs. Climate

Weather describes the short term state of the atmosphere. This includes such conditions as wind,
air pressure, precipitation, humidity and temperature. Climate describes the typical, or average,
atmospheric conditions. Weather and climate are different as the short term state is always changing
but the long-term average is not. On the 1 of January, 2011, Chicago recorded a high temperature
of 6 C; this is a measure of the weather. Measurements of climate include the averages of the daily,
monthly, and yearly weather patterns, the seasons, and even a description of how often extraordinary
events, such as hurricanes, occur. So if we consider the average Chicago high temperature for the 1 of
January (a colder 0.5 C) or the average high temperature for the entire year (a warmer 14.5 C) we are
comparing the city's weather with its climate. The climate is the average of the weather.

The Atmospheric Blanket: The Natural Greenhouse Effect

The Earth's atmosphere is an extremely thin shell compared with the size of our planet. The primary
gases in the atmosphere by volume are nitrogen (78.1%), oxygen (20.9%), and argon (0.9%). These
figures don't include water vapor, which varies significantly with location and altitude but averages
about 0.4% of the atmosphere globally. Other naturally occurring gases include carbon dioxide
(designated by chemists as CO2), ozone, and methane, which all occur in trace amounts. Although
CO2, methane, and ozone occur naturally, human activities are increasing their concentrations.

   Our planet's fundamental energy source is incoming radiation from the sun, which we will refer
to as incoming solar energy. Not all of this solar energy is absorbed by the planet. About 29% of it
is reflected back into space by the atmosphere, the land surface, and the sea surface. The percentage
of solar radiation reflected back into space is called the albedo. The primary climate variables
responsible for the Earth's 29% albedo are clouds, snow cover, ice sheets, sea ice, glaciers, and oxygen
and nitrogen in the atmosphere. In general, whiter substances (clouds, ice, and snow) reflect more
solar radiation. The scattering of sunlight by oxygen and nitrogen gives the sky its blue color.

   After 29% of the incoming solar radiation is reflected back to space, the Earth absorbs the remaining
71%, which heats the land, ocean surface, and atmosphere. In response, the surface and the
atmosphere radiate (i.e., give off) this heat by emitting infrared radiation. This infrared radiation

16 SHAMS TANVIR
is commonly referred to as heat energy because the infrared radiation emitted by any substance
depends on its temperature. The higher an object's temperature, the more heat energy it emits.

   However, not all of the emitted heat energy can escape to space. The greenhouse gases in the
intervening atmosphere absorb (trap) some of this heat energy. As a result, the heat energy leaving
the planet is reduced by the intervening atmosphere. It is this trapping of heat energy that otherwise
would have escaped to space through the atmosphere that is referred to as the greenhouse effect.

CO2 increased by human activities

While the natural greenhouse effect is vital for maintaining life on Earth, humans have added an
enormous amount of carbon dioxide to the thin shell of the atmosphere since the dawn of the
Industrial Revolution. As of 2017, we have dumped 2,200,000,000,000 (2.2 trillion) tons of carbon
dioxide into the atmosphere over the past 240 years. About 45% of that carbon dioxide still remains
in the air today. That leaves a blanket of human-generated carbon dioxide in our thin atmospheric
shell whose sheer weight is astounding--990 billion tons. That's equivalent to the weight of about 490
billion cars circling the planet all the time.

   How do we know the weight of the human-made CO2? From direct measurements initiated by
Charles David Keeling of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography (UC San Diego). This wiggly
curve (Figure 2.1) is called the Keeling Curve and shows the concentration of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere. When Keeling first started making measurements in 1958, the atmospheric carbon
dioxide concentration was 313 parts per million (abbreviated as 313ppm). That is, out of every
million molecules in the atmosphere, 313 were carbon dioxide molecules in 1958.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 17
                Figure 2.1: The Keeling Curve shows the increase in CO2 from 1958 to 2017 from "Bending the Curve: Climate
                Change Solutions" by Ramanathan et al. and reproduced from the Scripps CO2 Program from the Scripps
                Institution of Oceanography is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

What are the sources for the observed increase in CO2?

Many human activities that address our basic needs, development, and well-being are sources of
greenhouse gases. Most of the energy used by society since the Industrial Revolution has come from
fossil fuels: coal, oil, and natural gas. Burning fossil fuels emits the largest amount of CO2 by far,
contributing an estimated 34 billion tons in 2016. Major anthropogenic sources of carbon dioxide
include the following:

    1. Using fossil fuels to produce electricity: In 2016, 65% of electricity worldwide was generated by
         burning fossil fuels, including 38% from coal and 23% from natural gas. Coal emits roughly
         twice as much CO2 per unit of electricity generated as natural gas, so burning coal to generate
         electricity is particularly concerning.

    2. Transportation: There are about 1 billion motor vehicles in use around the world, the vast
         majority of which use oil-based fuels. Aviation and commercial shipping are also major
         emitters of carbon dioxide.

    3. Residential and commercial buildings and activities: In addition to indirect emissions from
         electricity use, buildings can be a direct source of CO2 emissions, primarily through heating.
         In developed countries, natural gas is frequently used for space heating, water heating, and
         cooking. The least affluent 3 billion, with limited access to fossil fuels, frequently burn wood
         or animal dung for heating and cooking, which also release CO2.

18 SHAMS TANVIR
    4. Industrial processes: A range of industrial processes, in particular cement and steel production,
         emit significant amounts of CO2. Cement production alone is estimated to have been
         responsible for 2 billion tons of CO2 emissions in 2016.

    5. Land use: Changes in land use, in particular burning forests to clear land for farming, grazing,
         or housing, also emit significant amounts of carbon dioxide. Over the decade 2007-2016,
         CO2 emissions from land use averaged about 5 billion tons per year.

IMPACT OF TRANSPORTATION ON EMISSIONS
Today's transportation systems depend on motor vehicles. As shown in Figure 2.2, by 2017
transportation as a whole had become the largest emitter of greenhouse gases in the United States. In
fact, in 2017 the US Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) reported transportation emissions
to be 1,866 million metric tons of CO2 equivalent (MMT CO2e), approximately 29% of total US
emissions. If one also considers the refining of fuels and the energy used to build roads, the emissions
attributable to transportation are even higher. Where electricity generation has low greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions, transportation's share of the total is much higher. For example, in California in
2017, transportation-related emissions accounted for 41% of California's GHG emissions, or about
48% with refining of transportation fuels.

     Figure 2.2: Change in Total Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Different Sectors in the United States during 1990- 2023 by Shams
     Tanvir using data from the EPA is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

Transportation is also the largest source of directly emitted air pollutants that cause local air
pollution, including carbon monoxide (CO), oxides of nitrogen (NOx), and particulate matter (PM).
Motor vehicles emit other gases as well, including hydrocarbons (HC) that lead to the formation
of ozone (O3) and secondary PM. And air-conditioning units in vehicles increase fuel use and emit
hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) refrigerant emissions that are short-lived climate super pollutants.
Vehicle-related pollution causes about 15,000 premature deaths annually in the US and between
184,000 and 242,000 globally.

   Fortunately, air quality has dramatically improved in US cities since the 1970s. Figure 2.3 shows
that air pollutants from cars and light trucks were reduced by 73% from 1970 to 2016, even though
VMT almost doubled.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 19
                       Figure 2.3: Air pollution emissions yearly trends. by Ramanathan et al. (2019) and adapted from US
                       Environmental Protection Agency 2019 is under the following Creative Commons license: CC
                       BY-NC-SA 4.0

This huge reduction in air pollutants was due to technological advances in vehicle emission control
technology and the reformulation of gasoline and diesel fuels. These technology and refining
improvements are the result of increasingly stringent performance standards adopted by the US
EPA and the California Air Resources Board (CARB). Hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide exhaust
emissions from new light-duty vehicles have decreased by over 99% in the US, as shown in Figure
2.4. Massive improvements are also being achieved with trucks, ships, locomotives, and other
transportation modes, but they are lagging improvements in cars.

20 SHAMS TANVIR
                   Figure 2.4: "California tailpipe HC performance standards for new light duty vehicle" by Ramanathan et al.
                   (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

VEHICLE ACTIVITY AND EMISSIONS
In order to understand the breadth of potential transportation-related emissions reductions, it is
useful to understand the relationship between vehicle activity and the corresponding emissions.
There are several factors that play a role in how much a vehicle emits from the tailpipe. A typical
driving trip will consist of idling, accelerating, cruising, and decelerating. The proportion of a trip
spent in these different stages will depend on the driver's behavior (for example, aggressive versus
mild driving habits), the roadway type (for example, freeway versus arterial roadway), and the level of
traffic congestion.

   We can create histograms of emissions for large regional areas. Data collected from passenger
vehicles in Southern California are presented in Figure 2.5. As indicated, most trips produce about
330 grams of CO2 emissions per mile, corresponding to approximately 26 miles per gallon of fuel
economy. Other trips, however, produce far less or far more CO2 emissions per mile, depending on
the specific driving pattern. This variation comes from the driver's behavior, the roadway type, and
the level of traffic congestion. Other vehicle types will have quite different emissions depending on
their weight, power, and other vehicle factors.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 21
                 Figure 2.5: "CO2 emissions, in grams per mile, for a representative database of passenger vehicle trips in
                 Southern California" by Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license: CC
                 BY-NC-SA 4.0

Electric vehicles have zero tailpipe emissions, but their energy efficiency (and upstream power plant
emissions) is affected by these same factors.

   If one plots emissions against speeds, one observes a U-shaped pattern as shown in Figure 2.6. The
resulting emissions-speed curve can be generalized for different types of vehicles, different driving
behaviors, and different types of trips, as shown in Figure 2.7. This generalized curve can then be
used as a tool for evaluating different carbon reduction schemes for transportation management. The
upper line in Figure 2.7 shows a representative emissions-speed curve for typical traffic. We can use
this curve to examine how different traffic management techniques can affect vehicle emissions such
as CO2. The lower line represents the approximate lower bound of CO2 emissions for typical internal
combustion vehicles traveling at a constant steady-state speed.

                  Figure 2.6: "Emission-speed plot of individual trips or trip segments" by Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the
                  following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

22 SHAMS TANVIR
          Figure 2.7: "Possible use of traffic operation strategies in reducing on-road CO2 emissions" by Ramanathan et al. (2019) is
          under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

Several important results can be derived from Figure 2.7:

     · If congestion reduces the average vehicle speed below 45 mph (for this particular freeway
         scenario), emissions increase. At these lower speeds, vehicles operate less efficiently and spend
         more time on the road, resulting in higher emissions. In this scenario, congestion mitigation
         programs will directly reduce emissions.

     · If moderate congestion reduces average speeds from a free-flow speed over 70 mph to a
         slower speed of 45 to 55 mph, this moderate congestion can reduce emissions (because
         emissions are higher and energy efficiency is lower at very high speeds). With no congestion,
         average traffic speeds can increase to over 65 mph, increasing emissions.

     · Smoothing stop-and-go traffic will reduce emissions.

     · Electric vehicles (EV) powered by renewable energy will have near-zero life cycle emissions; if
         electric vehicles are powered by fossil fuels, emissions from power plants will be lower at
         lower speeds, for the same reason as for internal combustion engine vehicles (ICEV) but even
         more so because regenerative braking captures energy in stop-and-go traffic. EVs are more
         energy efficient than similar ICEVs, but their GHG mitigation potential depends on the
         upstream source of electricity production. This upstream GHG intensity constitutes the Well-
         to-Tank (WtT) part of the total lifecycle emissions for EV. In addition to WtT emissions,
         emissions from battery pack manufacturing and vehicle manufacturing are critical for an
         accurate life cycle assessment (LCA) emission for EVs. These sources of emissions are better
         captured in the cradle-to-grave LCA estimate which includes emissions related to raw
         material extraction, fuel production and transport, vehicle manufacturing, vehicle use, and
         vehicle-end-of-life

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 23
TRANSPORTATION SECTOR GHG REDUCTION STRATEGIES
Pollutant and GHG emissions can be reduced in many ways. See Figure 2.8 for a simplified
framework. GHG emissions may be treated as primary energy carbon intensity multiplied by vehicle and
transportation efficiency multiplied by total travel demand.

                Figure 2.8: "General approach for calculating GHG emissions from transportation" by Ramanathan et al. (2019)
                is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

Primary energy carbon intensity can be reduced by using lower-carbon fuels or low-carbon
electrification. The energy needed to drive a specific distance can be reduced by improving both (1)
vehicle efficiency and (2) transportation system efficiency. This analytical construct--separating the
determinants of emissions into carbon intensity, efficiency, and demand--can be used as a policy
framework. A large carbon tax would address all three strategies, though it must be very large to be
effective. In practice, an environmentally sustainable transportation solution will depend on a mix of
policies and strategies.

   Strategies to reduce transportation GHG emissions and energy include the following:
     · Vehicle technology strategies that reduce fuel consumption, including fuel efficiency
         improvements and engine technologies;
     · Fuel technology strategies using alternative transportation fuels such as biodiesel, compressed
         natural gas, electric vehicles and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles;
     · Land use planning and multimodal transportation strategies that reduce emissions through
         more compact land uses or changing travel behavior to reduce vehicle trips using transit, rail,
         ride-sharing, and telework;
     · Regulatory instruments and pricing strategies, including congestion pricing, pay-as-you-
         drive insurance, mileage-based user fees, tolls and fuel taxes;
     · Vehicle operations and highway system management strategies such as speed management,
         congestion relief, incident management, traffic smoothing, traveler information services,
         and other logistics improvements as well as more fuel-efficient "eco-driving" practices; and
     · Construction, maintenance and operations strategies that reduce GHG emissions, such as

24 SHAMS TANVIR
         upgrading construction equipment; different pavement practices and mixes; work-zone
         management; and energy efficient practices for traffic lighting, transportation buildings,
         mowing and roadside vegetation management. New York State DOT's Climate Change and
         Energy Initiative is an example of the wide range of efforts transportation agencies are taking
         to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and reliance on petroleum products.
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON TRANSPORTATION
Climate change will affect transportation primarily through increases in several types of weather and
climate extremes, such as very hot days; intense precipitation events; intense hurricanes; drought; and
rising sea levels, coupled with storm surges and land subsidence. The impacts will vary by mode of
transportation and region, but they will be widespread and costly in both human and economic terms
and will require significant changes in the planning, design, construction, operation, and maintenance
of transportation systems. The changes made in the transporation system to withstand the climate
change impacts increase the system resilience against direct and indirect vulnerabilities. In 2008
report of U.S. Transportation Research Board the following statement was made:

   "Potentially, the greatest impact of climate change for North America's transportation systems will be flooding of
   coastal roads, railways, transit systems, and runways because of global rising sea levels, coupled with storm surges and
   exacerbated in some locations by land subsidence... The Atlantic and Gulf Coasts are particularly vulnerable because
   they have already experienced high levels of erosion, land subsidence, and loss of wetlands..."

                                                     Key Takeaways

          · Human related activities or anthropogenic emissions of carbon dioxide is the prime reason for
              global climate change.

          · Transportation is the highest emitting sector of greenhouse gases in the United States.
          · There is a huge variability in carbon emissions among trips made in modern automobile

              depending on congestion on the route and average traffic speed. Emissions can be controlled by
              changing the vehicle type or the fuel type used.
          · Total travel demand increases the amount greenhouse gas emissions given no change in how the
              traveling is done.
          · Climate change in turn affect how a transportation system is planned, designed, and operated in
              the future.

                                                         Self-Test

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 25
                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                          https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=109#h5p-2

                                                  GLOSSARY: KEY TERMS

Albedo: The fraction of light that a surface reflects. If it is all reflected, the albedo is equal to 1. If
30% is reflected, the albedo is 0.3. The albedo of Earth's surface (atmosphere, ocean, land surfaces)
determines how much incoming solar energy, or light, is immediately reflected back to space.

   Climate: The weather conditions prevailing in an area in general or over a long period.
   Climate Super Pollutants: Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) are a climate "super-pollutant": greenhouse
gases with hundreds to thousands of times the heat-trapping power of carbon dioxide (CO).
   Congestion Pricing: Fees charged for driving on busy city roads reduce greenhouse gas emissions
and improve air quality while also generating funding for the transit systems.
   Eco-Driving: Adoption of a driving behavior (or a driving style) that aims at saving fuel and
reducing harmful emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG).
   Fossil Fuels: Fossil fuels are formed from the decomposition of buried carbon-based organisms
that died millions of years ago. They create carbon-rich deposits that are extracted and burned for
energy. They are non-renewable and currently supply around 80% of the world's energy.
   Greenhouse Effect: a warming of Earth's surface and troposphere (the lowest layer of the
atmosphere) caused by the presence of water vapour, carbon dioxide, methane, and certain other gases
in the air.
   Heat Energy: Heat energy is the result of the movement of tiny particles called atoms, molecules or
ions in solids, liquids and gases.
   Incident Management: Planned and coordinated multi-disciplinary process to detect, respond to,
and clear traffic incidents and restore traffic flow as safely and quickly as possible.
   Incoming Solar Energy: Incoming ultraviolet, visible, and a limited portion of infrared energy
(together sometimes called "shortwave radiation")
   Infrared Radiation: Infrared radiation (IR), sometimes referred to simply as infrared, is a region of
the electromagnetic radiation spectrum where wavelengths range from about 700 nanometers (nm)
to 1 millimeter (mm).
   Parts Per Million (ppm): This is a way of expressing very dilute concentrations of substances.
Just as percent means out of a hundred, so parts per million or ppm means out of a million. Usually
describes the concentration of something in air, water or soil. One ppm is equivalent to 1 milligram
of something per liter of water (mg/l) or 1 milligram of something per kilogram soil (mg/kg).
   Resilience: The ability to prepare for changing conditions and withstand, respond to, and recover
rapidly from disruptions.
   Traffic Smoothing: Reduction of acceleration and deceleration (braking) in the traffic stream using
traffic management and operations.
   Weather: A description of the short term state of the atmosphere.

26 SHAMS TANVIR
   Work Zone: A work zone is an area of a trafficway with highway construction, maintenance,
or utility-work activities. A work zone is typically marked by signs, channeling devices, barriers,
pavement markings, and/or work vehicles.

                                                           MEDIA ATTRIBUTIONS

                · Figure 2.1: "Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions" by Ramanathan et al. (2019)
                    and reproduced from the Scripps CO2 Program from the Scripps Institution of
                    Oceanography is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                · Figure 2.2: "Change in Total Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Different Sectors in the
                    United States during 1990- 2023" by Shams Tanvir using data from the EPA is under the
                    following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                · Figure 2.3: "Air pollution emissions yearly trends" by Ramanathan et al. (2019) and
                    adapted from US Environmental Protection Agency 2019 is under the following Creative
                    Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                · Figure 2.4: "California tailpipe HC performance standards for new light duty vehicle" by
                    Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-
                    SA 4.0

                · Figure 2.5: "CO2 emissions, in grams per mile, for a representative database of passenger
                    vehicle trips in Southern California" by Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the following
                    Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                · Figure 2.6: "Emission-speed plot of individual trips or trip segments" by Ramanathan et
                    al. (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                · Figure 2.7: "Possible use of traffic operation strategies in reducing on-road CO2
                    emissions" by Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license:
                    CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                · Figure 2.8: "General approach for calculating GHG emissions from transportation" by
                    Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-
                    SA 4.0

                                                          REFERENCES

     · Transportation system resilience to extreme weather and climate change. FHWA-
         HOP-15-025. November 2015. Pursuant to Title 17 Section 105 of the United States Code,
         this file is not subject to copyright protection and is in the public domain. Copyright
         information.

                                                        ATTRIBUTIONS

     · Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M.,
         Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 27
     · Climate Change and Transportation, Climate Change and Variability by Yuri Yevdokimov is
         licensed under CC BY-NC-SA-3.0

28 SHAMS TANVIR
CHAPTER 3: DESIGN OF BICYCLE FACILITIES

CHAPTER OVERVIEW
This chapter starts with a discussion of the history of bike facilities in the U.S. and abroad. We
describe the Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) procedure for evaluating the level of service for
bicycle facilities. We then introduce students to bicycle-friendly street design principles. The concept
of complete streets is discussed next. Students learn about the practices that improve the safety of
bicycle facilities. Intersection design and operations tools to incorporate bicycles are introduced to
the students.

Chapter Topics

    1. Street Design Elements for Bicycle Facility Design
    2. Level of Service for Bike Facilities
    3. Bicycle-Friendly Street Design Principles

                                                 Learning Objectives

      After completing this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Implement bicycle-friendly street design principles.
          · Select appropriate street design elements to improve the safety and efficiency of bicycle facilities.
          · Design a conventional bike lane.
          · Select appropriate design elements to increase accessibility, safety, and efficiency of bicycle
              operation.
          · Calculate the Level of Service (LOS) for bike facilities.

BICYCLE FACILITIES
Bicycles do not have any internal combustion engines and do not use fossil fuel to operate. In addition,
the production and maintenance of bicycles requires a minimum number of raw materials. Therefore,
bicycles are considered a true zero-emissions mode. In terms of designing roadway facilities, the term
"bicycle facilities" is not limited to the bike lanes or the bike path used. In addition to the path or
space designated for bicycles, bicycle facilities include intersection control features, bikeway signing
and marking, bicycle storage, and parking facilities.

   In this chapter, we will first discuss the types of bicycle facilities. In particular, we will focus on
the street design elements that help improve the safety and efficiency of bicycle-based operation. We

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 29
will then introduce the concept of network connectivity for planning city or regional level bicycle
facilities.
TYPES OF BICYCLE FACILITIES
Chapter 1000 of the Highway Design Manual (HDM) defines five basic types of bicycle facilities:

    1. Shared Roadway (No Bikeway Designation)
    2. Class I Bikeway (Bike Path)
    3. Class II Bikeway (Bike Lane)
    4. Class III Bikeway (Bike Route)
    5. Class IV Bikeway (Separated Bikeway)

Shared Roadway

Most bicycle travel in the United States now occurs on streets and highways without bikeway
designation. In some cases, shared roadway will have signs and pavement markings for bicycle
operation. Most common type of pavement marking on a shared roadway is "Sharrows" as shown in
Figure 3.1.

                                    Figure 3.1: Sharrow on US1 in West Palm Beach by Michael Rivera is under the
                                    following Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 4.0

Bike Paths

Class I bikeways or bike paths are provided to serve corridors not typically served by streets and
highways. In most cases, bike paths are added for recreational purposes such as along rivers, ocean
fronts, canals, utility right of way, abandoned railway right of way, within school campuses, or within
and between parks. Figure 3.2 shows a bike path along California State Highway 35.

30 SHAMS TANVIR
Figure 3.2: Bike route along California State Highway 35 by Robert Ashworth is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY 2.0

Bike Lanes

Class II bikeway or bike lanes are the most common type of bicycle facility in the United States. Bike
lanes are intended to delineate the right of way assigned to bicyclists and motorists and to provide
for more predictable movements by each. But a more important reason for constructing bike lanes is
to better accommodate bicyclists through corridors where insufficient room exists for side-by-side
sharing of existing streets by motorists and bicyclists. Figure 3.3 shows a bike lane on Pleasant Valley
Parkway, Providence RI.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 31
                                      Figure 3.3: Bike lane on Pleasant Valley Parkway, Providence RI by Kenneth
                                      C. Zirkel is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 4.0

Bike Routes

Class III bikeway or bike routes are provided either to (a) provide continuity to other bicycle facilities
(usually Class II bikeways); or (b) designate preferred routes through high demand corridors.

   As with bike lanes, the designation of bike routes should indicate to bicyclists that there are
advantages to using these routes as compared with alternative routes. This means that responsible
agencies have taken actions to assure that these routes are suitable as shared routes and will be
maintained in a manner consistent with the needs of bicyclists. Normally, bike routes are shared with
motor vehicles. Figure 3.4 shows a wayfinding sign posted at a junction showing three different bike
routes.

32 SHAMS TANVIR
                      Figure 3.4: Bike route sign with directional information by Richard Drdul is under the following
                      Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 2.0

Separated or Class IV Bikeways

Separated bikeways are also known as cycle tracks. A cycle track is an exclusive bike facility that
combines the user experience of a separated path with the on-street infrastructure of a conventional
bike lane. A cycle track is physically separated from motor traffic and distinct from the sidewalk.
Cycle tracks have different forms but all share common elements--they provide space that is intended
to be exclusively or primarily used for bicycles, and are separated from motor vehicle travel lanes,
parking lanes, and sidewalks. In situations where on-street parking is allowed cycle tracks are located
to the curb side of the parking (in contrast to bike lanes). Figure 3.5 shows a two-way cycle track
separated by a raised buffer between the motorized vehicle travel lane.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 33
Figure 3.5: Pandora cycle track 4 by Richard Drdul is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 2.0

BICYCLE LEVEL OF SERVICE

The Highway Capacity Manual Chapter 18 provides guidelines on the method to calculate the bicycle
level of service (LOS). The method includes eight main computational steps:

    1. Estimation of bicycle running speed
    2. Estimation of bicycle delay at intersection
    3. Finding bicycle travel speed
    4. Estimation of bicycle LOS score for the link
    5. Estimation of link LOS
    6. Estimation of bicycle LOS score for segment
    7. Finding the segment LOS letter grade using the score

Link based LOS determination is a quick approach to find the bicycle infrastructure provided in
between the intersection. The segment-based LOS score includes the effect of intersection service and
is more appropriate for integrated evaluation of the multimodal level of service.

34 SHAMS TANVIR
STREET DESIGN ELEMENTS

The National Association of City Transportation Officials (NACTO) published Urban Street Design
Guide to publish a toolbox and the tactics the cities could use to make streets safer, more livable, and
more economically vibrant. In the guide, NACTO includes some guidance on several main elements
of urban street:

    1. Lane Width - concept of "Road Diet"
    2. Sidewalks
    3. Curb Extensions
    4. Gateway
    5. Pinchpoint
    6. Chicane
    7. Bus Bulbs
    8. Vertical Speed Control Elements

             1. Speed Hump
             2. Speed Table
             3. Speed Cushion
    9. Transit Streets
             1. Dedicated curbside bus lane
             2. Dedicated median bus lanes
             3. Contraflow bus lanes
             4. Bus stops
  10. Storm water management
             1. Bioswales
             2. Flow through planters
             3. Pervious strips
             4. Pervious pavement

DESIGN OF CONVENTIONAL BIKE LANE

The NACTO Urban Bikeway Design Guide includes specific design guidelines for Class II bikeway
facility. Among the different types of bike lanes, conventional bike lanes are the most common type.
Below are some required guidelines for designing conventional bike lanes:

    1. The desirable bike lane width adjacent to a curbface is 6 feet. The desirable ridable surface
         adjacent to a street edge or longitudinal joint is 4 feet, with a minimum width of 3 feet. In
         cities where illegal parking in bike lanes is an concern, 5 foot wide bike lanes may be
         preferred.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 35
    2. When placed adjacent to a parking lane, the desirable reach from the curb face to the edge of
         the bike lane (including the parking lane, bike lane, and optional buffer between them) is 14.5
         feet; the absolute minimum reach is 12 feet. A bike lane next to a parking lane shall be at least
         5 feet wide, unless there is a marked buffer between them. Wherever possible, minimize
         parking lane width in favor of increased bike lane width.

    3. The desirable bike lane width adjacent to a guardrail or other physical barrier is 2 feet wider
         than otherwise in order to provide a minimum shy distance from the barrier.

    4. Bicycle lane word and/or symbol and arrow markings (MUTCD Figure 9C-3) shall be used to
         define the bike lane and designate that portion of the street for preferential use by bicyclists.

    5. Bike lane word, symbol, and/or arrow markings (MUTCD Figure 9C-3) shall be placed
         outside of the motor vehicle tread path at intersections, driveways, and merging areas in order
         to minimize wear from the motor vehicle path.

    6. A solid white lane line marking shall be used to separate motor vehicle travel lanes from the A
         through bike lane shall not be positioned to the right of a right turn only lane or to the left of a
         left turn only lane (MUTCD 9C.04). A bike lane may be positioned to the right of a right turn
         only lane if split-phase signal timing is used. For additional information, see bicycle signal
         heads. For additional strategies for managing bikeways and right turn lanes, see through bike
         lanes in this guide. bike lane. Most jurisdictions use a 6 to 8 inch line.

PROTECTED INTERSECTION

The concept of protected intersection is discussed in the NACTO Guide Don't Give Up at the
Intersection.

   At protected intersections, the bikeway is set back from the parallel motor vehicle traffic. Unlike
at conventional bike intersections, people biking are not forced to merge into mixed traffic. Instead,
they are given a dedicated path through the intersection, and have the right of way over turning motor
vehicles.

   The setback between the motor vehicle lane and the bikeway makes people on bikes more easily
visible to turning drivers than in a conventional intersection.

   Corner islands anchor the design, extending the protected bike lane's separation as far into the
intersection as possible and tightening the corner's turn radius. They create a bike queue area after
the crosswalk, the natural place for people on bikes to wait.

   The setback creates a waiting zone for turning cars, where drivers can yield to bikes after starting
to turn but before crossing the path of oncoming bicycles. If it is large enough, this area lets drivers
wait while through-traffic passes them, relieving pressure to turn too quickly.

   Protected intersections also provide shorter, safer crossings for people walking. With low-speed
vehicle turns and room for accessible pedestrian islands, people on foot and using personal mobility
devices get many of the benefits of curb extensions.

   Protected intersections create shorter, simpler crossings, more predictable movements, and better
visibility between people on bikes and people driving. As a result, the intersection is more comfortable
and safer for people using the bikeway and the crosswalk.

   Figure 3.6 shows the important elements of a protected intersection.

36 SHAMS TANVIR
Figure 3.6: Protected intersection features by Pierre Rouzeau via Wikimedia Commons is under the following Creative Commons license: CC
BY-SA 4.0

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 37
                                                     Key Takeaways

          · There are five types of bicycle facilities as defined by Highway Design Manual (HDM) of
              California Department of Transportation.

          · Highway Capacity Manual provides a methodology to quantitatively measure Bicycle Level of
              Service (LOS).

          · The NACTO Urban Street Design Guide includes design recommendations and specifications
              for key urban street design elements.

          · Conventional bike lane design specifications are included in the NACTO Urban Bikeway Design
              Guide.

                                                         Self-Test

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                          https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=161#h5p-3

                                                  GLOSSARY: KEY TERMS
Curb: A stone or concrete edging to a street or path

   Bike Lane: a portion of the roadway that has been designated by striping, signage, and pavement
markings for the preferential or exclusive use of bicyclists.

   Bike Path: A bike path or a cycle path is a bikeway separated from motorized traffic and dedicated
to cycling or shared with pedestrians or other non-motorized users.

   Intersection: A point at which two or more roadway approaches intersects.
   Wayfinding: A bicycle wayfinding system consists of comprehensive signing and/or pavement
markings to guide bicyclists to their destinations along preferred bicycle routes.

                                                           MEDIA ATTRIBUTIONS
                · Figure 3.1: Sharrow on US1 in West Palm Beach by Michael Rivera is under the

                    following Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 4.0

38 SHAMS TANVIR
          · Figure 3.2: Bike route along California State Highway 35 by Robert Ashworth is under
             the following Creative Commons license: CC BY 2.0

          · Figure 3.3: Bike lane on Pleasant Valley Parkway, Providence RI by Kenneth C. Zirkel is
             under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 4.0

          · Figure 3.4: Bike route sign with directional information by Richard Drdul is under the
             following Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 2.0

          · Figure 3.5: Pandora cycle track 4 by Richard Drdul is under the following Creative
             Commons license: CC BY-SA 2.0

          · Figure 3.6: Protected intersection features by Pierre Rouzeau via Wikimedia
             Commons is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 4.0

                                                    REFERENCES
· AASHTO Task Force on Geometric Design (1999). AASHTO Guide for the Development of

   Bicycle Facilities. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials,
   Washington, DC.
· California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). (2020). Chapter 1000:- Bicycle
   Transportation Design, Highway Design Manual. Sacramento, CA.
· National Association of City Transportation Officials (NACTO).
· National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2022). Highway capacity manual
   7th edition: A guide for multimodal mobility analysis.

                                                                                                                                                              SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 39
CHAPTER 4: DESIGN OF PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES

CHAPTER OVERVIEW
In this chapter, we introduce the challenges of using pedestrian facilities first. Next, we discuss the
processes to analyze a given sidewalk for the measures of safety, efficiency, and comfort. Students are
trained to find inconsistencies in the existing pedestrian facility design and apply corrective measures
to improve safety, efficiency, and comfort of pedestrian operations.

Chapter Topics

    1. Challenges of using pedestrian facilities
    2. Process to analyzing sidewalks
    3. Pedestrian facility improvement approaches

                                                 Learning Objectives

      At the end of the chapter, the reader should be able to do the following:
         1. Conceptualize the challenges of using pedestrian facilities.
         2. Describe the historical contexts of decline in sidewalk life.
         3. Calculate pedestrian level of service for a given sidewalk .
         4. Apply intersection management for pedestrians.

CHALLENGES OF USING PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES
Pedestrian facilities refer to sidewalks, crosswalks, grade separated pedestrian crossings, shared use
paths. In 2017, on a typical day in the United States, approximately 38.9 million trips were undertaken
primarily by walking, representing 10.5% of trips made by all modes, making walking the second-
most prevalent transportation mode after driving or riding in a private motor vehicle. Furthermore,
most trips involving private vehicles or public transit involve an element of walking, whether walking
to and from parking places or walking to or from transit stops and stations.

   As a transportation mode, walking is healthy for individuals and beneficial for the environment.
Twenty five years ago, the US Surgeon General highlighted the importance of walking for exercise as
a means of combating obesity, diabetes, and other diseases. Since then, a wealth of studies published
in public health and medical journals have extolled the virtues of walking. Moved by concerns
about climate change, energy, and congestion, transportation planners now view walking as an
inexpensive and enjoyable activity that could replace short auto trips, thus reducing congestion

40 SHAMS TANVIR
and fossil fuel consumption. Yet despite the general consensus that walking brings many benefits,
policymakers still aren't sure how to increase the amount of walking people actually do. One of the
most obvious approaches is to improve pedestrian infrastructure. Walking is harder in places without
good sidewalks, and the sidewalks in many cities are in terrible disrepair. Many other places have no
sidewalks at all. But good sidewalks, while important, will not by themselves lead to more walking.
Changes in the built environment are a necessary but not sufficient condition for a pedestrian-
friendly city.

   Urban areas where people enjoy walking have more than just a functional pedestrian infrastructure.
Sidewalks are not like major streets, many of which are designed solely to move cars. Sidewalk users
are more exposed to their environments than drivers, both because pedestrians are not encased in
vehicles and because they move through their environments more slowly than do people in cars.
For this reason sidewalk users also require more from their environments. A successful sidewalk is
more than just a route for getting from Point A to Point B; it is also a place to abide, to meet others,
and to participate in neighborhood life. Urban sidewalks, as Jane Jacobs once argued, are a city's
"most vital organs," where people experience city life, enjoy neighborhood rhythms, and watch what
goes on. Pedestrianism--moving on foot, in a wheelchair, or with other mobility devices--is only
one dimension of the sidewalk experience. Sidewalks thrive as multi-use environments, not as pure
pedestrian thoroughfares.

   Many sidewalks in US cities lack the people and variety of activities that characterize sidewalks
in Europe, Asia, or Latin America, but this was not always the case. Nineteenth and early twentieth
century US sidewalks were vibrant spaces. Policy-makers began to perceive sidewalks exclusively as
transportation infrastructure; however, they used the goal of unrestricted movement as a justification
to restrict other activities, including public speaking, vending, socializing and loitering. Removing
these activities sapped the sidewalk of life and vitality. The singular view of streets and sidewalks
as transportation routes, later combined with policies that overwhelmingly favored motorists over
pedestrians, inadvertently made walking a less critical dimension of urban living.

   Planners who want to reinvigorate pedestrian spaces today face a difficult challenge. Building
infrastructure alone will not work, because people are more likely to walk in areas that host a diversity
of uses. Some uses, however, potentially conflict--a panhandler and a shopper can occupy the same
space, but the panhandler might make the shopper uncomfortable. Planners have tried to finesse this
problem by encouraging certain kinds of uses, and by encouraging pedestrianism only in certain
places, creating upscale pedestrian hubs and leisure destinations. These efforts at control often raise
hard questions about democracy and legality, and in any event are rarely effective ways to encourage
more walking. We propose that more people will walk or roll in wheelchairs when sidewalks are
spaces that accommodate the full range of activities that make cities interesting.

   We first discuss how a singular focus on sidewalks as spaces of movement contributed to the decline
of sidewalk life, and to walking as well.

The Rise of Single Purpose Sidewalk

In the 19th century, curbs and sidewalks became common along heavily traveled city streets. These
early sidewalks were often constructed by the abutting businesses and property owners. By the
century's end, sidewalks had become important elements of the urban infrastructure, and thousands
of miles of sidewalks had been paved in American cities. Because sidewalks were often paved before
the rest of the street, they were the easiest place to walk, and the easiest place to carry out various

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 41
economic and social activities. In commercial areas, sidewalks extended the realm of adjacent shops;
shopkeepers displayed their merchandise on sidewalks and stored deliveries and overstock on them
as well. Street peddlers made a living outdoors while street speakers and newsboys conveyed
information to passersby. Sidewalks were also a realm for social encounters where friends,
acquaintances, and strangers mixed. The sidewalks were thus both a route and a destination; a way to
move through the city, but also a place of commerce, social interaction, and civic engagement.

   As sidewalks proliferated, municipalities began to standardize them. Cities specified sidewalk
dimensions, construction standards, and materials to ensure consistency and durability. At the same
time, cities began to standardize streets and to require durable paving for the roadbed and travel lanes.
With this standardization, the nature of the urban sidewalk began to change, and its range of uses
began to contract. Municipal engineers began to focus narrowly on efficient transportation and the
importance of clean streets. Cities prohibited abutting property owners from using the sidewalks as
extensions of their businesses, and the courts--when businesses challenged cities--upheld the cities'
authority to do so. In the process, walking for transportation became sidewalks' primary purpose
and the pedestrian the primary user. The pedestrian's unobstructed mobility justified subsequent
municipal restrictions on other sidewalk activities. Consequently, the pedestrian became the sole
"public" for whom the sidewalks were provided.

   Cities applied a similar logic to streets. The advent of local planning further changed the street from
a locally-oriented public space to a transportation corridor.Municipalities developed public paving
projects whose primary goal was traffic movement. In the late 19th century pedestrians grumbled
about the hindrances that blocked sidewalks; by the turn of the century pedestrians found they had
become the hindrance, regarded by local planners as "obstructions" to the automobile. The sidewalk
shifted from being the most convenient space for walking to the only legitimate space for walking.
As pedestrians became "encroachers" into the roadbed, they were viewed as a source of accidents
and congestion. City councils restricted pedestrian crossings to intersections, required pedestrians to
obey traffic signals and instituted fines for jaywalking.

   As automobiles proliferated in the early twentieth century, newspaper editorials blamed
pedestrians for accidents because they defied the rules of the road and walked into moving vehicles.
"The dumb pedestrian really is pretty dumb," a columnist from Westways magazine wrote in 1937: "As a
pedestrian the average man is not very bright.... As an incorrigible individualist, the pedestrian is intellectually
inferior to the motorist in his traffic conduct." As early as 1912, urban infrastructure trade magazines
such as American City advised widening streets at the expense of sidewalks. Pedestrians were banned
from streets to make room for cars, and a myriad of activities were banned from sidewalks to make
room for pedestrians. But the sidewalks had never been about walking alone, and so in the process of
creating an efficient transportation system, public officials, municipal engineers and the courts also
enervated sidewalk life.

Too Much Control

When cities redefined sidewalks as transportation corridors, they also gave themselves another
reason to control sidewalk life. Anything that impeded pedestrian circulation could be restricted or
prohibited. Cities throughout the nation issued ordinances to regulate sidewalk activities including
loitering, panhandling, street vending, public speaking, and expressions of political dissent.

   By the middle of the 20th century, urban sidewalks were used for fewer activities, and more
people spent time in controlled environments like malls. And despite the recent popular and scholarly

42 SHAMS TANVIR
attention to walking, in a 2003 survey of the ten largest California cities, we found that public officials
continued to deploy four strategies that devalued sidewalks as multi-use spaces. First, they de-
emphasized sidewalks by developing sunken and raised plazas and elevated walkways. Second, they
gentrified select sidewalk segments to make them attractive destinations with shopping, restaurants
and bars while making few if any improvements to the remaining sidewalk network. Third, they
privatized particular sidewalks through the designation of business improvement districts and by
fencing and enclosing outdoor seating. And lastly, cities sought to contain undesirable sidewalk
activities they could not eliminate.We will discuss each of these strategies in turn.

   De-emphasis. In downtown and commercial areas, cities let (and sometimes encourage) developers
of privately provided plazas and open spaces to use enclosing walls, blank facades, and entrances
through parking structures, all of which separate their properties from public sidewalks. Cities
nationwide have built underground and overhead spaces--sunken plazas and skywalks--to provide
pedestrian circulation that avoids the street. In cities such as Minneapolis-St. Paul, Detroit, Boston
and Cincinnati, skywalks link high-rise towers to a network of tunnels leading people from
underground garages to office cubicles, allowing workers and visitors to move through the downtown
without setting foot on public sidewalks. While initially meant to address harsh winters, skywalks
also appear in cities with warm climates such as Dallas, Los Angeles, Miami, San Francisco, and Santa
Cruz.

   Gentrification. In the last few decades, many municipalities have invested in historic districts and
main streets to draw middle class residents and shoppers back to the city. Their efforts include
upgrading the streetscape through a mix of public art, street furniture, and decorative lighting,
renovating buildings, and converting old warehouses into trendy shops and restaurants. Cities have
also enacted ordinances designating some "pedestrian-oriented" districts, and encouraging specific
retail uses (cafes, bakeries, restaurants, flower shops, boutiques, bookstores, galleries, art shops) in
these districts. Architectural and landscape design guidelines promote specific themes to retain or
enhance an area's historic character. The objective is to increase land value and overall economic
viability. In the process, small, independent businesses such as nail salons, tattoo parlors and small
food stores are often replaced by chain stores and upscale retailers. The new consumer orientation
reflected in the higher prices and more upscale merchandise creates a subtle but effective screening
mechanism and makes the sidewalks comfortable for only higher income populations.

   Privatization. Many states have enabled Business Improvement Districts (BIDs) in which business
owners tax themselves to augment public services or provide improvements for a designated district.
Services offered by BIDs typically include sidewalk beautification, cleaning and maintenance, and
private security officers. BID security officers ensure that sidewalk activity is not disruptive to
businesses. Some urban residents become nuisances if they do not fit the BID's desired image for the
neighborhood. Fencing a part of the sidewalk for outdoor seating is another form of privatization.
Fences are boundaries that separate the privatized realm from public space. This might be required
by ordinance, as is the case of California where state law stipulates that alcohol can be served only in
enclosed and demarcated areas. While cafes can blend seamlessly into the city sidewalks, as they do
in Paris, too often in the US hard boundaries privatize public space and thus preclude different public
uses.

   Containment. Who has access to which sidewalks is controversial. To contain undesirable uses, cities
directly or indirectly sanction activities in one area to keep them out of another. Local governments
restrict prostitution to red light districts and homelessness to skid rows. Some cities have extended

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 43
this logic to street vending, allowing it in some areas while prohibiting it in others. At times, cities
have attempted to confine protest events and political speech to officially-approved protest zones.

   Some of the strategies above have helped empty public sidewalks of people and activities. Others
have encouraged the use of sidewalks, but only by a subset of the population, and in doing so they
make the sidewalk less public.

PEDESTRIAN LEVEL OF SERVICE (PLOS)

The Highway Capacity Manual Multimodal Level of Service (MMLOS) outlines a detailed process
to analyze a sidewalk. Usually, this detailed approach is used in facility planning or interchange area
management plan (IAMP), project development, and development review. However, the Qualitative
Multimodal Assessment (QMA) methodology is most suited when comparing different alternatives
side-by-side to each other. This methodology uses the roadway characteristics and applies a context-
based subjective "Excellent/Good/Fair/Poor" rating.

   For example, a six foot sidewalk is standard in a residential area and would be rated Good (or
Excellent if it had a buffer). Ratings can be "averaged" to obtain one for every mode, or they can be
shown for every element if more detail is desired e.g. in a technical appendix. This method is most
appropriate when one or more of the following conditions apply:

    1. The subject roadway does not easily divide into segments with uniform characteristics
         between intersections.

    2. The subject roadway has rural/suburban characteristics with infrequent or no signal control,
         where the MMLOS methodology is not applicable.

    3. Insufficient data are available to complete a MMLOS analysis

    4. Future alternatives may not have enough detail to properly quantify roadway characteristics
         required by other methodologies.

For calculating the pedestrian level of service using QMA, the following factors are considered at the
segment level:

   Outside travel lane width: Wider travel lanes are rated better than narrower travel lanes because
of the larger buffer space between vehicles and pedestrians.

   Bicycle lane/shoulder width: The addition of bicycle lanes or shoulders creates greater separation
between vehicles and pedestrian traffic and acts as a buffer. Wider facilities are rated better than
narrow or non-existent facilities.

   Presence of buffers (landscaped or other): Buffer presence that separates pedestrians from traffic
results in an improved rating. Wider buffers are rated better than narrower or non-existent ones.

   Sidewalk/path presence: The presence of sidewalks or paths will rate higher versus shoulders or
no facilities at all. Wider sidewalks/paths rate better than narrower or non-existent ones.

   Lighting: The presence of lighting, whether roadway or pedestrian-scale, is rated better than
roadways without lighting.

   Travel lanes and speed of motorized traffic: Less travel lanes and lower vehicle speeds will rate
higher than more lanes and higher speeds.

   At intersections, the following factors are considered:
   Traffic control: Intersections with a traffic signal or all-way stop control, or with marked

44 SHAMS TANVIR
crosswalks are rated better than locations with only two-way stop control or locations without
marked crosswalks.

   Crossing width: Fewer turn or through travel lanes to be crossed is rated better than more turn/
though lanes because the exposure to traffic and potential conflicts are less.

   Median islands: The presence of a median island is rated better than no islands as two-stage
crossings significantly improve the associated safety and ease when using a crossing.

PEDESTRIAN FACILITY IMPROVEMENT STRATEGIES

Contributing factors to pedestrian crashes often include a high density of driveways along a roadway
segment, high motor vehicle speeds and volumes, and poor pedestrian facility conditions (e.g., cracked
or raised sidewalks, significant potholes in pedestrian crossings).

   Other potential contributing factors include the state of crash-involved drivers and pedestrians,
such as levels of alcohol or drug impairment, distraction, and demographic factors including age and
gender.

   In identifying factors that may have contributed to a vehicle-pedestrian crash, the analyst can
examine police-provided crash diagrams or other available contextual information to consider the
following:

     · Vehicle speed;

     · Driver and pedestrian compliance with regulations and traffic devices;

     · Pedestrian crossing behaviors;

     · Human factors related to sight distance and the density of distractions in the environment
         (e.g., signs, signals, noise);

     · Built environment or land use area type;

     · Intersection presence and types of trac control devices;

     · Pedestrian crossing distance;

     · Time of day/day of week/seasonal factors;

     · Alcohol impairment on the part of pedestrians or drivers;

     · Distraction on the part of pedestrians or drivers;

     · Demographics;

     · Special populations, such as school-aged children, older adults, and persons with disabilities;

     · Presence of transit stops; and

     · Density of driveways along a segment or corridor.

The following pedestrian safety countermeasures have the potential to improve pedestrian safety.
The effectiveness of these countermeasures lies in their ability to reduce vehicular speeds by adding
friction to the driving environment, by enhancing the visibility of pedestrians, or both.

   High-visibility crosswalk:
   Vertically arranged street markings designed to improve the visibility of the crosswalk as compared
with traverse parallel lines.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 45
   Raised crosswalk/speed table:
   An elevated section of pavement with a marked crosswalk to encourage drivers to slow down.
   Median crossing (refuge) island:
   A protected space placed in the center of the street to facilitate pedestrian crossings by allowing
pedestrians to cross only one direction of traffic at a time.
   In-roadway "Yield to Pedestrian" sign (R1-6) installed as a gateway treatment:
   R1-6 signs placed at a crosswalk along the edge of the road and on all lane lines, thus requiring
drivers to slow down to drive between two signs.
   Pedestrian hybrid beacon (HAWK):
   A traffic control device used to stop motor vehicle traffic to allow pedestrians to cross safely.
   Leading pedestrian interval:
   Provides pedestrians with a 3- to 7-second head start when entering an intersection relative to the
green signal for parallel vehicular traffic.
   Rectangular rapid-flashing beacon:
   User actuated amber LED blocks that supplement warning signs at unsignalized intersections or
midblock crosswalks. They can be manually activated by pedestrians using a push button or passively
activated by a pedestrian detection system.
   Curb extension:
   An extension of the pedestrian space at intersections designed to increase the visibility of crossing
pedestrians and reduce their crossing distance
   Pedestrian lighting:
   Humanscale lights that illuminate spaces where pedestrians walk along and across roadways

                                                     Key Takeaways

          · City spaces that accommodate wide range of activities and have less control creates walkable
              conditions.

          · The Qualitative Multimodal Assessment (QMA) technique provides a quick approach to analyze
              an existing sidewalk and is a qualitative approach to the Pedestrian Level of Service (PLOS)
              determination.

          · Techniques that reduce vehicle speed and improve the visibility of pedestrian and vehicles.

                                                         Self-Test

46 SHAMS TANVIR
                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
              https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=181#h5p-4

                                                  GLOSSARY: KEY TERMS
Crosswalk: a marked part of a road where pedestrians have right of way to cross.

   Median: the strip of land between the lanes of opposing traffic on a divided roadway.
   Shared use paths: A shared-use path, mixed-use path or multi-use pathway is a path which is
"designed to accommodate the movement of pedestrians and cyclists". Examples of shared-use paths
include sidewalks designated as shared-use, bridleways and rail trails.
   Sidewalk: A paved path for pedestrians set along the side of a roadway.

                                                          REFERENCES
     · Transportation Officials. (2004). Guide for the planning, design, and operation of pedestrian

         facilities. AASHTO.
                                                        ATTRIBUTIONS

     · Vibrant Sidewalks in the United States: Re-Integrating Walking and a Quintessential Social
         Realm by Anastasia Loukaitou-Sideris and Renia Ehrenfeucht is licensed under CC BY-NC
         4.0

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 47
CHAPTER 5: ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND EMISSIONS FROM
TRANSPORTATION

CHAPTER OVERVIEW
In this chapter, we move the focus from non-motorized transportation to automobility. The basics
of energy consumption pathways for automobility are introduced. Students learn about the history
of energy mix and emissions control processes at both stationary and mobile emissions sources. We
then discuss the methods for calculating energy requirements for different transportation activities.
This chapter introduces the methods to calculate greenhouse gas emissions and other transportation
related pollutant emissions. The concept of near-road exposure to public health outcomes is
explained next.

Chapter Topics

    1. Energy Pathways for Automobility
    2. Life Cycle Analysis
    3. Fuel Use and Emissions for Road Traffic
    4. Aggregation and Estimation of Systemwide Energy Consumption and Emissions

                                                 Learning Objectives

      At the end of the chapter, the reader should be able to do the following:
          · Recognize the historical context of fossil fuel dependency in the transportation sector and list
              the various energy pathways to meet the same transportation needs.
          · Estimate energy consumption for multimodal transportation activities.
          · Aggregate energy consumption and emissions of different transportation components to
              estimate the systemwide energy consumption and emissions.
          · Calculate total emissions for different policy alternatives related to automobility.
          · Calculate the energy and environmental footprints of the existing scenario and the proposed
              improvements.

ENERGY PATHWAYS FOR AUTOMOBILITY
Pollutant and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions can be reduced in many ways. See Figure 5.1 for a
simplified framework. GHG emissions may be treated as primary energy carbon intensity multiplied
by vehicle and transportation efficiency multiplied by total travel demand.

48 SHAMS TANVIR
   Primary energy carbon intensity can be reduced by using lower-carbon fuels or low-carbon
electrification, which is described later in this section. The energy needed to drive a specific distance
can be reduced by improving both (1) vehicle efficiency and (2) transportation system efficiency, again
assuming no induced demand. This analytical construct--separating the determinants of emissions
into carbon intensity, efficiency, and demand--can be used as a policy framework. A large carbon
tax would address all three strategies, though it must be very large to be effective. In practice, an
environmentally sustainable transportation solution will depend on a mix of policies

   and strategies.

       Figure 5.1: General approach for calculating GHG emissions from transportation by Ramanathan et al. (2019) under CC
       BY-NC-SA 4.0

As you can see from Figure 5.1, different vehicle technologies and fuel technologies will directly
impact the total amount of GHG emissions from the transportation sector. In the following
subsections, we will discuss various vehicle and fuel technologies available in the market.

Vehicle (Powertrain) Technology

There has been considerable effort over the years to make vehicles more energy efficient, thereby
reducing pollutant and GHG emissions. Many of these vehicle-based technologies are described
in Chapter 6. In recent years, vehicles have benefited from lighter materials and more-efficient
combustion engines and powertrains. In just the past few years, the greater use of electric
powertrains, including gasoline-electric, plug-in hybrid, battery electric, and fuel cell electric
technologies, has provided the promise of even much greater efficiency improvements. Overall
vehicle efficiency improvements are illustrated in Figure 5.2 for different areas of the world.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 49
Figure 5.2: Average passenger car GHG emissions normalized by distance traveled for different regions by Ramanathan et al. (2019) under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

The improvements are due to a combination of aggressive policies and large technology investments
by automobile manufacturers. The increasing use of electric powertrains provides the promise for
continued improvements in energy efficiency. The continuing drop in battery costs assures that this
trend will continue into the foreseeable future. Figure 5.3 illustrates the number of electric vehicles
(EVs) that are being introduced in different parts of the world.

Figure 5.3: The number of electric vehicles (EVs) being introduced for different regions is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

50 SHAMS TANVIR
Fuel Technology

Another key strategy for reducing GHG emissions is to utilize low-carbon fuels. Today's dominant
fuel for transportation is gasoline, followed by diesel fuel and then jet fuel (Figure 5.4). All of these
fuels are petroleum based and contribute significantly to CO2 emissions. A number of other fuels are
being introduced that are less carbon intensive, including bio-based fuels, electricity, and hydrogen.
Their market share is currently quite small when compared with petroleum-based fuels. As described
in Chapter 6, both electricity and hydrogen (as well as biofuels) can be utilized as effective energy
carriers for transportation. Liquid biofuels have the advantage of being easily portable and having
high energy density, like petroleum fuels. When made from crop and food wastes, liquid and gaseous
biofuels have very low life cycle greenhouse gas emissions, sometimes even less than zero because
waste disposal and methane leakage are avoided. With steady improvements in processing and
farming, even biofuels made from crops, such as corn and sugarcane, tend to be significantly superior
to petroleum fuels. As processes for converting grasses, trees, and other cellulosic material into liquids
are improved, resulting in even lower life cycle greenhouse gas emissions, biofuels will likely prove
the superior alternative fuel for aviation and perhaps long-haul trucking, where portability and high
energy density are valued most highly.

Figure 5.4: Fuel utilization for the US transportation market, 2018 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

LIFE CYCLE ANALYSIS
Life cycle analysis is necessary for comparing emissions of different fuels. A life cycle analysis includes
all emissions from extraction through combustion, including, for example, the energy from farm
machinery and carbon released from soils when growing biofuels, emissions from the operation of
refineries, and the transport of fuels in tankers, pipelines, and trucks.

   Table 5.1 provides rough estimates of life cycle emissions of different vehicle-fuel combinations,

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 51
compared with gasoline-powered internal combustion engine vehicles. Note that these life cycle
emission comparisons (per kilometer) could vary considerably since they rely on a large number of
assumptions. For example, GHG emissions for an electric vehicle depend on the carbon intensity of
the electricity used to charge the vehicle. This varies widely across space and time, from close to zero
carbon in regions powered predominately by nuclear and low-carbon renewable sources, to carbon
emissions exceeding those from internal combustion engines in places where electricity is generated
from coal.

   In general, petroleum-based fuels are convenient fuels for vehicles, since they have high energy
density (per unit of volume), are easily portable and refuel vehicles quickly (because they are liquid),
and have energy infrastructure already in place. However, petroleum-based fuels have high GHG
emissions and emit large quantities of conventional pollutants. As a society, we have grown dependent
on petroleum and have become quite cost-efficient at extracting and refining fossil fuels, resulting in
low prices.

   In some cases, though, alternative fuels are demonstrably cheaper than petroleum, even in the US,
where petroleum products tend to have lower prices than elsewhere. For example, as of 2019, a
kilowatt hour costs about $0.12 in the US on average--equivalent to about 3-4 cents per mile, an
energy cost about one-third that of gasoline-powered cars. In areas with low-carbon electricity, these
electric vehicles also offer significant GHG emission savings.

Table 5.1: Greenhouse Gas Emissions per Kilometer, relative to Gasoline-Powered Internal Combustion Engines, Full Energy Cycle by
Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M., Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

FUEL USE AND EMISSIONS FROM ROAD TRAFFIC
Road transportation is a major consumer of energy and contributor to emissions of deleterious
pollutants. Motorized vehicles are the second highest source of CO2 emissions in the United States.
Transportation sources are causing 28% of total CO2 emissions in 2012 and 84% of that is from on

52 SHAMS TANVIR
road traffic (EPA, 2014). Emissions from anthropogenic sources, particularly burning of fossil fuels, is
attributed as a key factor in increase in atmospheric CO2 concentration in recent years (Etheridge et
al., 1996). In 2013, the United States consumed 97.1 quadrillion BTUs (Quads) of energy; 26.7 Quads
(more than 25% of the total energy supply) were used in transportation sector. In doing so 173,493
million gallons of motor fuel was used including both gasoline and diesel (BTS, 2015). All major urban
areas are experiencing widespread congestion due to increased demand of vehicular traffic (D. L.
Schrank & Lomax, 2007). Yearly delay per commuter has increased to 42 hours in 2014 compared
to 18 hours in 1982 resulting in a congestion cost of $160 billion (D. Schrank, Eisele, Lomax, & Bak,
2015). Increased demand for travel has caused increase in number of motorized vehicles, resulting in
increased congestion on roadways. Drivers are facing frequent flow disruption and increased waiting
time at intersections. These factors can lead to increased emission of deleterious pollutants such as
carbon dioxide (CO2), carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), hydrocarbons (HCs) (Oduyemi
& Davidson, 1998). Oversaturation is the main contributor to predicted total emissions for CO and
HC (Smit, 2006). Increased emission from congestion may be a result of more idling time, and more
acceleration and deceleration events associated with stop and go conditions.

Techniques for reducing fuel use and emissions from road traffic

There have been many improvements in prevention and control of mobile source emissions in recent
years such as modifying fuel, vehicle operation, engine design, behavior, regular maintenance, and
most commonly by exhaust gas treatment. Improvements such as low sulfur fuels, computerized fuel
metering, electronic ignition, air injection, exhaust gas recirculation, and 3-way catalytic converters
have substantially reduced emissions on an individual vehicle basis (Faiz, Weaver, & Walsh, 1996).
During hard acceleration events emissions of HC and CO can increase as vehicle engines operate in
a fuel rich mode (Alkidas, 2007). Emissions of PM and HC can increase under deceleration due to
the presence of unburned fuel (Cappiello, 2002). A common emissions mitigation measure considered
by transportation planners is to enhance the capacity of the roadways. But the effect of capacity
augmentation on reduction of emissions is not well quantified; such augmentation may increase
induced travel resulting in quick decrease of initial emission reduction benefits (Noland & Quddus,
2006).

   Many transportation planning and operations strategies are planned and being implemented to
reduce this problem (Eliasson, Hultkrantz, Nerhagen, & Rosqvist, 2009; Tonne, Beevers, Armstrong,
Kelly, & Wilkinson, 2008). Changing intersection design, traffic signal design, freeway metering
technologies are some examples of operational strategies that are practiced (Greene & Plotkin, 2011).
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) is implementing `Tier 3 Motor Vehicle
Emissions and Fuel Standard' from 2017; which is going to be an important shift in standards
for `regulatory classes' that follows EPA's adoption of `Tier 2' program in 2000. By the year 2030,
`Tier 3' class of vehicles are expected to reduce onroad NOX, VOC, CO, SO2, Benzene emissions
by 25%, 16%, 24%, 56%, 26% respectively. Furthermore, the phasing in of more stringent vehicle
emission regulations, and fleet turnover to lower emitting vehicles, can be a factor in reducing on-
road emissions of regulated pollutants such as CO, NOx, and HC.

   In contrast to all the above mentioned techniques, an alternative and complementary approach
could be the use of technologies to target the behavioral and system factors to improve the overall
energy efficiency without altering the mechanical efficiency of each mode (car, bus, truck). Passenger
vehicles run with 60% unutilized capacity (BTS, 2015); improving occupancy can make a big

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 53
difference in total travel demand. Online taxi and ride sharing services such as Waze, Uber, RubyRide,
Zipcar, Lyft has provided travelers with unique flexibility in terms of mode choice. Inefficient driving
styles cause loss of 45% of the optimal fuel economy (Sivak & Schoettle, 2012). Emergence of
communication technologies such as cellular and internet networks and social networks such as
Facebook, Twitter has made it possible to influence travel behavior of individuals. Moreover,
congestion arising from suboptimal route choice and oversaturation increases transportation energy
use up to 33% (Roughgarden, 2012). Informed travel mode, route, and departure time choice is
possible through real time travel information services such as Google Maps, INRIX and personalized
navigation systems. A practical framework with real time response capability for monitoring,
communicating, incentivizing, and controlling trip making and driving behavior attributes can make
energy efficiency an integral part of the optimized transportation network.

INTEGRATED TRAFFIC SIMULATION AND ENERGY USE-EMISSIONS ESTIMATION

Traffic simulation models at different levels of complexity and scales have been and are being
developed for assessing energy use-emissions impact. To conduct project-level traffic environmental
impact studies, microscopic emissions models are often adopted in transportation evaluation projects
(Ahn, Rakha, Trani, & Van Aerde, 2002; Nam, Brazil, & Sutulo, 2002; Stathopoulos & Noland, 2003).
Microscopic traffic simulation tools have been widely used to generate vehicle emissions estimates by
evaluating driving speed and acceleration characteristics/profiles on a vehicle-by-vehicle and second-
by-second basis. Although a high-fidelity traffic simulator is desirable for analyzing individual
movement delays and facilities with complex geometric configurations, microscopic simulation can
be computationally intensive and typically requires a wide range of detailed geometric data and
driving behavior parameters, which can be difficult to calibrate, especially for the purpose of
producing high fidelity emissions estimates. This has limited their applicability to small- and
medium-scale corridors.

   Alternatively, many organizations have utilized post-processing techniques for estimating vehicle
emissions from their travel demand model results. Large scale air pollution maps are generally
produced by using static estimates of average traffic and weather conditions. Most of the existing
research for regional or city level emission assessment have used historic O-D matrices (Gualtieri
& Tartaglia, 1998), land use transport models (Lautso & Toivanen, 1999), travel demand models
(Karppinen et al., 2000), traffic assignment modules (Namdeo, Mitchell, & Dixon, 2002). These
estimates lack the sensitivity of dynamic vehicular travel demand and cannot reflect temporal
fluctuations of road conditions.

   Recognizing that conventional static traffic assignment models are not sensitive to the dynamic
interaction of vehicular travel demand and time-dependent road conditions, planning practitioners
have increasingly recognized the capabilities of mesoscopic Dynamic Traffic Assignment (DTA)
models. However, many planners and engineers are still concerned that DTA tools, typically based
on fine-grained network representations, are computationally intensive and lack model components/
details necessary for accurately representing high-fidelity traffic dynamics. Differences in resolution
between traffic simulation and emissions estimation models is a barrier to integrating them into
one framework. In recent years, a multi-resolution modeling approach has been exploited by many
practitioners. Typically, this approach aims to integrate many existing simulation tools in a loosely
coupled software platform that can provide multiple levels of modeling detail regarding network
dynamics and traveler/driver choices. For example, in a subarea study, one can simply extract vehicle

54 SHAMS TANVIR
path data from a (macroscopic/mesoscopic) DTA tool for use in a microscopic simulation model
(e.g. VISSIM, Paramics, TRANSIMS) to generate second-by-second vehicle speed and acceleration
outputs for microscopic emissions or mobility-related analysis.

   Estimation of emissions is dependent on the simulated driving activity such as instantaneous
speeds and accelerations. Therefore, the accuracy of fuel use and emissions estimation hinge on the
accuracy of traffic simulation. Traditional traffic simulations are focused on the mobility and safety
aspects of the network. In contrast, traffic simulations to assess fuel use and emissions are focused
on the capability of the model to emulate driving activity parameters properly. In addition to the
fundamental difference in simulation purpose, a few functionality and compatibility issues are equally
important in energy use and emissions estimation. The simulator framework can be visualized as
Figure has two different modules namely a traffic simulation module and an emissions estimation
module. Data flow between these two modules should be consistent and uninterrupted in ideal
conditions.

   There have been many efforts in the past to couple an emission model with a traffic simulator either
manually or directly. AIMSUN has been used with a European modal emissions model, VERSIT+
(Ligterink & Lange, 2009). MOBILE6 emissions model has been coupled with EMME/2 and
PARAMICS (Bartin et al., 2007). MOVES emission model has been used with PARAMICS, DynusT,
and VISSIM (Lin, Chiu, Vallamsundar, & Bai, 2011b; Song et al., 2012; Xie et al., 2011). Dynamic
linkage of traffic and emissions models is challenging and can lead to significantly longer run times.
Evaluation for a large-scale network is a trade-off between estimation accuracy and computational
tractability. Therefore, it is a challenge to properly estimate emissions-related impacts that is greatly
exceeded by the imprecision and/or inaccuracy of the estimate.

Figure 5.5: Modules of integrated traffic simulation and emission estimation. Produced with permission from the author Tanvir (2018).

Multi-resolution modeling system such as a mesoscopic DTA has a relatively low simulation
resolution (e.g. 6 second update interval), while microscopic traffic simulators typically use 0.1
seconds as the simulation interval. To ensure theoretical convergence of the integrated models,
it is necessary to use multiple iterations between different simulation/assignment components to
determine the mobility and emission impact of high-level demand and traveler behaviors. However,
internal discrepancies between different modeling resolutions make tight interconnections and
consistent modeling extremely challenging.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 55
Energy use and emissions estimation

Effective tools to estimate emissions for different scenarios are required to assess the effect of these
strategies at different spatial and temporal resolution. There are several emissions models available
that can estimate vehicle emissions for the prediction and management of air pollution levels near
roadways. These models use information on weather, fuel type, fleet composition, vehicle type, and
activity schedule as input.

   For planning purposes, average speed and flow based models have been used for a long time.
However, these models cannot adequately represent the dynamic effects of driving styles. Average
speed based models use predetermined speed trajectories upon which relationships between cycle
or link-based average-speed and average emission rates are estimated (e.g. MOBILE (USEPA, 2007),
EMFAC (CARB, 2002), COPERT (Ntziachristos et al., 2000)). US Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) have developed MOVES that can take into account a second-by-second vehicle speed trajectory
(Chamberlin, Swanson, Talbot, Dumont, & Pesci, 2011). There are other models, such as CMEM (An,
Barth, Norbeck, & Ross, 1997), that also consider operating modes in estimating emissions. Thus,
MOVES is attractive in being able to represent a wide range of driving cycles for any user specified
speed trajectory.

Vehicle specific power (VSP) based estimation

VSP is a well-evaluated and widely used quantitative indicator of engine power demand that is an
excellent predictor of vehicle fuel use and that is also highly correlated with vehicle tailpipe exhaust
emissions for a wide range of pollutants (Jimenez-Palacios, 1998). VSP is a function of vehicle speed,
road grade, and acceleration which accounts for kinetic energy, rolling resistance, aerodynamic drag,
and gravity (Zhai, Frey, Rouphail, Goncalves, & Farias, 2009). It is usually reported as power required
per mass of the vehicle (for example: kilowatts per ton). Calculated VSP is categorized into different
operating mode bins by speed and VSP ranges to estimate emissions factor for vehicles. Therefore,
VSP is a parameter with important practical application. But accurate determination of VSP depends
on proper quantification of measured vehicle operating characteristics, such as speed, acceleration,
road grade etc. Microscopic traffic characteristics e.g. speed, acceleration, headway etc. are highly
dependent on the roadway, traffic, driver behavior characteristics.

   VSP is usually estimated using developed equations for different classes of vehicles. According to
MOVES the equation to calculate VSP is expressed as

   Where: A, B and C refer to the rolling term, rotating term and the drag term respectively. M is the
vehicle mass, is the vehicle speed, a is vehicle acceleration and  is road grade. The parameters are
different for each vehicle type.

   MOVES provides default coefficients for different group of vehicles. Derivation of these
coefficients is based on chassis dynamometer tests. The VSP formulation for light-weight vehicles
provided by MOVES is

   VSP = vehicle specific power, kW/ton
   v= speed at time t, m/s ; a = acceleration at time t, m/s2
   A= rolling resistance coefficient = 0.1565 kW-sec/m

56 SHAMS TANVIR
   B= rotational resistance coefficient = 2.002X10-3 kW-sec2/m2
   C= aerodynamic drag coefficient = 4.926X10-4 kW-sec3/m3
   m = vehicle mass = 1.479 ton.

EPA MOVES model

On March 2, 2010, USEPA announced the official release of the Motor Vehicle Emissions Simulator
(MOVES2010) for use in state implementation plan (SIP) submissions to EPA and regional emission
analysis for transportation conformity (Koupal, Cumberworth, Michaels, Beardsley, & Brzezinski,
2002). It replaced MOBILE 6.2 model where vehicle emissions rates represent averages over a driving
schedule with defined average speed. MOVES2010 considers the relative time spent and emissions
rate in vehicle speed and vehicle specific power bins (Fujita et al., 2012). Except for braking and
idling, these OpMode bins are stratified by 21 speed ranges (<25 mph, 25 to 50 mph, and >50 mph)
and by Vehicle Specific Power (VSP) (Koupal, Michaels, Cumberworth, Bailey, & Brzezinski, 2002;
Vallamsundar & Lin, 2011). The main purpose of this tool is to quantitatively predict emissions
from mobile sources for a wide range of user-defined parameters e.g. vehicle type, time periods,
geographical areas, pollutants, vehicle operating characteristics and road type (EPA, 2012). Therefore,
MOVES is a significant improvement in the state-of-art for emissions estimation.

   The inputs from traffic simulation software can be linked to MOVES in three different formats:

    1. Average speeds for the links of the network (similar to MOBILE)

    2. Link driving schedule (LDS) for each link of the network. LDS is a time dependent speed
         profile for a particular link. Generally LDS is selected for a representative vehicle or by
         sampling.

    3. Operating mode distribution of vehicles of the link.

However, MOVES is computationally intensive. Some investigators have attempted to use traffic
simulation output for vehicle speed trajectories as input to MOVES, leading to time consuming
computations for evaluation of different traffic management strategy scenarios.

Simplified emissions estimator - MOVESLite

As an alternative approach, a reduced form version of MOVES, referred to as MOVES Lite, has been
recently developed (Frey & Liu, 2013). MOVES Lite is based on the same computational structure
as MOVES with respect to Op Mode bins and, therefore, is capable of estimating emissions for any
specified speed trajectory. MOVES Lite is less computational intensive than MOVES because it is
calibrated to a base cycle and employs a cycle correction factor to adjust for differences in emission
rates between any cycle of interest and the base cycle. MOVES Lite is based on a more limited set
of vehicle types and pollutants than MOVES. Since traffic simulations are often for periods of a few
hours, MOVES Lite does not take into account variations in factors such as fuel properties, inspection
and maintenance programs, and ambient conditions that do not change substantially or at all during
such short periods of time. MOVES Lite is 3,000 times faster and can produce emissions estimates
within ±5% deviation compared to MOVES.

   Because many factors where MOVES is sensitive are approximately constant during the time
period of a typical simulation, there is no need to run MOVES in its entirety for every link in a
network. Furthermore, because MOVES estimates emission factors based on weighted combinations

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 57
of OpMode bins, a similar approach can be used as part of a simplified model that can be directly
coded as part of a traffic simulation model. MOVESLite harnesses these benefits to develop a less
computationally intensive vehicle emission estimation module. The conceptual model of MOVESLite
is based on (a) base emission rate for site-specific characteristics (b) a cycle correction factor for
speed trajectories and OpMode bin emission rates. The cycle correction factor is calculated using the
following equation

      {\rm CCF}_{p,c,a,v}=\left(\ \frac{\left(\sum_{m\ }{f_m^c\
   times{\rm ER}_{p,a,v,m}}\right)\ }{(\sum_{m\ }{f_m^b\
   times}{\rm ER}_{p,a,v,m})}\right)\left(\frac{V^b}{V^c}\right)
   Where,

  ERp,a,v,m = default emission rate for pollutant p, age a, vehicle type v, in
operating mode bin m, gram/hour

   fm c = fraction of time in OpMode bin m in cycle c
   fmb = fraction of time in OpMode bin m for base cycle b
   Vc = cycle average speed for cycle c, mph
   Vb = cycle average speed for base cycle b, mph
   The base emissions rate is then corrected for the simulated cycle using the following equation

   Where,
   CE p,c, = cycle average emission factor for any arbitrary driving cycle c, for pollutant p, for a fleet
of vehicles with mixed types and ages, gram/mi
   ER p,b,a,v = base emission rate for base cycle b, age a, vehicle type v, and pollutant p, gram/mi
   CCFp,c,a,v = cycle correction factor for driving cycle c, age a, vehicle type v, and pollutant p
   fa,v = age fraction for age a and vehicle type v
   fv = vehicle type fraction for vehicle type v
   c = cycle c
   b = base cycle
   p = pollutant
   Comparison of the 2 models across similar criteria shown in Table 5.2 and Table 5.3.

58 SHAMS TANVIR
                           Table 5.2: Performance of MOVES across different functional criteria

Criterion                  MOVES

Accuracy                   Accurate comparing with empirical emission factors.

Runtime                    Relatively slow.

Requirement for Input Substantial input data requirements.

Requirement for            Need to install MOVES package, JAVA, and MySQL.
Platform

Connection with TDM        Difficult to be coupled into TDM or TSM.
and TSM

Usability                  Errors, warnings arise frequently, especially for beginning users.

Time consuming             Adjust fuel property, temperature, humidity, air conditioning use, and I/M program for each
procedures                 link in the network.

Vehicle dynamic data       Second by second data, or OpMode distribution

Vehicle Types              13 Vehicle types: Passenger Car, Passenger Truck, Refuse Truck, Single-Unit Short-Haul, Truck
                           Single-Unit Long-Haul Truck, Motor Home, Intercity Bus, Transit Bus, School Bus,
                           Combination Short-Haul Truck , Combination Long-Haul Truck, Motorcycle

Adjusted emission rate     Yes, took vehicle distribution and weather condition (temperature and humidity) into account.
map (reflecting vehicle
distribution and climate)

                      Table 5.3. Performance of MOVES lite across different performance criteria

Criterion                         MOVES lite

Accuracy                          Within 5% errors comparing with MOVES.

Runtime                           3000 times faster than MOVES.

Requirement for Input             Limited input data requirements.

Requirement for Platform          Can be run in MS EXCEL or MATLAB. It has a computational algorithm.

Connection with TDM and           Can be integrated into TDM or TSM easily.
TSM

Usability                         User-friendly.

Time consuming procedures         Set fuel property, temperature, humidity, air conditioning use, and I/M program constant
                                  by link in the network.

Vehicle dynamic data              Same as MOVES

Vehicle Types                     For U.S. based model: Five vehicle types that comprise of more than 95% of the fleet:
                                  Passenger Cars, Passenger Trucks, Light Commercial Trucks, Single Unit Short Haul
                                  Trucks, and Combination Long Haul Trucks.

Adjusted emission rate map        Yes, took vehicle distribution into account.
(reflecting vehicle distribution
and climate)

                                                  Key Takeaways

· Different energy pathways exist to meet the same transportation needs.

                                                                                                                                                       SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 59
          · Combinations of vehicle technologies and fuel technologies result in change in total energy
              consumption and emissions.

          · It is important to analyze the life-cycle of a vehicle-fuel combination to ascertain the energy
              efficiency of the technology.

          · Microsimulation is a computaionally intensive way to estimate energy consumption from road
              traffic, macroscopic simulation may be too crude, and mesoscopic simulation is a balance between
              the two.

                                                         Self-Test

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                          https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=225#h5p-5

                                                  GLOSSARY: KEY TERMS
Carbon intensity: A measure of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases (CO2e) per unit of
activity, like generating a product

   Energy density: The amount of energy stored in a given system, substance, or region of space per
unit volume.

   Energy efficient: Use of less energy to perform the same task or produce the same result.
   Induced travel: Adding roadway capacity actually increases network-wide vehicle miles traveled
(VMT) by a nearly equivalent proportion within a few years, reducing or negating any initial
congestion relief. That increase in VMT is called "induced travel"

                                                           MEDIA ATTRIBUTIONS
             Figures

                · Figure 5.1: Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R.,
                    Auffhammer, M., Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                · Figure 5.2: Average passenger car GHG emissions normalized by distance traveled for
                    different regions by Ramanathan et al. (2019) is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                · Figure 5.3: The number of electric vehicles (EVs) being introduced for different regions

60 SHAMS TANVIR
             is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
          · Figure 5.4: Fuel utilization for the US transportation market, 2018 is licensed under CC

             BY-NC-SA 4.0
          · Figure 5.5: Modules of integrated traffic simulation and emission estimation. Produced

             with permission from the author Tanvir (2018).

      Tables

          · Table 5.1: Greenhouse Gas Emissions per Kilometer, relative to Gasoline-Powered
             Internal Combustion Engines, Full Energy Cycle by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R.,
             Auffhammer, M., Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                                                    REFERENCES

· Ahn, K., Rakha, H., Trani, A., & Van Aerde, M. (2002). Estimating vehicle fuel consumption
   and emissions based on instantaneous speed and acceleration levels. Journal of Transportation
   Engineering, 128(2), 182-190.

· Alkidas, A. C. (2007). Combustion advancements in gasoline engines. Energy Conversion and
   Management, 48(11), 2751-2761.

· An, F., Barth, M., Norbeck, J., & Ross, M. (1997). Development of comprehensive modal
   emissions model: Operating under hot-stabilized conditions. Transportation Research Record:
   Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1587(1), 52-62.

· Barth, M., & Boriboonsomsin, K. (2009). Traffic congestion and greenhouse gases. ACCESS
   Magazine, 1(35)

· Bartin, B., Mudigonda, S., & Ozbay, K. (2007). Impact of electronic toll collection on air
   pollution levels: Estimation using microscopic simulation model of large-scale transportation
   network. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2011(1),
   68-77.

· BTS. (2015). State transportation statistics 2015. Washington DC: US Department of
   Transportation, Bureau of Transportation Statistics.

· Bureau of Transportation Statistics. (2013). National transportation statistics (table 1-11:
   Number of U.S. aircraft, vehicles, vessels, and other conveyances). Retrieved from
   http://www.bts.gov/publications/national_transportation_statistics/html/table_01_11.html

· Cambridge Systematics. (1996). Quantifying air quality and other benefits and costs of
   transportation control measures. ( No. Task 1 Report. Project 8-33.). Washington D.C: National
   Cooperative Highway Research, Transportation Research Board.

· Cappiello, A. (2002). Modeling traffic flow emissions (MS Thesis).
· CARB. (2002). EMFAC 2002, california air resources board's emission inventory . ( No. Series,

                                                                                                                                                              SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 61
         September).California Air Resource Board.

     · Chamberlin, R., Swanson, B., Talbot, E., Dumont, J., & Pesci, S. (2011). Analysis of MOVES and
         CMEM for evaluating the emissions impact of an intersection control change. Paper
         presented at the Transportation Research Board 90th Annual Meeting, (11-0673)

     · Daganzo, C. F. (2006). In traffic flow, cellular automata = kinematic waves. Transportation
         Research Part B: Methodological, 40(5), 396-403. doi://dx.doi.org.prox.lib.ncsu.edu/10.1016/
         j.trb.2005.05.004

     · De Vlieger, I., De Keukeleere, D., & Kretzschmar, J. G. (2000). Environmental effects of driving
         behaviour and congestion related to passenger cars. Atmospheric Environment, 34(27),
         4649-4655.

     · Eliasson, J., Hultkrantz, L., Nerhagen, L., & Rosqvist, L. S. (2009). The stockholm
         congestion-charging trial 2006: Overview of effects. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
         Practice, 43(3), 240-250.

     · EPA. (1999). Regulatory announcements. Ann Arbor, MI: United States Environmental
         Protection Agency.

     · EPA. (2008). Integrated science assessment for oxides of nitrogen - health criteria (final report). ( No.
         EPA/600/R-08/071). Washington D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

     · EPA. (2010). Integrated science assessment for carbon monoxide (final report). ( No. EPA/600/R-09/
         019F). Washington D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

     · EPA. (2012). User guide for MOVES2010b. ( No. EPA-420-B-12-001b).United State
         Environmental Protection Agency.

     · EPA. (2014). Inventory of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions and sinks: 1990-2012. ( No. EPA
         430-R-14-003). Washington D.C.: U.S. EPA.

     · Etheridge, D. M., Steele, L. P., Langenfelds, R. L., Francey, R. J., Barnola, J., & Morgan, V. I.
         (1996). Natural and anthropogenic changes in atmospheric CO2 over the last 1000 years from
         air in antarctic ice and firn. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres (1984-2012), 101(D2),
         4115-4128.

     · Faiz, A., Weaver, C. S., & Walsh, M. P. (1996). Air pollutation from motor vehicles: Standards and
         technologies for controlling emissions World Bank-free PDF.

     · Frey, H. C., Zhai, H., & Rouphail, N. M. (2009). Regional on-road vehicle running emissions
         modeling and evaluation for conventional and alternative vehicle technologies. Environmental
         Science & Technology, 43(21), 8449-8455. doi:10.1021/es900535s; 10.1021/es900535s

     · Frey, H. C., & Liu, B. (2014). Development and evaluation of a simplified version of MOVES
         for coupling with a traffic simulation model. Proceedings, 91st Annual Meeting of the
         Transportation Research Board,

     · Frey, H. C., Rouphail, N. M., Unal, A., & Colyar, J. D. (2001). No title. Emissions Reduction
         through Better Traffic Management: An Empirical Evaluation Based upon on-Road Measurements,

     · Frey, H. C., Yazdani-Boroujeni, B., Hu, J., Liu, B., & Jiao, W. (2013). Field measurements of
         1996 to 2013 model year light duty gasoline vehicles. Paper presented at the Proceedings, 106th

62 SHAMS TANVIR
   Annual Conference, Air & Waste Management Association, Chicago, IL,

· Fujita, E. M., Campbell, D. E., Zielinska, B., Chow, J. C., Lindhjem, C. E., DenBleyker, A., . . .
   Lawson, D. R. (2012). Comparison of the MOVES2010a, MOBILE6. 2, and EMFAC2007
   mobile source emission models with on-road traffic tunnel and remote sensing
   measurements. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 62(10), 1134-1149.

· Gordon, P., Kumar, A., & Richardson, H. W. (1990). Peak-spreading: How much? Transportation
   Research Part A: General, 24(3), 165-175.

· Greene, D. L., & Plotkin, S. E. (2011). Reducing greenhouse gas emission from US
   transportation. Arlington: Pew Center on Global Climate Change,

· Gualtieri, G., & Tartaglia, M. (1998). Predicting urban traffic air pollution: A GIS framework.
   Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 3(5), 329-336.

· Health Effects Institute. Panel on the Health Effects of Traffic-Related Air Pollution. (2010).
   Traffic-related air pollution: A critical review of the literature on emissions, exposure, and health effects
   Health Effects Institute.

· Hurdle, V. F., & Son, B. (2000). Road test of a freeway model. Transportation Research Part A:
   Policy and Practice, 34(7), 537-564. doi://dx.doi.org.prox.lib.ncsu.edu/10.1016/
   S0965-8564(99)00031-2

· Jimenez-Palacios, J. L. (1998). Understanding and quantifying motor vehicle emissions with vehicle
   specific power and TILDAS remote sensing

· Karppinen, A., Kukkonen, J., Elolähde, T., Konttinen, M., Koskentalo, T., & Rantakrans, E.
   (2000). A modelling system for predicting urban air pollution: Model description and
   applications in the helsinki metropolitan area. Atmospheric Environment, 34(22), 3723-3733.

· Koupal, J., Cumberworth, M., Michaels, H., Beardsley, M., & Brzezinski, D. (2002). Design and
   implementation of MOVES: EPA`s new generation mobile source emission model. Ann Arbor,
   1001, 48105.

· Koupal, J., Michaels, H., Cumberworth, M., Bailey, C., & Brzezinski, D. (2002). (2002). EPA's
   plan for MOVES: A comprehensive mobile source emissions model. Paper presented at the
   Proceedings of the 12th CRC on-Road Vehicle Emissions Workshop, San Diego, CA,

· Krzyzanowski, M., Kuna-Dibbert, B., & Schneider, J. (2005). Health effects of transport-related air
   pollution World Health Organization Copenhagen.

· Lautso, K., & Toivanen, S. (1999). SPARTACUS system for analyzing urban sustainability.
   Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1670(1), 35-46.

· Ligterink, N. E., & Lange, R. d. (2009). Refined vehicle and driving-behaviour dependencies in
   the VERSIT emission model. Paper presented at the ETAPP Symposium,

· Lin, J., Chiu, Y., Vallamsundar, S., & Bai, S. (2011a). Integration of MOVES and dynamic traffic
   assignment models for fine-grained transportation and air quality analyses. Paper presented
   at the Integrated and Sustainable Transportation System (FISTS), 2011 IEEE Forum On, 176-181.

· Lin, J., Chiu, Y., Vallamsundar, S., & Bai, S. (2011b). Integration of MOVES and dynamic traffic
   assignment models for fine-grained transportation and air quality analyses. Paper presented

                                                                                                                                                              SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 63
         at the Integrated and Sustainable Transportation System (FISTS), 2011 IEEE Forum On, 176-181.

     · Lomax, T., Turner, S., Shunk, G., Levinson, H. S., Pratt, R. H., Bay, P. N., & Douglas, G. B.
         (1997). NCHRP report 398: Quantifying congestion. Transportation Research Board, National
         Research Council, Washington, DC,

     · Mahmassani, H. S., & Liu, Y. (1999). Dynamics of commuting decision behaviour under
         advanced traveller information systems. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies,
         7(2), 91-107.

     · Meyer, M. D. (1999). Demand management as an element of transportation policy: Using
         carrots and sticks to influence travel behavior. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
         Practice, 33(7), 575-599.

     · Mitchell, G., Namdeo, A., Lockyer, J., & May, A. D. (2002). The impact of road pricing and
         other strategic road transport initiatives on urban air quality. Paper presented at the
         Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Urban Transport and the Environment in the 21st
         Century, 481-490.

     · Nam, E. K., Brazil, H., & Sutulo, S. (2002) The integration of a fuel rate based modal
         emissions model (CMEM modified) into the VISSIM microscopic traffic model -
         inventory comparison with MOBILE6 in southfield michigan. . Proceedings of the 12th CRC
         on-Road Vehicle Emissions Workshop,

     · Namdeo, A., Mitchell, G., & Dixon, R. (2002). TEMMS: An integrated package for modelling
         and mapping urban traffic emissions and air quality. Environmental Modelling & Software, 17(2),
         177-188.

     · Newell, G. F. (1993). A simplified theory of kinematic waves in highway traffic: (I) general
         theory; (ii) queuing at freeway bottlenecks; (iii) multi-dimensional flows . Transportation
         Research Part B: Methodological, 27(4), 281-313.

     · Newell, G. F. (2002). A simplified car-following theory: A lower order model. Transportation
         Research Part B: Methodological, 36(3), 195-205.

     · Ni, D., Leonard, J. D., & Williams, B. M. (2006). The network kinematic waves model: A
         simplified approach to network traffic. Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems, 10(1), 1-14.

     · Noland, R. B., & Quddus, M. A. (2006). Flow improvements and vehicle emissions: Effects of
         trip generation and emission control technology. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
         Environment, 11(1), 1-14.

     · Ntziachristos, L., Samaras, Z., Eggleston, S., Gorissen, N., Hassel, D., & Hickman, A. J. (2000).
         Copert iii. Computer Programme to Calculate Emissions from Road Transport, Methodology and
         Emission Factors (Version 2.1), European Energy Agency (EEA), Copenhagen,

     · Oduyemi, K., & Davidson, B. (1998). The impacts of road traffic management on urban air
         quality. Science of the Total Environment, 218(1), 59-66.

     · Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M., Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. (2019).
         Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions. Location: Regents of the University of
         California. Editor: V. Ramanathan. Co-Editors: Adam Millard-Ball; Michelle Niemann; Scott
         Friese. Book published by the Regents of the Univ of California. Retrieved from

64 SHAMS TANVIR
   https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6kr8p5rq. 815pp https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
   nc-sa/4.0/

· Roughgarden, T. (2012). The price of anarchy in games of incomplete information. Paper
   presented at the Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, 862-879.

· Samaranayake, S., Glaser, S., Holstius, D., Monteil, J., Tracton, K., Seto, E., & Bayen, A. (2014).
   Real-Time estimation of pollution emissions and dispersion from highway traffic.
   Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, 29(7), 546-558.

· Schrank, D. L., & Lomax, T. J. (2007). The 2007 urban mobility report Texas Transportation
   Institute, Texas A & M University.

· Schrank, D., Eisele, B., Lomax, T., & Bak, J. (2015). 2015 urban mobility scorecard. Texas: Texas
   A&M Transportation Institute and INRIX, Inc.

· Sivak, M., & Schoettle, B. (2012). Eco-driving: Strategic, tactical, and operational decisions of
   the driver that influence vehicle fuel economy. Transport Policy, 22, 96-99.

· Sjodin, A., Persson, K., Andreasson, K., Arlander, B., & Galle, B. (1998). On-road emission
   factors derived from measurements in a traffic tunnel. International Journal of Vehicle Design,
   20(1), 147-158.

· Smit, R. (2006). An examination of congestion in road traffic emission models and their application to
   urban road networks

· Song, G., Yu, L., & Zhang, Y. (2012). Applicability of traffic microsimulation models in vehicle
   emissions estimates. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
   2270(1), 132-141.

· Stathopoulos, F. G., & Noland, R. B. (2003). Induced travel and emissions from traffic flow
   improvement projects. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
   Board, 1842(1), 57-63.

· Tanvir, S., Karmakar, N., Rouphail, N. M., & Schroeder, B. J. (2016). Modeling freeway work
   zones with mesoscopic dynamic traffic simulator: Validation, gaps, and guidance.
   Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, (2567), 122-130.

· Tanvir, Shams. Modeling and Simulation of Driving Activity from an Energy Use-Emissions
   Perspective. North Carolina State University, 2018.

· Tonne, C., Beevers, S., Armstrong, B., Kelly, F., & Wilkinson, P. (2008). Air pollution and
   mortality benefits of the london congestion charge: Spatial and socioeconomic inequalities.
   Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 65(9), 620-627.

· Twigg, M. V. (2007). Progress and future challenges in controlling automotive exhaust gas
   emissions. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, 70(1), 2-15.

· USEPA. (2007). MOBILE 6 vehicle emission modelling software and documentation. (). Washington,
   DC: US Environmental Protection Agency.

· Vallamsundar, S., & Lin, J. (. (2011). MOVES versus MOBILE. Transportation Research Record:
   Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2233(1), 27-35.

· Xie, Y., Chowdhury, M. A., Bhavsar, P., & Zhou, Y. (2011). An integrated tool for modeling the

                                                                                                                                                              SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 65
         impact of alternative fueled vehicles on traffic emissions: A case study of greenville, south
         carolina. Paper presented at the Transportation Research Board 90th Annual Meeting, (11-3880)
     · Yperman, I. (2007). The link transmission model for dynamic network loading (Ph.D. Thesis).
     · Zhai, H., Frey, H. C., Rouphail, N. M., Goncalves, G. A., & Farias, T. L. (2009). Comparison of
         flexible fuel vehicle and life-cycle fuel consumption and emissions of selected pollutants and
         greenhouse gases for ethanol 85 versus gasoline. Journal of the Air & Waste Management
         Association (1995), 59(8), 912-924.
     · Zhang, K., & Batterman, S. A. (2009). Time allocation shifts and pollutant exposure due to
         traffic congestion: An analysis using the national human activity pattern survey. Science of the
         Total Environment, 407(21), 5493-5500.
     · Zhou, X., Tanvir, S., Lei, H., Taylor, J., Liu, B., Rouphail, N. M., & Christopher Frey, H. (2015).
         Integrating a simplified emission estimation model and mesoscopic dynamic traffic simulator
         to efficiently evaluate emission impacts of traffic management strategies. Transportation
         Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 37, 123-136. doi://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
         j.trd.2015.04.013

                                                        ATTRIBUTIONS
     · Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M.,

         Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

66 SHAMS TANVIR
CHAPTER 6: INTRODUCTION TO ZERO EMISSIONS VEHICLES

CHAPTER OVERVIEW
In this chapter, we discuss the concept of zero (almost no) emissions (ZEV) vehicles to low emissions
vehicles. Often termed as alternative fuel vehicles, these vehicles are hailed as a more sustainable
counterpart of traditional gasoline and diesel operated vehicles. The alternatives that would be
discussed are battery electric vehicles, hybrid vehicles, fuel cell vehicles, hydrogen vehicles,
compressed natural gas vehicles, and liquid petroleum gas vehicles. We will discuss all form factors
and vocation types as it pertains to movement of people and goods - from scooters to mass transit,
from last and first mile delivery to continental trucking.

Chapter Topics

    1. Role of Combustion in Emissions Generation
    2. Zero Emissions Power Generation for Transportation
    3. Electricity and Hydrogen as Zero Carbon Fuels for Transportation
    4. A California Case Study for Zero Emissions Buses
    5. Heavy Duty Vehicle Electrification
    6. California ZEV Market and Incentives Programs

                                                 Learning Objectives

         At the end of the chapter, the reader should be able to do the following:
             · Select appropriate ZEV technology to sustainably meet any specific travel needs.
             · Evaluate the infrastructure and investment needs for different ZEV technologies.
             · Reflect on the current ZEV adoption and prescribe public and private financial mechanisms
                 to promote adoption of these vehicles.

THE ROLE OF COMBUSTION IN EMISSIONS GENERATION
Combustion is the principal technology that powers the energy economy. Simply stated, combustion
is at the heart of our everyday lives, from the provision of electricity to our home and place of
work, to the automobiles we drive, to the propulsion of jet aircraft we fly. Combustion is also the
principal source of the environmental impact we experience, from climate change to degraded urban

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 67
air quality. The following four principal forces are driving the paradigm shifts from our dependency
on combustion to alternative technologies for the generation of electricity and powering of vehicles:

    1. Degraded urban air quality (1943): The first evidence of persistently degraded urban air

       quality in the United States was chronicled in the Los Angeles Times, describing a
       tenacious haze that seemed to irritate eyes and cause many to cough (Figure 6.1). Today,

         urban regions throughout the world (for example, in India, China) are affected by degraded air
         quality.

           Figure 6.1: Los Angeles 1943: Degraded Unraban Air Quality by Ramanathan et al is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

    2. Finite petroleum resources (1980s): Automobile companies recognized that petroleum was
         finite and demand may outweigh discovery in the next millennium.

    3. Climate change (1990s): The world recognized that anthropogenic sources may be affecting
         the climate, leading to the signing of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change in
         1992.

    4. Fuel independence (2001): The assault on the World Trade Center enhanced the urgency to
         reduce US dependence on foreign sources of petroleum.

Depending on the type of engine, either air is compressed to a high pressure and fuel is added, or a
fuel-air mixture is compressed to a high pressure. In both cases, the fuel-air mixture is then ignited,
initiating a combustion process (essentially "burning" the fuel-air mixture) that transforms the energy

68 SHAMS TANVIR
  bound in the fuel (for example, gasoline) to high-temperature gas (thermal energy). The high-pressure,
  high-temperature gas then pushes on a piston (to power the transmission in a traditional gasoline
  vehicle, or generate electricity in a gasoline hybrid vehicle) or expands through a turbine (to generate
  electricity for the home and business). From this process, depicted in Figure 6.2, you can intuitively
  deduce that (1) the efficiency (the percentage of energy bound in the fuel that is transformed to useful
  power) will be limited by the friction associated with all of the mechanical steps, and (2) criteria
  pollutants will be formed because of combustion chemistry and emitted in the exhaust.

     When you consider the role of combustion in everyday life, the examples seem limitless (for
  example, cooking; heating water; space heating; generating electricity; propelling aircraft and rockets;
  and powering automobiles, buses, trucks, locomotives, and ships). Simply stated, combustion is
  interwoven into the fabric of both the quality of life and the economics of the world's markets.

   Figure 6.2: Combustion by Ramanathan is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

  In Figure 6.3, the relationship between combustion and the environment is illustrated. Fuel and air
  are injected into a chamber, ignited to liberate the energy bound in the fuel into thermal energy, and
  expanded to produce a useful product.

     Unfortunately, combustion has an exhaust as a by-product composed of criteria pollutants that
  degrade urban air quality (affecting the public health) and carbon dioxide (affecting the world's
  climate). Notably, the amount of criteria pollutant mass in the exhaust is minuscule and was
  historically ignored until the first consequences to public health in modern times surfaced in 1943
  (Los Angeles) and 1952 (London).1 It is as if Nature incorporated environmental impacts in the
  combustion of fossil fuels to counsel the world's population that combustion is not sustainable.

     Why is it that such a minuscule emission of a few chemical criteria relatively modest emission of
  CO2 affects the world's climate? Consider that the atmosphere is evenly distributed in a thin layer
  around the Earth, barely 10 miles in depth. In Figure 6.3, the purple sphere in the image represents
  the volume of all the air if it were gathered together, relative to the volume of the Earth. The image
  conveys the surprisingly small air resource upon which life on Earth depends, and the relatively small
  volume of air into which products of combustion are injected. Within this small volume, CO2 and

1. Ramifications of combustion exhaust were observed centuries before, an example of which is "fumifugium" (Evelyn 1661).

                                                                                                                                                                          SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 69
other greenhouse gases (GHGs) accrue to affect climate, and secondary criteria pollutants are formed
and primary criteria pollutants amass to degrade urban air quality. As noted in Figure 6.3, combustion
is responsible for over 90% of the world's emission of CO2 and criteria pollutants.

   In addition to contaminating the air resource with CO2 and criteria pollutants, the combustion
process has an impact not widely recognized: namely the consumption of oxygen from the air. For
every tankful of gasoline in your car, a ton of air (2,000 pounds) passes through your engine, and
400 pounds of oxygen are consumed. Given the finite resource of oxygen in the atmosphere, this is
sobering. While Nature appears to be replenishing the oxygen removed to date, an increasing demand
for oxygen could lead to an additional point of environmental stress. Fortuitously, the evolving
transition from a classic "combustion-dominant construct" to a "renewable-dominant construct" will,
in parallel with reducing the emission of CO2 and criteria pollutants, serve to mitigate the likelihood
of this environmental stress.

Figure 6.3: Combustion Impacts by Ramanathan et al is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

An Alternative to Combustion

Because combustion emits carbon dioxide and criteria pollutants as unavoidable by-products, an
alternative to combustion that can operate (1) more efficiently than combustion (thereby reducing
CO2 per megawatt hour), (2) with a zero-carbon fuel (thereby emitting no CO2), and (3) without the
emission of criteria pollutants would be preferred.

   An emerging alternative to combustion is fuel cell technology (Figure 6.4), which converts fuel
and air to electricity in a single step. Intuitively, you can imagine a higher efficiency in the absence

70 SHAMS TANVIR
of mechanical friction. You can also imagine virtually zero formation and emission of criteria air
pollutants, due to relatively low-temperature and relatively benign electrochemistry. In addition, fuel
cells are quiet--a welcomed attribute for deployment as a distributed generator in the midst of where
the public resides (homes) and works (industry, office buildings, and hospitals, for example).

Figure 6.4: Power Generation Options by Ramanathan is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

ALTERNATIVE FUELS
The Energy Policy Act of 1992 defines an alternative fuel as:

     · Biodiesel (B100)
               Biodiesel is a renewable fuel that can be manufactured from vegetable oils, animal fats,
                  or recycled cooking grease for use in diesel vehicles.

     · Natural gas and liquid fuels domestically produced from natural gas
               Natural gas is a domestically abundant fuel that can have significant cost advantages
                  over gasoline and diesel fuels.

     · Propane (liquefied petroleum gas)
     · Electricity
     · Hydrogen
     · Blends of 85% or more of methanol, denatured ethanol, and other alcohols with gasoline or

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 71
         other fuels

               Ethanol is a widely used renewable fuel made from corn and other plant materials. It is
                  blended with gasoline for use in vehicles.

     · Methanol, denatured ethanol, and other alcohols

     · Coal-derived, domestically produced liquid fuels

     · Fuels (other than alcohol) derived from biological materials

               Renewable diesel is a biomass-derived transportation fuel suitable for use in diesel
                  engines.

     · P-Series fuels

TRANSITION TO ALTERNATIVE POWER GENERATION FOR TRANSPORTATION

The next generation of vehicles is emerging in response to environmental pressures and a goal of
fuel independence. The environmental pressures, which include the mitigation of climate change and
air quality degradation, require a dramatic reduction in the emission of GHGs and air pollutants
from the transportation sector as well as the electric sector. Fuel independence requires removing
reliance on the international sourcing of carbon-rich fossil fuels and the associated geopolitics. In
response, vehicles of all sizes are transitioning from combustion engines and mechanical drivetrains
to alternative vehicles with battery and fuel cell engines and electric drivetrains. The transition began
with light-duty vehicles, expanded into medium-duty vehicles, and is now emerging with heavy-duty
vehicles including buses. This transition involves a merging of the transportation system with the
electricity generation system.

   Alternative vehicles encompass fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs) and plug-in electric vehicles
(PEVs). Examples of PEVs are battery electric vehicles (BEVs) and plug-in fuel cell electric vehicles
(PFCEVs).

   All of these vehicles have a few key characteristics in common. First, alternative vehicles are
designed to operate on fuels that portend (1) a potential of zero emission of both GHG and criteria
pollutants and (2) an opportunity to be generated locally and thereby achieve the goal of fuel
independence. Second, alternative vehicles have no tailpipe emissions of carbon or criteria pollutants.
The GHG and criteria pollutant emissions, if any, come solely from the fuel supply chain, such as
the generation of electricity or production of hydrogen. Electricity and hydrogen are the two fuels
emerging to power alternative vehicles.

Electricity as a Fuel

For PEVs, the electric grid becomes the source of the fuel. PEVs garner electricity from the home,
from the place of work, and in the conduct of business at commercial centers such as big-box stores,
shopping centers, and hotels. Referred to as G2V (grid-to-vehicle), extracting energy from the grid
adds a new load to the grid. Conversely, PEVs have the potential to provide beneficial attributes to
the grid. With what is called V2G (vehicle-to-grid), energy can be extracted from qualified vehicles to
serve loads when generating assets are strained.

   The existing grid is able to accommodate modest charging events, but as the number of charging
events increases (for example, at homes), local transformers may overload and fail. As a result, either
upgrades to transformers or controlled charging (that is, smart charging), or both, will be required.

72 SHAMS TANVIR
   In this process, while the emissions of pollutants from the tailpipes and electric grid are virtually
zero and the emission of carbon from the vehicles is zero, the carbon emissions from the electric grid
will not be zero with stationary fuel cells (as mentioned above) operating on fossil fuels (for example,
natural gas) and biogas. What is required is a zero-carbon fuel.

Hydrogen as a zero-carbon fuel

For FCEVs, hydrogen is the fuel. For PFCEVs, hydrogen is the "longrange" fuel (300 to 400 miles)
while electricity is the "short-range" fuel (50 to 150 miles). While the vehicles themselves emit
zero carbon, the supply chain of electricity (as noted above) and hydrogen can be major sources of
atmospheric carbon if not carefully planned. For example, hydrogen has been traditionally generated
in large plants by the steam reformation of natural gas at elevated temperatures. The principal
component of natural gas is methane (CH4), with concentrations varying around the world from 70%
to over 90%. Other components can be other hydrocarbons (for example, propane and ethane) and
inert chemicals such as carbon dioxide and nitrogen.

   Today, over 50 million metric tons of hydrogen from steam methane reformation (SMR) are
produced annually worldwide, and 11 million metric tons are produced in the United States to
support manufacturing (for example, of chemicals, foods, and electronics) and the refining of
petroleum to generate gasoline. Notably, the amount of hydrogen needed to fuel 20 million FCEVs
in California (today's population of all vehicles in California) is just 20% more than the hydrogen
generated today for the production of gasoline in California. If all the vehicles were PFCEVs, less
than 80% would be required. However, SMR hydrogen has an associated emission of CO2. What is
required is the generation of renewable hydrogen without the emission of carbon. An initial step in
the production of renewable hydrogen is the generation of carbon-neutral biohydrogen using tri-
generation for fueling FCEVs and PFCEVs as well as stationary fuel cells. As noted previously, the vast
majority of renewable hydrogen is expected to be sourced from the generation of electrolytic zero-
carbon hydrogen from otherwise curtailed solar and wind. Not only can electrolytic zero-carbon
hydrogen be stored over long periods of time and used in stationary fuel cells as diurnal or seasonal
demand requires, it can also be used to fuel FCEVs and PFCEVs.

   To use the California example again, systems analyses show that the amount of renewable zero-
carbon hydrogen generated by otherwise curtailed renewable resources will be more than ample to
fuel FCEVs. While water is also required, fueling all the state's 20 million vehicles with electrolytic
zero-carbon hydrogen would need less than 1% of the daily water flow in the California Aqueduct. If
all vehicles were PFCEVs, less than 0.2% would be required.

   For dispensing hydrogen to FCEVs, fueling stations are today being deployed at existing gasoline
stations. The locations are already zoned for fueling, and the public is familiar with the location as a
fueling site. Hydrogen dispensing can be added to an existing island (displacing a gasoline dispenser)
or on a newly established fueling island. Over time, gasoline dispensers could be replaced one by one
as hydrogen-fueled vehicles displace gasoline-fueled vehicles.

   California, again, provides an illustration of the scale of fueling infrastructure that will be required.
Approximately 9,800 gasoline stations serve the California population, with multiple stations often
sharing the same intersection. However, hydrogen dispensing will not be required at all of the existing
gasoline stations. The reasons include the high efficiency of hydrogen vehicles, meaning they can
drive farther before refueling than gasoline-powered cars can, and the replacement of competition
from the fuel pricing at intersections (often leading to four gasoline stations at an intersection) to

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 73
the smart phone. For example, it is estimated that a minimum of 1,600 hydrogen stations are needed
to fuel a full build-out of FCEVs in 2050. While this number of stations gives drivers a maximum
6-minute access to a hydrogen dispenser, the actual number will likely be larger in order to not
overcrowd any one station. If PFCEVs alone were deployed (that is, no FCEVs), the minimum number
of stations required statewide would be 93. The larger the percentage of PFCEVs in 2050, the fewer
the number of stations over and above 1,600.

  In 2019, the number of hydrogen stations in California is approximately 50. They are
concentrated at population centers targeted for the introduction of FCEVs by the

automobile manufacturers, along with key connector stations (for example, between northern and
southern California) and destination stations popular with tourists (for example, Santa Barbara, Lake
Tahoe, and Napa Valley).

Zero Emissions Hydrogen Generation Processes

The two technologies commercially available to produce hydrogen with a neutral or zero emission of
carbon are steam methane reformation (SMR) using biogas (carbonneutral), and electrolysis powered
by otherwise curtailed wind (zero-carbon).

Steam Reformation

Today, most of the hydrogen in the world is generated by SMR as the most cost effective and efficient
of all commercial reformation technologies. Efficiencies for centralized natural gas operated SMR
plants range from 76 - 81%. SMR operations currently take place mostly on a centralized scale. An
example of non-centralized (i.e., "distributed") hydrogen generation is the SunLine Transit station
in Thousand Palms, California. It is likely that more distributed SMR will be introduced into the
emerging hydrogen infrastructure since it can take advantage of the existing natural gas infrastructure
for wheeling biogas to produce hydrogen on site. Some companies, such as HyRadix, H2Gen, and
Ztek, are working on commercializing integrated SMR systems that generate, compress, and dispense
hydrogen into vehicles.

Electrolysis

Electrolysis is a method of generating hydrogen from water using an electric current to split water
into its two parts: hydrogen and oxygen. The source of the electricity dictates the cost of the process,
estimated to be 58% of the price at the pump in one study. Using renewable solar or wind generated
electricity that would be otherwise curtailed to power an electrolyzer is an environmentally friendly
method to generate zero-carbon hydrogen. Large-scale solar and wind farms can be used for
centralized generation of electrolytic hydrogen that can be injected into natural gas pipelines (in
the earlier years) and dedicated hydrogen pipelines (in later years), stored from days to seasons, and
eventually used to either power fuel cell vehicles or generate electricity through gas turbines or fuel
cells. The installation cost of a hydrogen pipeline is 1/3 that of an electrical transmission line that
moves the same amount of energy. Hydrogen pipelines are also safer than overhead transmission
lines, require less maintenance, and are aesthetically preferred. Electrolysis using the electrical power
grid comes at a higher environmental cost. Some studies show that generating hydrogen from grid
electrolysis to fuel automobiles yields a net increase of GHG emissions compared to today's
conventional vehicles. However, more recent studies establish that power-to-gas (P2G) technology,
which involves the conversion of electrical power into a gaseous energy carrier, is a promising

74 SHAMS TANVIR
  prospect for future energy systems. With P2G, hydrogen can be supplied completely from excess
  renewable energy, which benefits: 1) balancing the electrical grid with high use of variable,
  unpredictable renewable power, 2) providing high capacity, long term energy storage for seasonal
  shifting, and 3) creating a hydrogen supply to promote the use of state-of-art fuel cell vehicles across
  different transportation sectors, including light, medium, and heavyduty. Additionally, P2G has also
  been shown to be the most cost-effective approach for longterm energy storage.

  THE NEED FOR ZERO EMISSIONS BUSES: A CALIFORNIA CASE

  California Transportation Sector Although public transport by urban bus is generally more
  environmentally efficient than individual passenger cars, conventional buses are still associated with
  significant local criteria air pollutant2 and greenhouse gas emissions3.

     Air pollution associated with criteria pollutants is a significant concern in urban areas such as
  California's South Coast Air Basin (SCAB) where heavy-duty vehicles and buses are significant
  contributors to the total emissions of NOx. While progress has been made in reducing criteria air
  pollutant emissions from light-duty vehicles, medium-duty and heavy-duty vehicles have been more
  difficult to address due to the diversity of duty cycles and operational needs encompassed by these
  sectors. Additionally, powertrains in medium-duty and heavy-duty vehicles have typically relied on
  diesel fuel in order to satisfy their duty cycles, thereby limiting options for emissions reductions.
  In addition to criteria air pollutant reductions, many regions of the world have initiated proactive
  programs to reduce CO2 emissions. California, as an example, has an especially ambitious carbon
  reduction program. In 2016, total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions for the State of California were
  almost 430 million metric tons of CO2 equivalents (MMTCO2e), an overall decrease of 13% from a
  peak in 2004, and a decrease to 2 MMTCO2e below the 1990 level (the State's 2020 mandated GHG
  target).

     The transportation sector remains the most significant source of GHG emissions in the State,
  accounting for 41% of the inventory. Figure 6.5 shows the GHG emission by sector for 2016, and
  Figure 6.6 presents trends for the transportation sector from 2000 to 2016. Figure 6.6 also shows that
  heavy-duty vehicles are the second largest contributor to (GHG) emissions behind automobiles and
  that emissions from the heavy-duty sector started decreasing after 2007, even as diesel sales increased.

2. Air pollution contributes to a wide variety of adverse health effects. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has
   established national ambient air quality standards (NAAQS) for six of the most common air pollutants-- carbon monoxide,
   lead, ground-level ozone, particulate matter, nitrogen dioxide, and sulfur dioxide.

3. Gases that absorb infrared radiation and trap heat in the atmosphere are called greenhouse gases.

                                                                                                                                                                          SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 75
Figure 6.5: Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Sector for 2016 by Analy Castillo is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

Figure 6.6: Greenhouse Gas Emissions for the Transportation Sector in California by Analy Casillo is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

BACKGROUND LEGISLATION FOR URBAN BUSES
In recognition of the need for reduction in greenhouse gas and criteria air pollutant emissions

76 SHAMS TANVIR
from urban buses, initiatives to deploy zero emission buses into public transit agencies have been
promulgated by governmental authorities around the world. For example, during the 2016
International Zero Emission Bus Conference in London, over 23 cities presented plans to incorporate
60% of ZEBs in their fleet by 2025. This includes initiatives such as the C40 Clean Bus Declaration,
which stipulates the acquisition of over forty thousand clean buses by 2040. California has been a
leader in pollution and GHG emissions reductions for decades. In 2005 Governor Schwarzenegger
enacted Executive order S-3-05 which set into motion three GHG emission goals for the State of
California in the near and long-term. These goals are to: 1) bring GHG emissions to 2000 levels by
2010, 2) achieve 1990 levels by 2020, and 3) establish GHG emissions levels by 2050 that are 80%
below those recorded in 1990. The first two goals were affirmed by the California Legislature in the
passage of Assembly Bill 32 (AB 32) in 2016 (the "Global Warming Solutions Act"). While the third goal
has not yet been established as a legal mandate, the Legislature passed SB 32 in 2016, which requires
by law a 40% reduction from 1990 levels by 2030.

   Other legislation, such as Senate Bill 1078, establishes the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS), or
renewable energy penetration goals for the state. These goals are delineated in Senate Bill 1078 and
are updated by Senate Bill 2 with an aim to have a renewable penetration of 20% by 2013, 25% by
2016 and 33% by 2020. These high penetration objectives, along with future increased load from
the electrification of the transportation sector, will have complex and dynamic interactions with the
electrical grid. These complex interactions and concurrent complementary technology utilization
strategies play a crucial role in energy utilization and price regulation. Therefore, to fully leverage
these high renewable penetration rates, a sector-wide, California specific approach must be taken
when analyzing the future of California's energy system and build out of complementary
infrastructure.

   To meet the schedule and reduction targets, a substantial effort has been focused on the
transportation sector to accelerate fleet modernization and increase the penetration of clean engine
technologies and cleaner fuels. Part of this effort is the "Innovative Clean Transit" initiative from the
California Air Resource Board, with the goal of transforming the statewide transit bus fleet by 2040
through phasing-in ZEB purchases. Related to this effort, several transport authorities have stated
commitments to transition to a zeroemissions fleet within the next 15 years. These transit agencies,
however, will be tasked with complying with these initiatives while still being able to satisfy the
travel patterns of customers in their service area. However, no holistic analysis has been conducted
to compare the environmental impacts of the overall fuel supply chain needed for the deployment
of ZEBs. This type of analysis is essential to: (1) maximize the emission reduction while minimizing
resource consumption in the supply chain (e.g., energy and water), and (2) establish criteria that
can identify the most effective combination of ZEB technologies based on the characteristics and
limitations of the transit agency. Developing strategies to transition urban bus fleets towards low
or zero emissions involves selecting between a wide array of emerging public bus powertrain
technologies in the context of operational cycle constraints. However, merely deploying battery
electric or fuel cell electric buses do not automatically guarantee significant emissions reductions
since many sources of emissions may occur outside of the operating or use phase. Therefore, to gain
an accurate assessment of how effective the transition to alternate urban bus powertrain technologies
can be, accounting for emissions from the full life cycle of these buses must take place.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 77
HEAVY DUTY VEHICLE ELECTRIFICATION

Heavy-Duty Vehicles Electrification of the transportation sector has already begun, with more than
1 million light-duty ZEVs on the road in California as of 2021, consisting of 63% BEVs, 36% plug-in
hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs), and 1% FCEVs. While battery-centric drive trains have dominated
the LDV sector, battery powered HDVs have more obstacles because of battery size, battery and
vehicle/payload weight, vehicle range, and charging times. A number of HDV vocations (e.g., long-
haul, public transit) have long distance travel applications, so their electrified powertrains have to
accommodate trips with a long range. Other HDV vocations (e.g., drayage) have shorter ranges and
are able to operate satisfactorily with battery power.

   Charging infrastructure presents an additional challenge in the heavy-duty space for two main
reasons. The first is that charging a high-capacity battery takes much longer than fueling a diesel
truck. Some vocations only have one shift a day so can charge overnight, but the rest either must
take longer stops for charging or companies must develop a robust cache of battery banks charged at
warehouses. The second charging infrastructure challenge is the availability of high-power chargers
at the correct times of day. Current public vehicle charging infrastructure includes Level 2 AC
chargers and DC fast chargers. While Level 2 chargers can be used for overnight charging of light-
, medium-, and some heavy-duty vehicles, they are insufficient to charge the largest HDVs and
therefore not a comprehensive option. DC fast chargers can charge light- and medium-duty vehicles
quickly, or some HDVs overnight but are not able to charge class 7-8 HDVs in short times. Ultimately,
in order to build a sustainable zero-emission HDV future that includes BEVs, an investment in
higher power, shorter charge time charging infrastructure around the country is required. Alternative
fuels, more specifically FCEVs utilizing hydrogen fuel, also present a sizeefficient solution. They
have emerged as a feasible option because hydrogen has a higher gravimetric energy density than
gasoline, so it can be compressed and stored on board without imposing as much extra weight as
a battery on an already heavyweight system. FCEVs also have comparable fueling times and ranges
to internal combustion engine vehicles, making them more competitive than BEVs on that metric
in the heavy-duty space. Implementation of FCEVs creates vehicle hydrogen demand (VHD) that
motivates hydrogen infrastructure development, allowing for further development of a multi-end use
hydrogen economy. Specifically, hydrogen converted to electricity by fuel cells for the electric grid,
or electricity hydrogen demand (EHD), is a key part of the diversification of economy-wide uses of
hydrogen. However, FCEVs come with their own challenges. Like BEVs with charging infrastructure,
hydrogen fueling infrastructure is a large barrier to FCEV penetration. According to the California
Fuel Cell Partnership, 8 hydrogen stations in California are dedicated to heavyduty refueling and
over 50 additional open and online retail stations. Compared to an estimated more than 10,000 diesel
and gasoline stations in the state, that is very early infrastructure for a mode of transportation and
severely limits the expansion of FCEV technology at all payloads. In order for FCEVs to be truly
zero-emission, the hydrogen production infrastructure must also evolve. As of June 2021, 95% of
global hydrogen was gray hydrogen, or hydrogen produced from fossil fuels without the use of any
carbon capture and storage (CCS) technology. Gray hydrogen compromises the idea of life cycle
zero-carbon transportation, so a transition including FCEVs requires investment in carbon-neutral
green hydrogen production methods. Those methods include electrolytic hydrogen using electricity
from renewable resources, biogas reformation, and artificial photosynthesis. Once a ZEV fleet mix
develops, the shift to electrification will have a notable effect on the grid. BEVs and FCEVs both
increase grid demand profiles because BEVs draw power directly from the grid and green hydrogen

78 SHAMS TANVIR
  production for FCEV fueling draws power from the grid for electrolysis albeit utilizing to some extent
  excess renewable resources.

     Electrification will increase peak demand, which is a good indicator of system cost because it
  defines the maximum capacity at which the grid must be able to comfortably operate [35]. Even
  though generation does not have to constantly meet peak demand, the transmission system must be
  able to accommodate it to prevent outages. Fortunately, BEV charging and electrolysis for hydrogen
  fuel can be considered flexible loads. BEV charging time and rate can be adjusted by the customer
  manually or smart charging systems can optimize when a network of BEVs charge to minimize cost
  and strain on the grid. Hydrogen production is even more flexible because the timing of production
  is not tied to the timing of vehicle fueling; fuel is produced ahead of time, transported to the fueling
  station, then extracted according to customer needs. Ultimately, the capacity of the electric grid must
  increase as demand naturally increases over time in addition to the vehicle electrification load. With
  continued expansion and investment in renewable generation sources, compatible energy storage,
  and load shifting strategies, peak load can be met and rapid daily ramping managed.

  STATE OF THE CALIFORNIA ZEV MARKET

  California's Zero Emissions Vehicle (ZEV) market continues to build momentum. In a span of ten
  years, the market has grown exponentially from a minimal number of total ZEVs in 2009 to over half
  600,000 light-duty ZEVs on the roads in California in mid-2019.4 ZEVs accounted for nearly eight
  percent of new light-duty vehicle sales in 2018, which represents a growth in market share of almost
  40 percent compared to 2017. Additionally, there are 47 zero-emission light-duty cars and trucks
  offered for sale or lease in California with more planned in the coming years. While the majority of the
  ZEVs sold have been Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEVs) and Battery Electric Vehicle (BEVs), the
  younger light-duty fuel cell electric vehicle (FCEV) market is gaining momentum growing from fewer
  than 100 a decade ago to approximately 6,000 on California's roads by mid-2019. The heavyduty ZEV
  market is also growing rapidly as ZEV technology transfers from light-duty and smaller heavy-duty
  ZEV applications, with over 100 models commercially available today and many major manufacturers
  announcing plans for future commercialization of battery-electric and hydrogen fuel cell electric
  trucks and buses.

     Refueling infrastructure is needed to power the vehicles and support the ZEV market. As of
  December 2019, California has 22,233 electric vehicle charging outlets, including 3,355 direct current
  fast chargers (DCFCs), at over 5,674 public stations throughout the State and 41 public retail
  hydrogen stations located in the major metropolitan areas compared to virtually none a decade ago.
  The State's goal is to have 1.5 million ZEVs on the road, 250,000 charging outlets, including 10,000
  DCFC, and 200 hydrogen stations by 2025 as well as 5 million ZEVs by 2030. The magnitude and
  speed of effort needed to achieve these goals is unprecedented.

  HISTORICAL ALTERNATIVE FUELS AND VEHICLES INCENTIVE PROGRAMS IN
  CALIFORNIA

  Air Quality Improvement Program (AQIP)

  The Air Quality Improvement Program (AQIP), established by the California Alternative and

4. Veloz, 2019. "Sales Dashboard." Last updated: August 6, 2019. https://www.veloz.org/sales-dashboard/. Accessed August 15,
   2019.

                                                                                                                                                                          SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 79
Renewable Fuel, Vehicle Technology, Clean Air, and Carbon Reduction Act of 2007 (Assembly Bill
(AB) 118, Statutes of 2007, Chapter 750), was a voluntary incentive program administered by CARB
to fund clean vehicle and equipment projects, research on biofuels production and the air quality
impacts of alternative fuels, and workforce training. The AQIP Guidelines and annual funding
plans guided CARB's implementation of the AQIP.

     · Hybrid Truck and Bus Voucher Program
               AQIP background, working group information and regulatory text (available by
                  request)
               Program administrator page with list of eligible vehicles / application forms

     · Zero-Emission Vehicle and Plug-In Hybrid Light-Duty Vehicle Rebate Project
               AQIP background, working group information and regulatory text (available by
                  request)
               Program administrator page with list of eligible vehicles / application forms (Clean
                  Vehicle Rebate Project)

Carpool / HOV Lane Access

California law allows single-occupant use of High Occupancy Vehicle (HOVs) lanes by certain
qualifying clean alternative fuel vehicles. Use of these lanes with a single occupant requires a Clean
Air Vehicle Sticker issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV).

Alternative Fuel Incentive Program (AFIP) 2007-2009

The Alternative Fuel Incentive Program (AFIP), established by Assembly Bill (AB) 1811, required
CARB to develop a joint plan with the California Energy Commission to spend $25 million for the
purposes of incentivizing the use and production of alternative fuels. This program has ended.

ZIP I, ZIP II and Fleet ZIP 2001-2004

The Zero Emission Vehicle Incentive Programs (ZIP I, ZIP II and Fleet ZIP) were administered by
CARB in conjunction with the State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Commission
(California Energy Commission or CEC).

Lawn and Garden Equipment Replacement Project

The purpose of the Air Quality Improvement Program (AQIP) Lawn and Garden Equipment
Replacement (LGER) Project was to encourage further development and deployment of cordless
zero-emission lawn and garden equipment. The availability of incentive funding helped bring a
variety of residential and commercial cordless zero-emission equipment to the market.

Zero-Emission All-Terrain Agricultural Work Vehicle Rebate Project

The $1.1 million Zero-Emission Agricultural UTV Rebate Project accelerated the use of zero-
emission work vehicles for use in California agricultural operations, by providing rebates for the
purchase of new, eligible all terrain and utility vehicles on a first come, first serve basis.

80 SHAMS TANVIR
                                                     Key Takeaways

          · Battery Electric Vehicles (BEVs) are sufficient and, with advances in battery technology, the
              energy density will dramatically increase, the charging time will dramatically decrease, and the
              weight will dramatically decrease to provide the range, fueling time, and size provided historically
              by petroleum-fueled internal combustion vehicles.

          · While BEVs have a role, FCEVs and PFCEVs are needed to provide the range and refueling time
              to which the public is accustomed with conventional gasoline and diesel internal combustion
              vehicles.

          · Fuel Cell technology is also suitable for medium-duty vehicles (such as delivery trucks) and for
              heavy-duty vehicles (that is, buses and large trucks) where BEV technology is limited or
              insufficient. FC technology is applicable as well for off-road construction vehicles, locomotives,
              and ships.

                                                         Self-Test

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                          https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=247#h5p-6

                                                  GLOSSARY: KEY TERMS
Battery electric vehicles (BEVs): All-electric vehicles, also called battery electric vehicles, have a
battery that is charged by plugging the vehicle in to charging equipment. These vehicles always
operate in all-electric mode and have typical driving ranges from 150 to 400 miles.

   Fuel cell technology: A fuel cell uses the chemical energy of hydrogen or other fuels to cleanly and
efficiently produce electricity

   Fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs): FCEVs use a propulsion system similar to that of electric
vehicles, where energy stored as hydrogen is converted to electricity by the fuel cell.

   Plug-in electric vehicles (PEVs): A plug-in electric vehicle (PEV) is any road vehicle that can utilize
an external source of electricity (such as a wall socket that connects to the power grid) to store
electrical energy within its onboard rechargeable battery packs, to power an electric motor, and help
propelling the wheels.

   Plug-in fuel cell electric vehicles (PFCEVs): Plug-in fuel cell electric vehicles (PFCEVs) combine
features of battery electric vehicles (BEVs) and fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs). This vehicles are a
type of plug-in hybrid electric vehicle where instead of an internal combustion engine a hydrogen
gerating fuel-cell is used.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 81
                                                           MEDIA ATTRIBUTIONS
                · Figure 6.1: Los Angeles 1943: Degraded Unraban Air Quality by Ramanathan et al is

                    licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
                · Figure 6.2: Combustion by Ramanathan is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
                · Figure 6.3: Combustion Impacts by Ramanathan et al is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA

                    4.0
                · Figure 6.4: Power Generation Options by Ramanathan is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA

                    4.0
                · Figure 6.5: Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Sector for 2016 by Analy Castillo is licensed

                    under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
                · Figure 6.6: Greenhouse Gas Emissions for the Transportation Sector in California by

                    Analy Casillo is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                                                          REFERENCES
     · Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M., Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. (2019).

         Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions. Location: Regents of the University of
         California. Editor: V. Ramanathan. Co-Editors: Adam Millard-Ball; Michelle Niemann; Scott
         Friese. Book published by the Regents of the Univ of California. Retrieved from
         https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6kr8p5rq. 815pp.under (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0)

                                                        ATTRIBUTIONS
     · Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M.,

         Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
     · Technology Mix Optimization for Zero-Emission Fleets Adopting a Multi-Criteria Decision

         Analysis within a Life Cycle Assessment Framework by Castillo, Analy is licensed under CC
         BY-NC-SA 4.0
     · Viable Pathways in the Energy Sector to Meet California Climate Goals with an Emphasis on
         Heavy-Duty Transportation and Refinery Emissions by Houck, Margaret is licensed under
         CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

82 SHAMS TANVIR
CHAPTER 7: DESIGN OF CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE

CHAPTER OVERVIEW
In this chapter, we narrow down our focus on the infrastructure and investment needs for electric
transportation. We will discuss the charging infrastructure planning, design, and operations process;
specifically, where the chargers would be placed, how those are used, and who will be using these
chargers. We will cover both light-duty and heavy-duty electrification needs. In addition to
conductive charging, we will discuss the inductive charging process and discuss the design of wireless
charging facilities.

Chapter Topics

    1. Charging Methods in EVs
    2. AC and DC Charging in EVs
    3. The Need for Charging Infrastructure
    4. Charging Station Location
    5. Smart Charging and ICT Aspects of Electric Charging

                                                 Learning Objectives

      At the end of the chapter, the reader should be able to do the following:
          · Classify the charging infrastructure based on power requirement, vehicle type compatibility,
              flexibility, and systems resilience.
          · Locate chargers based on the ways the chargers are used and the people using the chargers.
          · Estimate the equity and environmental justice implications for a given charging infrastructure
              scenario.
          · Summarize the policy pathways to integrate charging infrastructure at the federal, state, and
              local levels.
          · Analyze and design transportation and charging infrastructure in alignment with expanding
              electrification needs

CHARGING TECHNOLOGIES FOR EV
Fast, reliable and safe charging possibilities are required in order to help the roll-out of electric
mobility. This problem can be considered as a `chicken and egg' problem. Drivers will not consider
the electric mobility reliable and comfortable unless there are charging facilities in predictable ranges.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 83
In contrast, the investors of the charging infrastructure would expect quick and regular income after
the installation, but it will be probably a mid-term process. It should be noted that this trend can be
considered similar to the relationship between the roll-out of the gasoline cars and the petrol stations
almost a century ago. When the vehicles in the fleet do not have enough energy left in the battery or if
the range is not sufficient to cover a journey, the vehicles are quickly charged to complete the trip. On
the other hand, the vehicles can be charged at a low power when they are parked overnight. Besides
this, swapping of batteries can provide a unique opportunity to get a full battery pack in minutes,
similar to the short fueling times of gasoline cars.

   And now, let's dive straight into the content. You will learn about various EV battery charging
methods like AC charging, DC charging, wireless inductive charging, and battery swap. The module
will conclude with smart charging and Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) and an introduction to ICT aspects of
EV charging. Hope you have a successful learning experience!

CHARGING METHODS IN EVS

There are different ways to charge the EV battery. In all these methods power from the conventional
AC grid is directly or indirectly converted from AC to DC to charge the EV battery. In the
Introduction course, we looked at AC and DC charging of EV. Besides this, EVs can be charged by
wireless inductive charging and by battery swap technology. Watch this lecture by Pavol Bauer to get
an overview of the various EV charging methods!

                     One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them
                     online here: https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=311#oembed-1

As explained in the lecture, the three common ways to charge an EV are:

    1. Conductive charging - AC and DC
    2. Inductive charging - Static and Dynamic
    3. Battery swap technology

The physical location of the components for converting the power supplied by the grid to that
required by vehicle battery can be categorized as onboard and offboard chargers. Onboard chargers
are located within the vehicle, and the size and power rating are constrained by the available space
within the vehicle. Off-board chargers are located outside the vehicle, and this setup provides more
flexibility in terms of the power that can be delivered. Both classes of charging devices must contain
control circuits and communicate in real-time with the vehicle battery. This is to ensure that the
battery is charged in an optimum way, avoiding any damage to the battery through overcharging. AC
charging uses an onboard charger while DC and battery swap use an off-board charger. In case of an
inductive charger, a combination of both an onboard and off-board charger are required.

Conductive Charging

This is the most common charging method right now and it has 2 categories: AC and DC charging.

84 SHAMS TANVIR
Figure 7.1: Conductive Charging- AC by Electric Cars: Technology Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

The advantages of this method are:

    1. The battery can be recharged anywhere using the AC grid and the onboard EV charger.
    2. The EV charger can easily communicate with the Battery Management System (BMS) and no

         additional power electronic converters are needed in the EV charger. This leads to a higher
         performance and lower cost.

And the disadvantages are:

    1. AC power has to be converted into DC power in the car, and there is a limitation of the power
         output for AC charging due to size and weight restrictions of the onboard charger.

    2. AC charging needs relatively long time due to the relatively lower charging power.

DC charging is suitable for high power EV charging, and the power output of fast charges is limited
only by the ability of the batteries to accept the charging power.

Figure 7.2: Conductive Charging- DC by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 85
The advantages of this method are:
    1. It can be designed with either a high or low charging rate, and is not limited in its weight and
         size.
    2. DC charging with high power requires low charging time.

And the disadvantages are:
    1. Higher investment for installation of the charger when compared to AC charging.
    2. Adverse impact on power system: high power demand on the grid esp. at peak hours.
    3. Since the off-board chargers and the BMS are physically separated, reliable communication is
         important to ensure correct charging conditions.

Inductive Charging

The main idea behind inductive charging is the use of two electromagnetically linked coils. The
primary coil is placed on the road surface, in a pad-like construction linked to the electricity network.
The secondary coil is placed on the vehicle, ideally on the bottom or top of the car. The 50Hz
AC power from the grid is rectified to DC and is then converted to a high-frequency AC power
within the offboard charger station. Then this high-frequency power is transferred to the EV side by
electromagnetic induction. The coils on the car convert this high-frequency AC power back to DC to
charge the EV using the onboard charger.

   The advantages of this method are:
    1. Convenience
    2. Suitable for self-driving cars
And the disadvantages are:
    1. High investment
    2. Limited space & weight of charge pads
    3. Misalignment tolerance between the vehicle and the charge pad
    4. Power losses and relatively lower efficiency than conductive charging
    5. Electromagnetic radiation exposure

86 SHAMS TANVIR
Figure 7.3: Inductive Charging- Static by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

The other way to charge a car wirelessly is called dynamic charging. The coils connected to electric
cables which used to provide the power are buried in the road. The coils emit an electromagnetic field
that is picked up by vehicles driving over them and converted into electricity to charge the cars.

   Advantages:
    1. Low stand-in charging time
    2. Low battery DoD
    3. Smaller battery size
So far the dynamic inductive charging is still in the experimental stage because there are many
challenges to standardize it. The challenges are:
    1. The high cost of investment
    2. Foreign objects, coil structure changes and coil misalignment on the road
    3. Applicability of different car types and universal coil type selection

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 87
Figure 7.4: Inductive Charging- Dynamic by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

Battery Swap

The third method of EV charging is battery swap. It works on the basis of switching out the depleted
battery and replacing the same with a full battery. The process involves driving into a battery
switching bay and an automated process will position the vehicle, switch out the current battery
and replace it with a fully charged battery. The depleted batteries are charged in the station for later
deployment. The system works on the business concept that the EV user owns the vehicle and not the
battery. Battery swap requires a foolproof way to estimate the batteries state of health to check for its
usage pattern and to ensure that only authorized vehicles and charging stations can charge it.

   The advantages of this method are:
    1. No range anxiety
    2. Quick and easy refilling like a combustion engine car tank
    3. Longer charging times available for the EV battery compared to fast DC Charging
The main challenges to this method are:
    1. The requirement of standardized battery interface across multiple car manufacturers.
    2. Consumer acceptance of not owning a battery and having to change the vehicle battery.

88 SHAMS TANVIR
Comparison of EV Charging Methods

Table 7.1 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

Let's have an overall comparison of all these battery powering methods. From this table, we can see
the overall comparison of all battery powering methods.

     · It can be observed that the dynamic inductive charging is the most convenient charging
         method but also the most expensive. Even if the static inductive is cheaper compared to the
         dynamic one, the average cost of inductive charging is higher than any other method.
         Dynamic inductive charging has the most flexibility as the car can be charged at any time
         when on the way and do not need to stop by the service point.

     · To power the battery, the battery swap method needs the shortest serving time. For all
         charging methods except battery swap, the serving time is highly related to the power level. In
         this case, the DC conductive charging method has the highest power capacity among all the
         methods.

     · There are many factors that impact the efficiency, e.g. the number of power converters and
         their types, the charging power, and the charging methods. From the table, we can see that, in
         general, the conductive charging method has higher overall efficiency than inductive
         charging. It is because the power conversion process using an air gap is less efficient than
         direct power transfer using cables. Further, the efficiency of inductive charging reduces as a
         result of the misalignment between the sending and receiving charge pads.

     · The battery lifetime is depending on many factors, for example, the charging power (C-rate)
         and the DOD. The battery lifetime in DC charging has the lowest lifetime because the
         charging power and hence the corresponding C-rate are the highest. Further, typically at fast
         charging stations, people want to charge their batteries as much as possible for long distance
         trips increasing the depth of discharge as well. In contrary, batteries operated with dynamic

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 89
         inductive charging method has the longest lifetime expectations because the batteries can be
         charged/discharged with small DOD.
     · From the perspective of grid impact, the DC charging method has the most significant impact
         since it has the highest power level. Besides, the battery swap could also have a high impact on
         the grid if the charging powers are high as well.
     · Finally, considering standardization challenge, the dynamic inductive charging and the
         battery swap are faced with the most difficult challenges. It is because both methods require
         standardization between car types, battery size, power level and even shape.

AC CHARGING OF EVS

AC charging using the onboard charger of an EV is the most popular and simplest means of charging
an EV today. Large power plants produce alternating current (AC) power which is transmitted over
long distance transmission lines to our homes. Most of our homes get AC power supply from the grid
and a large number of the appliances we use in our homes also run on AC power. The EV battery as
we learnt earlier requires direct current (DC) power. The question that arises is how do we charge
electric vehicles with AC power from the grid? Is AC charging of EVs done the same way all over the
world? If not, what are the differences? And finally, the question which is most important for an EV
user: how long does it take to charge your EV with AC power? Find out the answers to those questions
in this lecture by Gautham Ram Chandra Mouli on AC charging of EVs.

                     One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them
                     online here: https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=311#oembed-2

   AC charging allows EVs to be charged by using inexpensive AC charging stations which feed AC
power directly from the grid to the car. The nature of AC, that is, single phase or three phase, voltage
level and grid frequency may vary from country to country. AC charging uses an onboard charger
to convert AC power from the conventional AC grid to direct current or DC power to charge the
traction battery. Cars have a standardised vehicle inlet, and a charging cable is used for connecting the
vehicle connector to the infrastructure socket of the AC charging station. The onboard charger needs
to be light (typically less than 5 kg) and compact due to the limitation of allowable payload and space
in the EV and the PHEV. The drawback of this charger is the limitation of the power output because
of size and weight restrictions.

AC Charger Operations

When the charging station and the EV are first connected, the charge controller in the station
communicates with the EV. Information regarding the connectivity, fault condition and current limits
are exchanged between the charger and the EV.

     · When the AC power is provided to the EV, the onboard charger has a rectifier that converts
         the AC power to DC power. Then, the power control unit appropriately adjusts the voltage

90 SHAMS TANVIR
         and current of a DC/DC converter to control the charging power delivered to the battery.
     · The power control unit, in turn, gets inputs from the Battery Management System or the BMS

         for controlling the battery charging.
     · Apart from this, there is a protection circuit inside the onboard charger. The BMS triggers the

         protection circuits if the battery operating limits are exceeded, isolating the battery if needed.

Figure 7.5: AC Charging Operations by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

AC CHARGING -TYPES
The EV industry has not agreed on one specific AC connector, so depending on the car brand and
country, the connector varies in shape, size and pin configuration. One of the main reasons is the
difference in AC voltage and frequency. Generally, an AC connector has two or more larger pins to
transmit power, and some smaller pins for communication. Four types of AC connectors are used
worldwide, namely:

     · The Type 1 connector, which is mostly used in USA & Japan.
     · The Type 2 connector, which is mostly used in Europe, including those of Tesla cars.
     · The Type 3 connector, used in Europe but is being increasingly phased out by Type 2

         connectors.
     · The proprietary connector used by Tesla for its cars in the USA.
     · China has its own standard for AC charging, which is similar to Type 2 connectors.
DC CHARGING OF EVS
Range anxiety is the fear that the electric vehicle does not have enough capacity to travel anywhere
that is far away. This means no EV road trips, no leisurely drives through the mountains, potentially
even no cross-city travel. Yes, EV range is continuing to grow, but it is nowhere near the range of its
gas-powered equivalent and the charging times are still relatively longer.
   Mitigating this issue is DC fast-charging. They can charge many electric cars to 80-percent capacity
in around 30 minutes, though charging rate slows down significantly after that to avoid damaging the
battery pack. The tradeoff is that DC fast-charging stations are more expensive to install and operate.
Large scale adoption of electric cars is possible with higher charging powers and more fast-charging

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 91
stations. This allows the car makers to use smaller battery packs, thus reducing the cost of an EV's
most expensive component. Hence, could be a possible solution for the range anxiety.

   We know that fast charging is quite attractive in the sense of high power charging with short
charging times. But how does a DC fast charger work? What are the different DC charging systems
around the world? Gautham Ram Chandra Mouli will be answering these question for you in this
lecture. Find out now!

                     One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them
                     online here: https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=311#oembed-3

THE NEED FOR CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE

The usage of electric vehicles (EVs) has steadily increased over the past decade (Burnham et al., 2017)
with the total number of EVs on the road in the United States (US) surpassing 1.3 million as of
October 2019 (Edison Electric Institute, 2019). Despite the recent growth in the EV market, EVs still
represent a small proportion of light-duty vehicles in the US and across the world, with conventional
gasoline-powered vehicles (GVs) representing the largest proportion. Given EVs (i) produce zero
tailpipe emissions while GVs produce a variety and high-volume of harmful local pollutant emissions
and (ii) EVs can be powered by renewable energy sources with minimal greenhouse gas emissions
while GVs can only utilize greenhouse gas emitting fuel, the potential social and environmental
benefits of converting the light-duty vehicle fleet from predominantly GVs to predominantly EVs are
significant.

   One of the main factors limiting the growth of EVs is the limited public and commercial EV
charging infrastructure throughout the US and the world. A specific shortcoming of existing EV
charging infrastructure is the lack of `fast' chargers, also known as Level 3 chargers. CHAdeMO
(2020) suggests a strong positive correlation between the number of fast chargers installed in cities
in Japan and the number of EVs sold in those cities, indicating an important connection between EV
growth and fast-charging infrastructure. Level 3 chargers are 8 to 12 times more efficient than Level
2 `slow' chargers. While Level 1 and Level 2 chargers are often used for at-home or at-destination
(e.g., the workplace or shopping center) charging, Level 3 fast-charging enables en-route (or mid-
trip) charging. Moreover, Level 3 charging is preferable for quick charging, long distance travel, and
emergency charging, where charging time is a critical concern (Jabeen et al., 2013). Fast-charging
services are also beneficial for households living in high-density residential buildings where home
charging may not be available. The dearth of fast-charging facilities in the US is compounded by the
shorter driving distances and longer recharging times of EVs compared to. In fact, `range anxiety'
from shorter driving distances between charges as well as the (in)ability to recharge batteries during
travel are major obstacles for EVs in the consumer market (Egbue and Long, 2012). In 2019, the total
number of EV charging stations in the US reached around 28,400 with nearly 94,000 outlets (U.S.
Department of Energy, 2020). The state of California, which is the largest EV market in the US, has
more than 6900 stations and more than 29,500 outlets (U.S. Department of Energy, 2020). However,
only 14.6% of all charging stations in the US provide Level 3 fast-charging service and the current

92 SHAMS TANVIR
number of Level 3 fast-charging stations cannot fulfill the demand for fast charging throughout most
of the country (U. S. Department of Energy, 2020).

   Potential problems associated with this supply-demand imbalance include long waiting times at
fastcharging stations and/or long detour distances to find an EV fast-charging station. Clearly, there is
a significant need to invest in and expand EV fast-charging infrastructure capacity in order to support
the growth of the EV market. This need is well known by both governmental agencies looking to
support EVs and car manufacturers who are selling EVs. In addition to strategic planning, there is also
a need to manage the EV fast-charging capacity efficiently at individual stations and across a region
of fast-charging stations. Given the expected rapid growth rate of EVs over the next decade or two,
there are likely to be imbalances between the supply of fast-chargers and the demand for fast charging,
even as public sector and private companies work to expand fast-charging capacity. Managing supply
and demand at the individual station level and across a regional system of fastcharging stations is
important for minimizing user wait times at fast-charging stations and utilizing existing capacity
effectively at fast-charging stations. Moreover, when demand outpaces supply in an area, demand-
responsive pricing-based management strategies can generate revenue to support the funding and
financing of additional fast-charging capacity to balance supply with demand in the long run.

Electric vehicles vs. Gasoline vehicles

GVs dominate the personal vehicle market and are a relevant reference point to compare with the
service quality offered by EVs. There are several key differences between EVs and GVs in terms of
recharging and refueling that have implications for the planning and management of EV fast-charging
infrastructure. First, in one important way, recharging an EV is more flexible than refueling a GV.
Unlike GVs that are almost exclusively refueled at dedicated gasoline refueling stations, an EV can be
recharged in at least three different types of places--at a dedicated EV recharging station, in a general
parking lot with installed chargers (e.g., at workplaces, shopping centers, etc.), or at the EV owner's
house. Home-installed chargers are typically Level 1 or Level 2 chargers while Level 3 chargers are
only available at dedicated charging stations because of power supply and safety concerns. Home-
and workplace-installed `slow' chargers are mainly used for destination charging, while public fast-
chargers aim to facilitate en-route charging, particularly for long-distance trips. Second, the average
range of an EV when fully charged is typically shorter than that of a similar GV. Although the average
travel range of EVs has steadily increased in recent years, range-anxiety is still a concern for current
and potential EV owners. The average range for an EV sedan is around 200 miles, which is only
one-half to two-thirds the range of a typical GV sedan. This range issue has implications in terms
of the frequency with which EV owners need to recharge and also the spatial distribution of EV
fast-charging stations needed to support (long-distance) EV travel. Properly sizing and siting fast-
charging stations is mainly a planning level challenge; however, these stations also need to be managed
efficiently, particularly when demand outpaces supply (in certain areas, during certain times of the
day). Third, and most importantly from a real-time management perspective, the recharging time of
an EV is considerably longer than the refueling time of a GV. Even with a 50 kW Level 3 fast charger,
to recharge an EV from empty to 80% capacity takes thirty minutes to an hour. Hence, if an EV does
require the use of an EV fast-charging facility, the vehicle may occupy a charger at the station for
a significantly longer period of time than a GV does at a gasoline station. Moreover, if an EV user
goes to a recharging station with a queue, he/she may have to wait an extended period of time to
even begin recharging. When a limited number of EV fast-charging stations are constructed along

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 93
a high-volume corridor, a spike in local demand may create queues at one or more EV recharging
stations, thereby inconveniencing EV users who need to recharge but do not have many alternative
fast-charging stations nearby.

EV charging technology

The types of chargers usually found in public EV charging stations in North America are the J1772,
the CCS (Combined Charging System), the CHAdeMO (abbreviation of "Charge de Move"), and
the Tesla Supercharger. The first one is a Level 2 charger, while the other three include Level 3
Direct Current Fast Charging (DCFC) chargers (they are also capable of lower level charging).
Table 1 summarizes EV charger types from Level 1 to Level 4. As mentioned previously, Level 3
chargers are 8 to 12 times more efficient than Level 2 chargers. Level 4 charging--also called Extreme
Fast Charging (XFC)--is not currently available. Level 4 chargers could further improve charging
efficiency and narrow the current refueling/recharging time difference between EVs and GVs.

   Table 7.2 shows that compared with Level 2 chargers, Level 3 and 4 chargers have considerably
more output power and therefore require higher voltage. The large loads from fast-charging stations
will ultimately become a burden for electric grids and may cause system failures in the worst-
case scenario. Studies have been done on both supply and demand sides of EV charging to avoid
the situation. On the supply side, researchers propose methods of upgrading infrastructure and
integrating fast-charging stations into the grid (Aggeler et al., 2010; Dharmakeerthi, Mithulananthan,
& Saha, 2012; Guo, Deride, & Fan, 2016; Burnham et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017; Iyer et al., 2018). On
the demand side, researchers use multiple approaches to model demand and propose control schemes
(e.g. pricing) to balance the spatial and temporal demand for charging (Cao et al., 2012; Chen & Frank,
2001; Flath et al., 2014).

Table 7.2: Summary of Common Level 1 to Level 4 Charging Facilities in North America is licensed under CC BY 4.0

CHARGING STATION LOCATION

EV charging demand and station choice behavior

Understanding and effectively capturing spatial-temporal demand patterns and EV user behavior is
a crucial component for developing models to support the real-time management of a system of EV
fast-charging stations. The relevant behavioral attributes in much of the EV station choice literature
include, charging cost (Jabeen et al., 2013; Wen, MacKenzie and Keith, 2016; Daina, Sivakumar and
Polak, 2017; Ge, MacKenzie and Keith, 2018), distance or detour distance to charging stations (Daina,
Polak and Sivakumar, 2015; Sun, Yamamoto and Morikawa, 2016; Yang et al., 2016), as well as
EV state of charge (SOC) and/or charging time (Sun, Yamamoto and Morikawa, 2015; Yang et al.,

94 SHAMS TANVIR
2016; Xu et al., 2017; Pan, Yao and MacKenzie, 2019). The model in the current study considers the
following factors: charging price at each EV fast-charging station, detour distance for an EV driver to
visit each station, and expected wait time at each station.

   The behavioral modeling approaches in the literature include the multinomial logit (MNL) (Jabeen
et al., 2013; Daina et al., 2017), the mixed logit (Sun, Yamamoto and Morikawa, 2015, 2016; Xu et
al., 2017) and the nested logit (Yang et al., 2016), which are all discrete choice modeling approaches.
Other modeling approaches for charging behavior include those by Kang & Recker (2009) who use
an activity-based model and by Hu, Dong, & Lin (2019) who model choices based on cumulative
prospect theory. In Jabeen et al. (2013), the charging choice is whether to charge at home, at work,
or at public stations. The three alternatives are independent, as such the study employs the MNL
model. The mixed logit model is appropriate when there is unobserved heterogeneity among users,
differences in tastes, and/or when using panel data (Sun, Yamamoto and Morikawa, 2015). In Yang
et al. (2016), the choice of charging is integrated with routing and the authors employ a nested logit
model for route and charging choices. See Train (2009) for an overview of discrete choice models and
their applications.

Management and pricing of EV Fast-charging stations

This section reviews literature associated with managing EV charging stations via using different
pricing strategies. One important application of pricing schemes is to manage and balance EV
charging demand. These management schemes include Price Based (PB) and Demand Response (DR)
Programs in electricity markets (Albadi and El-Saadany, 2008).

   PB management programs are usually based on Time-of-Use (TOU) pricing or real-time pricing
(RTP). TOU pricing involves charging users separate prices for peak and off-peak hours in order to
shift loads from peak to non-peak periods. TOU prices are usually provided to users in advance;
therefore, they cannot be used to respond to within-period demand stochasticity. TOU related studies
include Cao et al., (2012) and Bayram et al. (2015).

   RTP involves dynamic price changes based on current demand levels. Chen & Frank (2001) study
general service price adjustments based on the state of queues. Their study assumes that firms
are capable of changing prices and that customers adjust behaviors based on queue states. Their
results indicate that firms can increase surpluses while social welfare increases, under homogeneous
customer behavior. Chen et al. (2017a) design an RTP mechanism based on an automatic DR strategy
for Photovoltaic-assisted charging stations. Luo, Huang and Gupta (2018) consider a case for
stochastic dynamic pricing where renewable resources and energy storage are integrated to charging
suppliers.

   The management approach in this paper involves RTP under which fast-charging station prices are
dynamically adjusted based on current demand levels, i.e. DDRPA schemes. It extends the setting in
Chen & Frank (2001) to a larger area with multiple EV fastcharging stations managed by the same
entity. This paper describes schemes that enable heterogeneous pricing across stations based on the
current state of each individual station, which is unlike the spatial or area pricing schemes used in
earlier literature.

   It is worth noting that several studies in the literature model the dynamic interplay between the
electric grid power supply and EV charging station energy acquisition for management purposes
(Dharmakeerthi, Mithulananthan and Saha, 2012, 2014; Sbordone et al., 2015; Khan, Ahmad and
Alam, 2019). Future research may combine the user-and-EV station dynamic models and

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 95
management strategies in the current paper, with the EV station-and-power grid dynamic models and
management strategies in the literature.
SMART CHARGING
The unique aspect of EV charging is that the charging process can be controlled in time. For example,
if an EV that needs 20kWh is connected for 8h to a 10kW charger, then upto 80 kWh can be delivered.
But since only 20 kWh is needed, the charging can be done either at a lower power, moved in time
to occur for any 2 hours within the 8 hours or done in parts. This flexibility in EV charging can be
used for various applications such as increase the use of renewables or lower the charging costs. In
the future, electric vehicles can even operate as a backup for the grid on a relatively large scale. In
case of a short duration failure, EVs can be connected to the grid, to our homes or to loads and can
be controlled to provide emergency power via Vehicle to Grid (V2G) charging. Pavol Bauer will teach
you this concept in his lecture below.

                     One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them
                     online here: https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=311#oembed-4

ICT ASPECTS OF ELECTRIC CHARGING
Charging electric cars is part of an evolving ecosystem with many different components and
stakeholders that must be able to exchange information automatically. For example, charging systems
today require communication between the EV user, his/her charging card, payment portal, charge
point operator to do a simple AC charging of an EV in the public terrain. With the advent of smart
charging, this ecosystem is expanded even further to include players like the distribution system
operator, the transmission system operator and the balance responsible party. In this video, Auke
Hoekstra will explain how you can use a range of ICT protocols to do just that.

                     One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them
                     online here: https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=311#oembed-5

Case study: ABB EV charging infrastructure

Now that we have learnt about all the EV charging concepts, let us now look at how it is done
in the real world. For this, we will have a case study with ABB EV Charging Infrastructure
(http://new.abb.com/ev-charging) and meet with Crijn Bouwman, Vice President of Product
Management.

96 SHAMS TANVIR
   ABB specializes in DC fast chargers ranging from 50kW to 150kW (Chademo, Combo, GB/T) with
modular chargers going upto 400kW. They also offer AC charging solutions for electric cars and
overnight and opportunity chargers for busses and trucks.

                     One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them
                     online here: https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=311#oembed-6

                                                     Key Takeaways

          · There are various charging methods for EVs. The three common ways are conductive charging,
              inductive charging and battery swap.

          · Conductive charging is the most common charging method right now and it has two categories:
              AC and DC charging. The second method is inductive charging and consists of two types: static
              and dynamic charging.

          · There are several benefits of smart charging and it has huge potential: EV charging can be
              controlled based on renewable generation, energy prices, grid loading and how the EV can be used
              as a storage and as an emergency power supply.

          · Climate change in turn affect how a transportation system is planned, designed, and operated in
              the future.

                                                         Self-Test

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                          https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=311#h5p-7

                                                  GLOSSARY: KEY TERMS
CCS (Combined Charging System): The Combined Charging System (CCS) is a standard for
charging electric vehicles. It can use Combo 1 (CCS1) or Combo 2 (CCS2) connectors to provide
power at up to 350 kilowatts (kW) (max 500 amps).

   Direct Current Fast Charging (DCFC): DC fast chargers convert AC power to DC within the
charging station and deliver DC power directly to the battery.

                                                                                                                                                                      SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 97
   Extreme Fast Charging (XFC): XFC is defined as the ability to replace at least 80% of the vehicle
battery capacity in 15 min or less, or to replenish range at a rate of 20 miles per minute of charge.

   Range Anxiety: Range anxiety, a term commonly associated with electric vehicles (EVs), refers to
the apprehension and worry experienced by EV owners about the adequacy of their vehicle's battery
charge to complete a journey or the availability of charging stations along the way.

   Time-of-Use (TOU): Time-Of-Use (TOU) pricing is a variable rate structure that charges for
energy depending on the time of day and the season the energy is used. With TOU rates, your bill will
be determined by both when you use electricity and how much you use.

   Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G): V2G, technology is smart charging tech that allows car batteries to give
back to the power grid.

                                                           MEDIA ATTRIBUTIONS

             Figures

                · Figure 7.1: Conductive Charging- AC by Electric Cars: Technology Electric Cars:
                    Technology is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                · Figure 7.2: Conductive Charging- DC by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC
                    BY-NC-SA 4.0

                · Figure 7.3: Inductive Charging- Static by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC
                    BY-NC-SA 4.0

                · Figure 7.4: Inductive Charging- Dynamic by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed
                    under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                · Figure 7.5: AC Charging Operations by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC
                    BY-NC-SA 4.0

             Tables

                · Table 7.1 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
                · Table 7.2: Summary of Common Level 1 to Level 4 Charging Facilities in North America

                    is licensed under CC BY 4.0

             Videos

                · Video 1: Introduction to Charging Methods of EVs is available for free via
                    http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
                    https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

                · Video 2: AC Charging of EVs is available for free via http://www.online-
                    learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
                    https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

                · Video 3: DC Charging of EVs is available for free via http://www.online-
                    learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
                    https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

98 SHAMS TANVIR
          · Video 4: Smart Charging and V2G is available for free via http://www.online-
             learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
             https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

          · Video 5: Charging of Electric Vehicles ICT Aspects of Electric Charging is available for
             free via http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA
             license: https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

          · Video 6: Case Study ABB is available for free via http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl
             © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license: https://creativecommons.org/
             licences/...

                                                    REFERENCES
· Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M.,

   Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed by the following creative commons license: CC
   BY-NC-SA 4.0

                                                   ATTRIBUTIONS
· Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M.,

   Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
· Dynamic modeling and real-time management of a system of EV fast-charging stations by

   Yang, D., Sarma, N., Hyland, M., & Jayakrishnan, R is licensed under CC BY 4.0 Deed
· Electric Cars: Technology by TU Delft OpenCourseWare is licensed under a Creative

   Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

                                                                                                                                                              SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 99
CHAPTER 8: SHARED MOBILITY AND AUTOMATION

CHAPTER OVERVIEW
In this chapter, we discuss the potential of vehicle sharing and automation to minimize the need for
additional vehicles on the road and eventually reduce vehicle miles traveled (VMT). However, the
focus of this chapter is to look at the unintended consequences of these technologies; specifically, the
`rebound effect' or the `induced demand'. Additionally, we will elucidate on the inefficient operation,
inequitable distribution, and inadequate infrastructure related to these technologies.

Chapter Topics

    1. Shared Mobility
    2. Automation in Transportation
    3. Induced Demand from Shared Automated Transportation
    4. VMT Reduction Methods
    5. Transportation Efficiency Improvement
    6. Effect of Vehicle Automation

                                                 Learning Objectives

      At the end of the chapter, the reader should be able to do the following:
          · Design curb space for shared automated fleets.
          · Develop a framework to analyze sustainability of any emerging transportation technology based
              on first principles.
          · Apply the concept of induced demand to calculate the short-term activity change and the long-
              term behavioral changes stemmed from adoption of emerging transportation technologies.

SHARED MOBILITY
The revolution of shared mobility started with the concept of On-Demand Mobility Services. On-
demand mobility services involves arranging for travel on-demand. Usually, the travelers request
their "rides" on automobile or paratransit using a smartphone app. It is to be noted that on-demand
mobility existed before smartphones and the smartphone-based app, and in many parts of the US and
the world, especially rural areas, it still operates without it. The service provider typically manages
a fleet of vehicles and optimizes the vehicles' locations and route assignments based on the dynamic

100 SHAMS TANVIR
demand of subscribers. Greenblatt and Shaheen (2017) classified on-demand mobility services in four
major categories - transport network companies (TNCs), carsharing, ridesharing, and e-hailing.

   TNCs such as Uber and Lyft match drivers who subscribe to their platform with trip requests from
individuals. Most of the trip requests are from single travelers; therefore, the majority of the TNC
trips are not shared rides. For example, according to a recent study in Boston the average occupancy
rate for TNC trips is 1.5, including the driver. Average occupancy for TNC trips can have a value
less than 2 since there are many empty trips without passengers made in shared mobility systems.To
promote ridesharing, major TNCs offer shared ride service options such as UberPOOL and Lyft Line
in major cities. However, only a small fraction of users who have access to these shared ride options
request them, and even a smaller fraction of those trip requests are actually matched as shared rides.

   Carsharing is subscription-based mobility where subscribers pay a short-term fee. Zipcar is an
example of typical carsharing services. On the other hand, the traditional carpooling and vanpooling
fall under the ridesharing category. Ridesharing through microtransit services such as Via, Chariot,
and Flex is considered a potential mobility solution in highly dispersed urban areas. E-hailing services
matches traditional for-hire taxis to the nearest passengers using apps similar to TNCs. As in the case
of TNCs, these on-demand mobility services only reduce the total number of trips when shared rides
happen.

   Although on-demand mobility services include other modes such as bicycle and scooter, we have
purposefully limited the discussion in this chapter to exclude those modes. Additionally, paratransit
services are on-demand as well, as are airport shuttles, and shared ride services common in the Global
South. We assume that mobility decisions taken by the users of those modes will not significantly
impact vehicle emissions (e.g., through mode shift). In addition, TNCs will be a focal point of our
discussion regarding the impacts of on-demand mobility services because the current market share of
all the other categories combined is inappreciable compared to that of TNCs.

AUTOMATION IN TRANSPORATION

The US personal mobility market is valued at around one trillion dollars (Walker and Johnson, 2016).
In recent years, the promises of sensing, communication, and artificial intelligence technologies have
attracted billions of dollars in investments to develop connected and automated vehicles. These
investments were predominantly made by `Silicon Valley' companies, and since almost all the
traditional automotive manufacturers have followed suit.

   The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defines five levels of driving automation in its J3016
taxonomy (SAE, 2016). The levels increase from 0 to 5 with a higher level representing lesser
intervention and attention from the human driver. Level 3 to level 5 automation, according to SAE,
represents automated driving features such as traffic jam chauffeur, local driverless taxi, and steering
wheel-free driving.

   Connectivity allows for the exchange of information between vehicle and infrastructure.
Information exchange among vehicles, termed as vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication has
enabled several applications in the safety, mobility, and environmental domains. Examples of such
applications are forward collision warning (safety), advanced traveler information (mobility), and
eco-driving (environment). Vehicle to infrastructure (V2I) communication has enabled additional
applications such as red-light violation warning (safety), transit signal priority (mobility), and eco-
approach and departure (environment) . The US National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
(NHTSA) proposed inclusion of V2V connectivity in all new-light duty vehicles and trucks in 2016.

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 101
INDUCED DEMAND FROM SHARED AUTOMATED TRANSPORTATION

On-demand mobility services, especially those offered by TNCs, operate on a premise that people
will not own vehicles, and rather use these services to meet their travel needs. In the case of TNCs,
users often spend time by curbside waiting for the vehicles to pick them up. This could translate
to an increase in the amount of time spent in the microenvironment with a higher level of traffic-
related air pollution as compared to using personal vehicles. The extent of the increase in exposure to
traffic emissions will depend on a number of factors such as the frequency of service use, the pick-up
locations, and the level of traffic emissions at those locations. The literature on this increased level of
exposure for TNC users is still evolving as the service models continue to develop.

   Current TNC operation is primarily based on existing vehicle and fuel technologies and is expected
to remain the same in the near future. However, TNCs are likely to be early adopters of fuel-efficient
vehicle and alternative fuel technologies as fuel cost accounts for a significant portion of their total
operation costs. Fleet vehicles are conducive towards electric technologies because mileage radius
is limited, trip length is limited, and they need to come back to the same place (or can access fixed
hubs enroute), where the owner can install a charging station. Hu et al. (2018) studied New York city
taxi trips and found that 94% of TNC shifts needed to serve those trips are shorter than 200 miles.
Considering the range of current electric vehicles in the market, TNC drivers can practically switch
to electric vehicles.

   The research on the vehicle miles traveled (VMT) and subsequent emissions reduction potential
is still evolving. Some localities and states like California are beginning to require TNCs to report
more data to regulators. Additionally, it is not clear how the operational model for TNC would evolve
in a post-COVID-19 pandemic scenario as the private venture capitalists backing the TNC sector
focus more on the profitability of their operations. Alonso-Mora et al. (2017) compared 14,000 New
York city taxi trips with a hypothetical ride-sharing operation. They found that 98% of the total taxi
trips could be replaced by 3,000 ride-share vehicles with capacity of 4 passengers per vehicle or 2,000
vehicles with 10 passengers per vehicle. Bischoff and Maciejewski (2016) simulated trips from 1.1
million personal vehicles in the city of Berlin, Germany, and found that a fleet of 100,000 shared
autonomous vehicles would be able to serve those trips sufficiently. In these simulation studies, no
barriers to adoption of ride sharing were assumed and ,therefore, they represent an ideal scenario.

   Evidence of the real-world impacts of TNCs, especially on VMT and congestion, has begun to
emerge recently. In the short term, TNCs can incur a significant amount of "deadhead" miles, which
are the miles where the driver is driving without any passenger, such as from the drop-off location
of one trip to the pick-up location of the next trip (Wenzel et al. 2019). A recent paper (Komanduri
et al. 2018) using RideAustin data estimated that 37% of all the miles are due to deadheading. It was
estimated to be around 20% in San Francisco (Castiglione et al, 2018) and about 50% in New York City
(Schaller, 2018). Castillo et al. (2018) presented a condition of matching failure by TNCs where there
are fewer number of available vehicles nearby than there are trip requests. Such failure may contribute
to a substantially increased amount of deadhead miles. The number of these empty passenger trips
can be reduced significantly by imposing an adaptive matching radii within which the driver supply
and trip demand matching must occur (Xu et al., 2019).

   In longer term, TNCs may complement public transit by providing first and last mile services, or
decrease transit ridership by competing. Hall et al. (2018) found that transit ridership decreased by
5.9% in smaller cities but increased by 0.8% in larger cities due to the entry of Uber. Also, small transit
agencies in big cities received the most complementing effect from Uber. Clewlow and Mishra (2017)

102 SHAMS TANVIR
surveyed more than 4,000 residents in 7 large cities in the US and found that 15% of public transit,
17% walk, and 7% bike trips were replaced by TNC trips, and that induced trips--trips which did not
have happened if TNC service was not there--consisted of 22% of the total trips. A similar study by
Henao and Marshall (2018) conducted in Denver, Colorado, found that public transit trips replaced
by TNCs and induced TNC trips were 22% and 12%, respectively.

   Evidence to date has pointed in the direction that TNCs, in the way they are operated and used
currently, increase VMT, which has also resulted in increased traffic congestion in some areas. As a
result, traffic-related emissions will likely also increase. However, it should be noted that any increase
in VMT caused by TNCs will not increase tailpipe emissions if those miles are zero-emission miles.
And if TNCs' zero-emission miles can displace some of the personal vehicles' gasoline miles, there can
be a net reduction in total traffic emissions. For example, Bauer et al. (2018) showed that a centrally
managed shared autonomous electric taxi fleet in Manhattan Island of New York City would yield
58% reduction in energy consumption and 73% reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions as
compared to an autonomous fleet of conventional gasoline vehicles. Note that the New York power
grid is fueled by higher proportion of clean fuel source such as hydroelectric, solar, and nuclear.
However, localities with higher level of reliance on fossil fuels will not achieve such high levels of
GHG reduction as reported by Bauer et al. (2018).

   In terms of equity point of view, there is a large variation in the usage of TNCs among population
in different income groups. According to the 2017 National Household Travel Survey (NHTS) in
9 major metropolitan areas, people with annual income more than $200,000 made 44 TNC trips
per year, whereas people with annual income less than $15,000 made only 6 TNC trips. TNCs cost
significantly more than taking public transit, so it is not surprising they are serving a wealthier
clientele. TNCs also require a smart phone and bank account to use, which will limit use for some
riders. Thus, the increase in traffic emissions generated by TNCs are contributed more by high-
income population. It is unclear, however, how the air quality and health impacts of those increased
emissions are distributed in the environmental justice context.

   While the real-world testing and demonstration of connected and automated vehicles (CAVs)
to date have shown potential for emissions reduction in the near term, primarily as a result of
improved vehicle and traffic operational efficiency, the long-term impacts of these technologies on
traffic emissions are unclear as there is no real-world evidence at this time. One speculative long-
term impact is that the expanded and inexpensive mobility provided by CAVs may cause increased
trip frequency and, consequently, higher VMT. The price competitiveness nature of an automated
operation of TNCs may lead to the substitution of TNC trips for public transit trips. Middle to
lower-income riders find these automated TNCs or robo-taxis to be competitive with public transit.
However, the mode shift depends on the level of price reduction. For low-ridership local transit
routes, the impact may not reduce ridership greatly, but for medium to high-ridership routes, this
competition could lead to significantly more VMT if left unregulated. Regulation of VMT may involve
adding taxes or fees for using a CAV, and/or congestion pricing or cordon pricing on highways.
Wadud et al. (2016) estimated VMT increase of 4% -60% due to the reduced cost of drivers' time.
Meyer et al. (2017) suggested that autonomous vehicles could increase accessibility in suburban areas
by 10% to 14%. Such increase in accessibility may translate to urban sprawl and result in increased trip
length. These uncertain yet potentially significant impacts of CAVs may result in an overall increase
in emissions in the long run.

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 103
VMT REDUCTION METHODS

As described earlier, total VMT in the US continues to grow at a steady pace. VMT was flat from 2008
to 2012, primarily because of the economic recession, but has been increasing since then.

   In terms of potentially reducing VMT, we can refer back to a variety of mobility measures outlined
in previous chapters. In general, these include the following:

     · Use pricing mechanisms to encourage users to reduce the number and distance of their trips
         and increase the number of passengers per vehicle. Several regions across the US are already
         increasing the number of toll and commuter lanes on their roadway networks, while cities
         such as Singapore, London, and Stockholm have implemented cordon pricing schemes that
         charge drivers to enter the city center.

     · Provide incentives for using alternative modes such as transit and biking, as well as shifting
         work locations and schedules, for instance by telecommuting.

     · Reduce urban sprawl, increase land use densities, and improve the mix of jobs and housing.

TRANSPORTATION EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENT

Another important strategy for reducing emissions from transportation is to improve the efficiency
of transportation system operations. As described above, today's transportation systems are often
congested, which wastes time, money, and fuel. This wasted fuel translates to increased pollutant
and GHG emissions. The 2023 Urban Mobility Report published by the Texas A&M Transportation
Institute found that traffic congestion caused 3.3 billion gallons of wasted fuel on the US roads in
2022. This wasted fuel accounts for more than 2% of total gasoline usage in the country. Over the
last several decades, a number of intelligent transportation system ( ITS) techniques are increasingly
utilized that are squarely aimed at reducing these environmental impacts. ITS techniques and
applications target three general areas: (1) congestion mitigation (for example, advanced signal
control, predictive ramp metering, incident management), whereby congestion is reduced and speeds
increased; (2) better management of speeds for different roadway types, using techniques such as
variable speed limits and intelligent speed adaptation; and (3) smoothing of traffic by using techniques
such as cooperative adaptive cruise control and speed harmonization. These "eco-friendly"
intelligent transportation system technologies are typically categorized into three areas: vehicle
systems, traffic management systems, and travel information systems.

Vehicle Systems Improvement

Vehicle systems represent vehicle features and functions that allow a vehicle to "see," respond to,
and communicate with its surroundings. Sensors such as on-board radar and computer vision
technologies enable a vehicle to monitor the distance to the vehicle in front and to detect when
a vehicle is leaving a lane, and they support adaptive cruise control systems that allow a driver
to select a desired speed and set a following distance. In addition, communication devices (for
example, dedicated short-range communications, cellular) will likely be deployed to enable vehicle-
to-vehicle, vehicle-to-infrastructure, and infrastructureto- vehicle applications that are primarily
focused on improving safety. It is important to point out that improved anticollision systems may
have a significant indirect energy and emissions savings: fewer crashes result in less congestion,
allowing for higher average traffic speeds with less stop and go. In addition to safety applications,

104 SHAMS TANVIR
a variety of mobility and environmental applications have also emerged, as illustrated in Table 8.1.
These applications take advantage of connected vehicle technology such as cooperative adaptive
cruise control where vehicles communicate with each other to cooperatively manage following
distance, braking, accelerating, and more. These technologies are allowing vehicles to become
increasingly automated, with the possibility of full vehicle automation coming in the next decade.

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 105
106 SHAMS TANVIR
Table 8.1: Intelligent transportation system applications utilizing connected and automated vehicle technology from "Bending the Curve:
Climate Change Solutions" by Ramanathan et al. is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

Traffic Management Systems Improvement

Traffic management systems have become more sophisticated with the advent of better sensor
technology, more reliable communication channels, and advanced information processing.
Transportation managers are better equipped to estimate traffic conditions, detect and remove traffic
incidents, and craft better travel demand management strategies (that is, manage the number of
vehicles on a congested roadway). The overarching goal of traffic management is to take full
advantage of the existing roadway capacity, thus keeping traffic flowing smoothly at moderate speeds.
In doing so, it will have a large impact on energy consumption and GHG emissions related to
traffic. In addition, traffic management system strategies go even further by reducing the number of
vehicles and VMT in the transportation network without compromising overall travel needs, thereby
reducing the total contributions of energy consumption and emissions from the transportation
sector.

Travel Information Systems Improvement

Travel information systems provide information to drivers, such as route guidance systems,
geolocation systems, and electronic payment systems. All of these systems add convenience to the
traveler while reducing energy consumption and emissions. For example, a route guidance system
will cut back on unnecessary travel that may occur when a driver gets lost or chooses a long, out-of-
the-way path. En route driver information can reduce energy and emissions associated with driving
around in search of a specific location or parking. Electronic payment systems also eliminate the
need for a driver to decelerate the vehicle, idle while a manual transaction takes place, and then
accelerate the vehicle back to a desired speed. If this payment can occur without slowing down, energy
consumption and emissions are greatly reduced.

   In general, environmentally friendly ITS applications (that is, specific ITS applications that reduce
energy and emissions) have slowly been emerging over the last decade, as have safety and mobility
programs mentioned in Table 8.1. Pioneering research programs in the US, the European Union,
and other regions have made significant progress in developing and testing these ITS applications
and technologies with a focus on environmental benefits. From these research programs, it is clear
that specific environmental benefits can be maximized when different ITS applications are "tuned"
so that emissions and energy consumption are reduced. The actual energy and emissions savings
vary, but they are typically on the order of 5% to 20%. It is important to point out that there is not a
single ITS technology solution that has demonstrated a large reduction in energy consumption and
emissions. But since most of these applications are additive, greater benefits may be achieved when a
combination of environmentally friendly ITS programs is put into place.

EFFECT OF VEHICLE AUTOMATION

In recent years, interest in vehicle automation has soared. Some reports have predicted that vehicles
could be fully automated (that is, not requiring a driver) by as early as 2025, though this is highly
unlikely other than in tightly bounded areas with easy driving conditions. As an extension of ITS,
vehicle automation could have both positive and negative effects on society (Figure 8.1). The bounds
on the image are created by different automation scenarios ran by the authors of the paper. Vehicle

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 107
automation could lead to reduced emissions, due to congestion reduction (for example, crash
avoidance, platooning), traffic smoothing (for example, cooperative adaptive cruise control), and
better speed management (for example, speed harmonization). Indeed, eco-driving behaviors could
be directly programmed into the automated vehicle operation. On the other hand, vehicle automation
could potentially increase emissions by increasing vehicle travel. People might use their automated
vehicles for additional purposes or choose a more distant place to live, since the time cost of travel
would be reduced. Automated vehicles could be used by a wider range of users, including youth
and elderly. "Drop-off" errands might increase, resulting in new empty vehicle relocation trips, such
as returning home without any passengers. Some early conclusions regarding automated vehicles
include the following:

     · Partial and full automation can reduce energy use and emissions, but only if incentives exist to
         encourage pooled use of vehicles.

     · Automated vehicles that communicate and coordinate with other vehicles and the
         infrastructure will likely have greater improvements in safety, mobility, and the environment
         compared with autonomous vehicles without those capabilities.

     · Automated vehicles have the strong potential to induce travel demand, unless incentives exist
         for pooled use of the vehicles.

108 SHAMS TANVIR
Figure 8.1: Potential energy/emissions impacts of automated technology. The upper-bound case is shown in the top panel, and the
lower-bound case in the lower panel. "Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions" by Ramanathan et al. is under the following Creative
Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                                                     Key Takeaways

          · There are generally four different ways to mitigate transportation emissions: through vehicle
              technology, low-carbon fuels, VMT management, and intelligent transportation systems, including
              the use of connected and automated vehicles.

          · VMT can be reduced by increasing the use of pooled travel (for example, buses, transit, shared

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 109
              mobility that is pooled).
          · Other VMT reduction methods may include adopting incentives and disincentives to reflect full

              social costs of travel and, eventually, transitioning from individual vehicle ownership to use of
              mobility services that are pooled.
          · Vehicle automation is likely to be deployed in the near future and should be managed so as to
              achieve environmental sustainability.

                                                         Self-Test

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                          https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=350#h5p-8

                                                  GLOSSARY: KEY TERMS
Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control (CACC): an extension to the adaptive cruise control (ACC)
concept using Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) communication. Adaptive cruise control (ACC) is a type
of advanced driver-assistance system for road vehicles that automatically adjusts the vehicle speed to
maintain a safe distance from vehicles ahead.

   Intelligent Transportation System ( ITS): an advanced application which aims to provide
innovative services relating to different modes of transport and traffic management and enable users
to be better informed and make safer, more coordinated, and `smarter' use of transport networks.

   On-Demand Mobility Services: On-demand mobility services are transport services that are
available at any time that a person wants to use them, i.e., on demand.

   Paratransit: an alternative mode of flexible passenger transportation that does not follow fixed
routes or schedules, are common and often offer the only mechanized mobility options for the poor
in many parts of the developing world.

   Speed Harmonization: gradually lowering speeds before a heavily congested area in order to
reduce the stop-and-go traffic that contributes to frustration and crashes.

   Transport Network Companies (TNCs): Transportation Network Companies (TNCs) provide
prearranged transportation services for compensation using an online-enabled application or
platform (such as smart phone apps) to connect drivers using their personal vehicles with passengers.

110 SHAMS TANVIR
                                                     MEDIA ATTRIBUTIONS

      Figures

          · Figure 8.1: Potential energy/emissions impacts of automated technology from "Bending
             the Curve: Climate Change Solutions" by Ramanathan et al. is under the following
             Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

      Tables

          · Table 8.1: Intelligent transportation system applications utilizing connected and
             automated vehicle technology from "Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions" by
             Ramanathan et al. is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                                                    REFERENCES

· Alonso-Mora, J., Samaranayake, S., Wallar, A., Frazzoli, E., & Rus, D. (2017). On-demand high-
   capacity ride-sharing via dynamic trip-vehicle assignment. Proceedings of the National Academy
   of Sciences, 114(3), 462-467.

· Bauer, G. S., Greenblatt, J. B., & Gerke, B. F. (2018). Cost, energy, and environmental impact of
   automated electric taxi fleets in Manhattan. Environmental science & technology, 52(8),
   4920-4928.

· Bischoff, J., & Maciejewski, M. (2016). Simulation of city-wide replacement of private cars
   with autonomous taxis in Berlin. Procedia computer science, 83, 237-244.

· Castiglione, J., Cooper, D., Sana, B., Tischler, D., Chang, T., Erhardt, G., Roy, S., Chen, M., &
   Mucci, A. (2018, October). TNCs & congestion. Draft report, San Francisco County
   Transportation Authority.

· Castillo, J. C., Knoepfle, D., & Weyl, G. (2017, June). Surge pricing solves the wild goose chase.
   In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (pp. 241-242). ACM.

· Greenblatt, J. B., & Shaheen, S. (2015). Automated vehicles, on-demand mobility, and
   environmental impacts. Current sustainable/renewable energy reports, 2(3), 74-81.

· Hall, J. D., Palsson, C., & Price, J. (2018). Is Uber a substitute or complement for public
   transit?. Journal of Urban Economics, 108, 36-50.

· Henao, A., & Marshall, W. E. (2018). The impact of ride-hailing on vehicle miles
   traveled. Transportation, 1-22.

· Hu, L., Dong, J., Lin, Z., & Yang, J. (2018). Analyzing battery electric vehicle feasibility from
   taxi travel patterns: The case study of New York City, USA. Transportation Research Part C:
   Emerging Technologies, 87, 91-104.

· Komanduri, A., Wafa, Z., Proussaloglou, K., & Jacobs, S. (2018). Assessing the impact of app-
   based ride share systems in an urban context: Findings from Austin. Transportation Research

                                                                                                                                                            SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 111
         Record, 2672(7), 34-46.
     · Meyer, J., Becker, H., Bösch, P. M., & Axhausen, K. W. (2017). Autonomous vehicles: The next

         jump in accessibilities?. Research in Transportation Economics, 62, 80-91.
     · Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M., Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. (2019).

         Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions. Location: Regents of the University of
         California. Editor: V. Ramanathan. Co-Editors: Adam Millard-Ball; Michelle Niemann; Scott
         Friese. Book published by the Regents of the Univ of California. Retrieved from
         https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6kr8p5rq. 815pp. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
         by-nc-sa/4.0/
     · SAE international. (2016). Taxonomy and definitions for terms related to driving automation
         systems for on-road motor vehicles. SAE International,(J3016).
     · Schaller, B. (2018). Making Congestion Pricing Work for Traffic and Transit in New York
         City. Schaller Consulting.
     · Wadud, Z., MacKenzie, D., & Leiby, P. (2016). Help or hindrance? The travel, energy and
         carbon impacts of highly automated vehicles. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
         Practice, 86, 1-18.
     · Walker, J., & Johnson, C. (2016). Peak car ownership: The market opportunity of electric
         automated mobility services. Rocky Mountain Institute.
     · Wenzel, T., Rames, C., Kontou, E., & Henao, A. (2019). Travel and energy implications of
         ridesourcing service in Austin, Texas. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
         Environment, 70, 18-34.
     · Xu, Z., Yin, Y., & Ye, J. (2019). On the supply curve of ride-hailing systems. Transportation
         Research Part B: Methodological.

                                                        ATTRIBUTIONS
     · Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M.,

         Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

112 SHAMS TANVIR
CHAPTER 9: SUSTAINABLE FREIGHT

CHAPTER OVERVIEW
In this chapter, we discuss the policies and strategies used to ensure sustainability in the freight
movement process. Everything from retail to services, construction to waste collection rely on an
efficient and reliable freight transport system. However, with the increasing pressures of
urbanization, this has to be balanced with the environmental and social impacts caused by transport
activity. This is the challenge of City Logistics, a field of study that has significant practical
implications for the world and the cities we live in. It is not merely a question of what is involved,
but what can be done about urban freight transport to improve it for the sake of economic efficiency,
quality of life, and sustainability. This chapter will give you the tools you need to understand the
complexities of urban freight transport systems.

Chapter Topics

    1. Sustainable Urban Freight Transport
    2. Urban Freight as a System
    3. City Logistics Solutions
    4. Evaluation of City Logistics

                                                 Learning Objectives

      At the end of the chapter, the reader should be able to do the following:
          · Understand the complex nature of urban freight transport systems.
          · Evaluate freight traffic impact.s
          · Explore the different approaches to solving urban freight transport problems.
          · Identify the research methods used to develop and apply knowledge in this field.
          · Identify the main logistics challenges facing cities around the world.

SUSTAINABLE URBAN FREIGHT TRANSPORT
Building on the definition of sustainability, we can consider a transport system to be sustainable
if it contributes to overall economic growth as well as social equity, without degrading the natural
environment. There are several trends that point to a strong growth of urban freight transport around
the world, such as the general growth of the economy and the steep growth of e-commerce. The
problem is that urban freight activity in many instances lead to direct impacts on the environment,

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 113
society and economy. Some impacts, of course, are more severe and urgent than others. The impacts,
such as air and noise pollution, traffic accidents, congestion and the emissions of greenhouse gases,
lead to unsustainable outcomes, such as climate change, poor health and safety outcomes, delays and,
eventually, unlivable cities.

   We can often get the impression that freight activity are only "bad", but that is not the case. The
freight system holds, first and foremost, a functional role, which is to facilitate the movement of
freight, a function essential to the economy and living of the urban residents. Hence, any solution
aimed at reducing the negative impacts of urban freight should take care that the service quality of the
freight system is not too diminished either.

   So, a balanced view will at least have four aspects considered:

    1. Logistics service quality

    2. General condition of the transport system

    3. Environmental concerns and impacts

    4. Social concerns

Logistics service quality

Goods delivery and pick-up can be regarded at the micro-, meso- and macro-economic level. The
micro level is that of the individual firms. Shops sell their goods and order fresh produce, and city
logistics operators deliver them at the required location. Accessibility, average speed, reliability and
delivery costs are important here. By keeping logistic costs down, goods stay attractive for buyers.
This has a positive impact on the productivity of entire sectors of the city's economy, including
construction, retail and tourism (meso level impact). This increases the volume and diversity of the
goods and services available and increases the return of investments in the city, which in turn
contributes to economic development (macro level impact).

General condition of the transport system

With a growing number of people living in cities, both passenger and freight transport will grow
substantially. The city's government may spend part of the tax income on infrastructure in order to
keep the economy on its growth path. However, if these investments cannot keep up with the growth
in traffic, congestion can become worse. This makes it more difficult to deliver goods on time and at
low costs. Congestion also leads to an increase of traffic emissions (e.g. carbon monoxide). A negative
cycle may start. Economic development may slow down. Companies and people may migrate away to
less congested areas, creating new flows every time they want to return to the city, thereby increasing
congestion. Although bad city logistics cannot be blamed for all these transport problems, it can be
part of the problem - and the solution.

Environmental concerns and impacts

City logistics takes place with motorized and non-motorized vehicles and equipment. In most cases
roads are used to transport the goods, but there are also examples where inland waterways and
railways are used to ship goods in and out of cities. A growing use of motorized transport vehicles
leads to a growing use of fossil fuels. This has many negative environmental impacts. One of these
is the depletion of natural resources. The emission of carbon dioxide contributes to climate change.

114 SHAMS TANVIR
Mining and production of conventional vehicle fuels damages and pollutes the environment as
well. Air pollution (such as nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, particulate matter and sulfur dioxides)
is also a well-known side effect of the combustion of fuels in engines. Particles as small or smaller
than 10 micrometers (also known as PM10) result from the wear of tires and brakes. There are also
other environmental effects, for instance a visual pollution or intrusion in the landscape, roads acting
as physical barriers for pedestrians, or loss of green areas. Contamination of land with toxic or other
hazardous materials may occur during production, maintenance and use of vehicles (e.g., loss of fluids,
wear of brake pads). It may also occur during construction, maintenance and use (e.g. run-offs) of
infrastructure. Finally, there is waste produced during the lifecycle of vehicles and infrastructure.

Social concerns

The urban freight sector has an important social impact as well, both positive and negative. A positive
impact is that city logistics provides many jobs, either directly or indirectly. Having a job means
a higher standard of living and more diverse spending opportunities (on education etc.). Another
positive impact is that efficient city logistics allows people to consume a wider range of goods. The
negative social impacts of city logistics may relate to environmental effects. Air pollution, noise and
safety hazards may make the city a less pleasant, less safe and it affects health. Inhalation of smoke
is linked to respiratory diseases. Traffic safety, especially of vulnerable road users like cyclists and
pedestrians, are difficult problems facing many cities around the world, causing unnecessarily high
fatalities. One should also note that these effects are not equally distributed to members of society, but
affect usually poorer areas.

URBAN FREIGHT AS A SYSTEM

The domain of urban freight transport has many facets and touches our lives in different ways
sometimes. So, it is important to first define the terms and concepts that will be used throughout the
rest of this chapter. This will help us to be clear about what we mean when we use a specific term, and
help us communicate with one another better. The next video will introduce some of these terms and
fundamental concepts.

                     One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them
                     online here: https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=388#oembed-1

   A systems approach to urban distribution is an integrated process aimed at improving
performance of urban distribution systems, that involves a number of activities, including defining
problems, conducting surveys, setting goals, objectives and criteria, designing alternatives, predicting
and evaluating the performance of alternatives, implementing an alternative and reviewing the
performance of the system (Figure 9.1).

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 115
Figure 9.1: A Systems Approach to Urban Distribution from Sustainable Urban Freight Transport: a Global Perspective by through TU Delft
OpenCourseWare is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial Share Alike

CITY LOGISTICS SOLUTIONS
In this chapter, we will briefly describe some of the city logistics schemes that have been studied and
implemented. We will not be able to cover them all, since they are truly many (see Table 9.1). The main
focus will be interesting perspectives that practitioners and researchers have in solving some of the
challenges of urban freight transport.

116 SHAMS TANVIR
Table 9.1: Overview of main actions public administrators can perform and potential reactions from the private sector
             from Sustainable Urban Freight Transport: A Global Perspective is licensed under a Creative Commons
                                    Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

Main category                  Approach                       Specific action               Private sector reaction

Private/Public                 Transfer points                City terminals                Incorporate spaces into
infrastructure                                                                              logistics chain;
                                                                                            consolidate deliveries/
                                                                                            collection;
                                                                                            shift to smaller & cleaner
                                                                                            road
                                                                                            vehicles or other modes.

Outskirts logistic centers

Logistic improvement of
terminals

Use of rail or ship terminals

Use of public parking lots

Modal shift                    Use of the train or
                               underground system

Shuttle train

Land use                       Parking                        (smart) Load zone provision   Avoid on-street parking
management                                                                                  for
                                                                                            loading and unloading
                                                                                            activities;
                                                                                            less congestion; higher
                                                                                            reliability.

Parking space planning

Hub areas

Use of other reserved spaces

Building regulations           Load/unload interfaces

Use of private parking lots

Mini-warehouse                 Consolidate delivery to only
                               one
                               location (per block/small
                               walkable
                               area)

Access                         Spatial restrictions           Access according to weight,   Shift to smaller vehicles
conditions                                                    volume, width,                (but also
                                                              height & length               MORE vehicles)

Access to pedestrian zones     Shift to small/clean vehicles

Street blocking allowance      Minimize impact of delivery
                               activity/increase safety

Closing the center to private  Access given to freight
traffic                        vehicles
                               during a time-window

Environmental zoning           Reduction of emissions
restricting polluting
vehicles or zero-emission
zones

Road pricing                   Overall reduction in
                               unnecessary traffic

Time restrictions              Adequate rotation in load      Increase utilization of load
                               zones                          zones

Night deliveries               Shift to off-hour delivery

                                                                                            SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 117
Main category                 Approach                     Specific action         Private sector reaction
Double-parking short time
restrictions                  Minimize impact of delivery                          Apply for appropriate
                              activity                                             classification,
Access time windows                                                                with best traffic
                              Avoid congested periods or                           permissions
                              pedestrian/shopping hours

Traffic                       Scope of regulations         Carrier classification
management

Freight zone classification   -                            Dynamic routing
Harmonization of regulations
Street classification         -

Information                   -

                              On-line load zone
                              reservations

Access Restrictions

Time Access Restrictions

Time access restrictions, also known as time-windows, restrict trucks from entering a certain area
within a certain time. The time-window area is often the city center or even a smaller part, the
pedestrian area within the city center. Sometimes time-window restrictions allow delivery trucks
access for a certain time period to areas where normally no motorized vehicles are allowed, such as
pedestrian areas.

Vehicle Restrictions

Vehicle restrictions prevent vehicles that have certain characteristics from entering a certain area (e.g.,
city center, specific streets). Vehicle restrictions can apply to various vehicle characteristics, such as
length, width, height, axle pressure, and weight. A specific vehicle restriction, the amount of emissions
emitted by the vehicle's engine, is discussed in another restriction, the low emission zone.

Low Emission Zones/Environmental Zones (Engine Restrictions)

Low emission zones or environmental zones restrict polluting vehicles from entering a defined area.
This can be considered an advanced type of vehicle restrictions. Usually the vehicle receives a special
sticker that marks it as qualified to enter the zone.

Vehicle Load Factor Controls

A vehicle's load factor should ensure that only fully (or at least to a certain extent) loaded vehicles
enter an area, such as the city center. Urban freight vehicles have, on average, a low load factor (due to
several reasons). Enforcement of such controls are difficult.

Road Pricing

Road pricing is an access regulation that usually affects not only freight transport, but all transport,
although the prices might discriminate between passenger and freight transportation. Depending
on the primary function of the road pricing, the price may increase for different times in a day

118 SHAMS TANVIR
or depending on how "clean" the vehicle is. Note that this not a restriction per se, but falls more under
traffic management schemes.

Parking and Unloading Restrictions

Finally, parking and unloading restrictions regulate the locations in an area where large vehicles
are allowed to park in order to unload deliveries or load pickups. Parking restrictions on other road
users might also be used to facilitate the loading and unloading activities of freight vehicles on a
particular street at a particular time.

Vehicle Technology

A key aspect of the transport system is the vehicle! A vehicle can be understood in a broader sense than
just a machine running on the road carrying your freight. It also extends to non-mechanical means,
like walking, or to continuous distribution systems, like pipelines. In this video, we will focus on the
most common considerations for deciding between vehicle types from the point of view of freight
carriers.

                     One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them
                     online here: https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=388#oembed-2

Consolidation and Transshipment of Freight

The subject of consolidation and transshipment is a regular topic in logistics management, because
of the possibility to increase the utilization and efficiency of resources. Ron introduces the topic of
urban consolidation centers and the main advantages and disadvantages to the solution in the video
below.

                     One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them
                     online here: https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=388#oembed-3

Shared Logistics

An important approach to deal with inefficiencies in the urban freight system is for companies to
cooperate more with each other. Here, we restrict the discussion to horizontal logistics cooperation,
rather than vertical logistics cooperation (such as integration along the supply chain or sub-
contracting).

   In urban freight, we can identify three types of objects shared among cooperating companies:
     · Order sharing

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 119
     · Capacity sharing
     · Information sharing.

In order sharing, "collaborating carriers combine, share or exchange customers orders or requests"
for the purpose of optimizing their own transport capabilities and while as a whole, still provide the
same level of service. An acceptable and fair method for allocating the costs and revenue according to
the service provided by each company needs to be designed.

   While in the former type, the transport demand is shared; in capacity sharing, it is the transport
supply, which is shared. In other words, there is a temporary loan or borrowing of transport capacity,
either in terms of load units (e.g. containers), transport units (e.g. vehicles or drivers), or logistics
facilities (e.g. consolidation centres or cross-docks), or also of storage capacity, in terms primarily of
warehousing space.

   The third type, information sharing, occurs when carriers share information (often anonymized or
aggregated to protect legal and business interests) with other partners to improve overall efficiency of
operations. Such sharing might need a trusted third-party to collect, aggregate and process the data
from the partners. The information could be used, for example, to optimize parking management at a
busy street or a loading bay, such that competing carriers do not arrive at the same time.
EVALUATION OF CITY LOGISTICS
In this video, Prof Taniguchi starts the series of lectures on evaluation of city logistics. Based on the a
brief overview of the basic goals of city logistics, this video introduces three categories of city logistics
policies with many examples.

                     One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them
                     online here: https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=388#oembed-4

Criteria for Evaluation

On what basis are evaluations made? Assistant Professor Ali presents here the typical evaluation
criteria used in city logistics, such as cost, environment, social and congestion. It also describes some
detailed components, normally, considered under each evaluation criteria.

                     One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them
                     online here: https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=388#oembed-5

Modeling of Urban Freight Flows

For many of the tasks in developing, evaluating and implementing sustainable urban freight concepts,

120 SHAMS TANVIR
we need to be able to model the freight flows. Freight traffic is embedded in a multi-layered economic
and social context. Prof Tavasszy explains, in this video, the state-of-the-art models used in urban
freight.

                     One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them
                     online here: https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=388#oembed-6

                                                     Key Takeaways

          · Urban freight movement creates negative impacts, such as air and noise pollution, traffic
              accidents, congestion, and the emissions of greenhouse gases.

          · A sustainable urban freight system balances the four key aspects (a) logistics service quality (b)
              general condition of the transport system (c) environmental concerns and impacts, and (d) social
              concerns

          · An urban distribution system has three key dimensions (a) Stakeholders - administrators,
              residents, carriers, shippers, and receivers, (b) Spatial- site, link, regional, city, (c) Factors -
              financial, social, economic, environmental.

          · There are four main approaches to improving the city logistics (a) creation of public/ private
              infrastructure (b) land use management (c) access conditions (d) traffic management.

                                                         Self-Test

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                          https://uta.pressbooks.pub/sustainablemobility/?p=388#h5p-9

                                                  GLOSSARY: KEY TERMS
Consolidation: Freight consolidation is when a shipper combines multiple shipments within a region
into a single load hauled by a carrier to a destination region.

   Horizontal logistics: Horizontal logistics cooperation may be defined as "cooperation between two
or more firms that are active at the same level of the supply chain and perform a comparable logistics
function". These firms serve the same transport service segment and provide almost the same services.
Hence, they are very much rivals, in the fiercely competitive industry.

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 121
   Logistics: logistics refers to the overall process of managing how resources are acquired, stored,
and transported to their final destination.

   Shuttle train: A shuttle train is a train that runs back and forth between two points, especially if it
offers a frequent service over a short route.

   Supply chain: A supply chain is the network of all the individuals, organizations, resources,
activities and technology involved in the creation and sale of a product.

   Transshipment: transshipment is the shipment of goods or containers to an intermediate
destination, then to another destination.

   Urban distribution: Urban freight distribution is the system and process by which goods are
collected, transported, and distributed within urban environments. The urban freight system can
include seaports, airports, manufacturing facilities, and warehouse/distribution centers that are
connected by a network of railroads, rail yards, pipelines, highways, and roadways that enable goods
to get to their destinations.

                                                           MEDIA ATTRIBUTIONS

             Figures

                · Figure 9.1: A Systems Approach to Urban Distribution from Sustainable Urban Freight
                    Transport: a Global Perspective by through TU Delft OpenCourseWare is licensed under
                    Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial Share Alike

             Tables

                · Table 9.1: Overview of main actions public administrators can perform and potential
                    reactions from the private sector from Sustainable Urban Freight Transport: A Global
                    Perspective is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
                    ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

             Videos

                · Video 1: Sustainable Urban Freight: Urban Freight Systems is available for free via
                    http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
                    https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

                · Video 2: Sustainable Urban Freight: Vehicle Technology is available for free via
                    http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
                    https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

                · Video 3: Sustainable Urban Freight: Urban Consolidation Centre is available for free via
                    http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
                    https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

                · Video 4: Sustainable Urban Freight: Evaluating the Impacts of City Logistics Policy
                    Measures is available for free via http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft,
                    released under a CC BY NC SA license: https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

                · Video 5: Sustainable Urban Freight: Evaluating the Impacts of City Logistics Policy

122 SHAMS TANVIR
             Measures is available for free via http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft,
             released under a CC BY NC SA license: https://creativecommons.org/licences/...
          · Video 6: Sustainable Urban Freight: Modelling City Logistics is available for free via
             http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
             https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

                                                    REFERENCES
· Muñuzuri, J., Larrañeta, J., Onieva, L., & Cortés, P. (2005). Solutions applicable by local

   administrations for urban logistics improvement. Cities. https://doi.org/10.1016/
   j.cities.2004.10.003
· Sustainable Urban Freight Transport: a Global Perspective by TU Delft OpenCourseWare is
   licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
   International License.

                                                   ATTRIBUTIONS
          Transforming the Freight Industry in ACCESS Magazine, 1(20), 26-31 by Regan, A. is

            licensed by CC BY-NC 3.0
          Sustainable Urban Freight Transport: a Global Perspective by Dr. J.H.R. van Duin, Dr.

            Johan Joubert, Dr. Russell Thompson, Ir. Tharsis Teoh, Prof.dr.ir. L.A. Tavasszy
            through TU Delft OpenCourseWare is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution
            Non-Commercial Share Alike

                                                                                                                                                            SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 123
124 SHAMS TANVIR
LINKS BY CHAPTER

                                                           CHAPTER 1

     · Figure 1.1: Three pillars of sustainability by Neyda Abreu is under the following Creative
         Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 1.2: World Oil Production- History and Projections by Tom Ruen is under the Public
         Domain via Wikimedia Commons

     · Figure 1.3: Freeway Traffic by User Minesweeper via Wikimedia Commons is under the
         following Creative Commons license: CC-BY-SA-3.0

                                                           CHAPTER 2

     · Figure 2.1: "Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions" by Ramanathan et al. (2019) and
         reproduced from the Scripps CO2 Program from the Scripps Institution of Oceanography is
         under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 2.2: "Change in Total Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Different Sectors in the United
         States during 1990- 2023" by Shams Tanvir using data from the EPA is under the following
         Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 2.3: "Air pollution emissions yearly trends" by Ramanathan et al. (2019) and adapted
         from US Environmental Protection Agency 2019 is under the following Creative Commons
         license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 2.4: "California tailpipe HC performance standards for new light duty vehicle" by
         Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA
         4.0

     · Figure 2.5: "CO2 emissions, in grams per mile, for a representative database of passenger
         vehicle trips in Southern California" by Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the following
         Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 2.6: "Emission-speed plot of individual trips or trip segments" by Ramanathan et al.
         (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 2.7: "Possible use of traffic operation strategies in reducing on-road CO2 emissions" by
         Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA
         4.0

     · Figure 2.8: "General approach for calculating GHG emissions from transportation" by
         Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA
         4.0

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 125
                                                           CHAPTER 3

     · Figure 3.1: Sharrow on US1 in West Palm Beach by Michael Rivera is under the following
         Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 4.0

     · Figure 3.2: Bike route along California State Highway 35 by Robert Ashworth is under the
         following Creative Commons license: CC BY 2.0

     · Figure 3.3: Bike lane on Pleasant Valley Parkway, Providence RI by Kenneth C. Zirkel is under
         the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 4.0

     · Figure 3.4: Bike route sign with directional information by Richard Drdul is under the
         following Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 2.0

     · Figure 3.5: Pandora cycle track 4 by Richard Drdul is under the following Creative Commons
         license: CC BY-SA 2.0

     · Figure 3.6: Protected intersection features by Pierre Rouzeau via Wikimedia Commons is
         under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 4.0

                                                           CHAPTER 4

     · NA

                                                           CHAPTER 5

Figures

     · Figure 5.1: Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R.,
         Auffhammer, M., Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 5.2: Average passenger car GHG emissions normalized by distance traveled for
         different regions by Ramanathan et al. (2019) is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 5.3: The number of electric vehicles (EVs) being introduced for different regions is
         licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 5.4: Fuel utilization for the US transportation market, 2018 is licensed under CC BY-
         NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 5.5: Modules of integrated traffic simulation and emission estimation. Produced with
         permission from the author Tanvir (2018).

Tables

     · Table 5.1: Greenhouse Gas Emissions per Kilometer, relative to Gasoline-Powered Internal
         Combustion Engines, Full Energy Cycle by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M., Barth,
         M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                                                           CHAPTER 6

     · Figure 6.1: Los Angeles 1943: Degraded Unraban Air Quality by Ramanathan et al is under
         the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

126 SHAMS TANVIR
     · Figure 6.2: Combustion by Ramanathan is under the following Creative Commons license:
         CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 6.3: Combustion Impacts by Ramanathan et al is under the following Creative
         Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 6.4: Power Generation Options by Ramanathan is under the following Creative
         Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 6.5: Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Sector for 2016 by Analy Casillo is under the
         following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 6.6: Greenhouse Gas Emissions for the Transportation Sector in California by Analy
         Casillo is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                                                           CHAPTER 7

Figures

     · Figure 7.1: Conductive Charging- AC by Electric Cars: Technology Electric Cars: Technology
         is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 7.2: Conductive Charging- DC by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC BY-
         NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 7.3: Inductive Charging- Static by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC BY-
         NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 7.4: Inductive Charging- Dynamic by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC
         BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 7.5: AC Charging Operations by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC BY-
         NC-SA 4.0

Tables

     · Table 7.1 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
     · Table 7.2: Summary of Common Level 1 to Level 4 Charging Facilities in North America is

         licensed under CC BY 4.0

Videos

     · Video 1: Introduction to Charging Methods of EVs is available for free via
         http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
         https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

     · Video 2: AC Charging of EVs is available for free via http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl ©
         TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license: https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

     · Video 3: DC Charging of EVs is available for free via http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl ©
         TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license: https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

     · Video 4: Smart Charging and V2G is available for free via http://www.online-
         learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 127
         https://creativecommons.org/licences/...
     · Video 5: Charging of Electric Vehicles ICT Aspects of Electric Charging is available for free

         via http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
         https://creativecommons.org/licences/...
     · Video 6: Case Study ABB is available for free via http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU
         Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license: https://creativecommons.org/licence

                                                           CHAPTER 8

Figures

     · Figure 8.1: Potential energy/emissions impacts of automated technology from "Bending the
         Curve: Climate Change Solutions" by Ramanathan et al. is under the following Creative
         Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

Tables

     · Table 8.1: Intelligent transportation system applications utilizing connected and automated
         vehicle technology from "Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions" by Ramanathan et al.
         is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                                                           CHAPTER 9

Figures

     · Figure 9.1: A Systems Approach to Urban Distribution from Sustainable Urban Freight
         Transport: a Global Perspective by through TU Delft OpenCourseWare is licensed under
         Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial Share Alike

Tables

     · Table 9.1: Overview of main actions public administrators can perform and potential
         reactions from the private sector from Sustainable Urban Freight Transport: A Global Perspective
         is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
         International License.

Videos

     · Video 1: Sustainable Urban Freight: Urban Freight Systems is available for free via
         http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
         https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

     · Video 2: Sustainable Urban Freight: Vehicle Technology is available for free via
         http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
         https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

     · Video 3: Sustainable Urban Freight: Urban Consolidation Centre is available for free via
         http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
         https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

128 SHAMS TANVIR
· Video 4: Sustainable Urban Freight: Evaluating the Impacts of City Logistics Policy Measures
   is available for free via http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC
   BY NC SA license: https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

· Video 5: Sustainable Urban Freight: Evaluating the Impacts of City Logistics Policy Measures
   is available for free via http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC
   BY NC SA license: https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

· Video 6: Sustainable Urban Freight: Modelling City Logistics is available for free via
   http://www.online-learning.tudelft.nl © TU Delft, released under a CC BY NC SA license:
   https://creativecommons.org/licences/...

                                                                                                                                                            SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 129
REFERENCES

CHAPTER 1

     · Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development: Our Common Future.
         1987. www.un-documents.net/wced-ocf.htm.

     · Appleyard, B. S. 2005. Livable Streets for School Children: How Safe Routes to School
         programs can improve street and community livability for children. National Centre for
         Bicycling and Walking Forum, available online: http://www.bikewalk.org/pdfs/
         forumarch0305.pdf

     · Banister, D. and Berechman, Y. 2001. Transport investment and the promotion of economic
         growth. Journal of Transport Geography 9:3, 209-218.

     · Black, W. 2010. Sustainable Transportation: Problems and Solutions. New York: Guilford
         Press.

     · Deffeyes, K. 2002. Hubbert's Peak: The Impending World Oil Shortage. Princeton, NJ:
         Princeton University Press.

     · DOE (Department of Energy). 2009. Emissions of greenhouse gases report. DOE/EIA-0573,
         available online: http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/1605/ggrpt/carbon.html

     · Downs, A. 1992. Stuck in Traffic: Coping With Peak-Hour Traffic Congestion. Washington,
         DC: Brookings Institution Press.

     · IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2010. Impact of high food and fuel prices on developing
         countries. Available online: http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/faq/ffpfaqs.htm

     · Maring, G. 2007. Surface transportation funding issues and options. Presentation to the
         National Surface Transportation Infrastructure Financing Commission. Available
         online: http://financecommission.dot.gov/Documents/
         Surface%20Transportation%20Funding%20Issues%20and%20Options_Gary%20Maring.pp
         t

     · Marsh, B. 2011. Kilowatts vs. Gallons. New York Times, May 28. Available
         online: http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2011/05/29/weekinreview/volt-
         graphic.html?ref=weekinreview

     · UPI (United Press International). 2011. Global biofuel land area estimated. Available
         online: http://www.upi.com/Science_News/2011/01/10/Global-biofuel-land-area-
         estimated/UPI-97301294707088/

     · Urry, J,. 2004. The `System' of Automobility. Theory Culture and Society 21:4-5, 25-39.
     · Usón, A.A., Capilla, A.V., Bribián, I.Z., Scarpellini, S. and Sastresa, E.L. 2011. Energy efficiency

         in transport and mobility for an eco-efficiency viewpoint. Energy 36:4, 1916-23.

130 SHAMS TANVIR
     · Xu, J., Kochanek, K., Murphy, S., and Tejada-Vera, B. 2010. Deaths: Final Data for 2007.
         National Vital Statistics Reports, 58:19, available online: http://www.cdc.gov/NCHS/data/
         nvsr/nvsr58/nvsr58_19.pdf

CHAPTER 2

     · Transportation system resilience to extreme weather and climate change. FHWA-
         HOP-15-025. November 2015. Pursuant to Title 17 Section 105 of the United States Code,
         this file is not subject to copyright protection and is in the public domain. Copyright
         information.

CHAPTER 3

     · California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). (2020). Chapter 1000:- Bicycle
         Transportation Design, Highway Design Manual. Sacramento, CA.

     · National Association of City Transportation Officials (NACTO).
     · National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2022). Highway capacity manual

         7th edition: A guide for multimodal mobility analysis.
     · AASHTO Task Force on Geometric Design (1999). AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle

         Facilities. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, Washington, DC.

CHAPTER 4

     · Transportation Officials. (2004). Guide for the planning, design, and operation of pedestrian
         facilities. AASHTO.

CHAPTER 5

     · Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M., Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. (2019).
         Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions. Location: Regents of the University of
         California. Editor: V. Ramanathan. Co-Editors: Adam Millard-Ball; Michelle Niemann; Scott
         Friese. Book published by the Regents of the Univ of California. Retrieved from
         https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6kr8p5rq. 815pp https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
         nc-sa/4.0/

     · Tanvir, Shams. Modeling and Simulation of Driving Activity from an Energy Use-Emissions
         Perspective. North Carolina State University, 2018.

     · Ahn, K., Rakha, H., Trani, A., & Van Aerde, M. (2002). Estimating vehicle fuel consumption
         and emissions based on instantaneous speed and acceleration levels. Journal of Transportation
         Engineering, 128(2), 182-190.

     · Alkidas, A. C. (2007). Combustion advancements in gasoline engines. Energy Conversion and
         Management, 48(11), 2751-2761.

     · An, F., Barth, M., Norbeck, J., & Ross, M. (1997). Development of comprehensive modal
         emissions model: Operating under hot-stabilized conditions. Transportation Research Record:
         Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1587(1), 52-62.

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 131
     · Barth, M., & Boriboonsomsin, K. (2009). Traffic congestion and greenhouse gases. ACCESS
         Magazine, 1(35)

     · Bartin, B., Mudigonda, S., & Ozbay, K. (2007). Impact of electronic toll collection on air
         pollution levels: Estimation using microscopic simulation model of large-scale transportation
         network. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2011(1),
         68-77.

     · BTS. (2015). State transportation statistics 2015. Washington DC: US Department of
         Transportation, Bureau of Transportation Statistics.

     · Bureau of Transportation Statistics. (2013). National transportation statistics (table 1-11:
         Number of U.S. aircraft, vehicles, vessels, and other conveyances). Retrieved from
         http://www.bts.gov/publications/national_transportation_statistics/html/table_01_11.html

     · Cambridge Systematics. (1996). Quantifying air quality and other benefits and costs of
         transportation control measures. ( No. Task 1 Report. Project 8-33.). Washington D.C: National
         Cooperative Highway Research, Transportation Research Board.

     · Cappiello, A. (2002). Modeling traffic flow emissions (MS Thesis).

     · CARB. (2002). EMFAC 2002, california air resources board's emission inventory . ( No. Series,
         September).California Air Resource Board.

     · Chamberlin, R., Swanson, B., Talbot, E., Dumont, J., & Pesci, S. (2011). Analysis of MOVES and
         CMEM for evaluating the emissions impact of an intersection control change. Paper
         presented at the Transportation Research Board 90th Annual Meeting, (11-0673)

     · Daganzo, C. F. (2006). In traffic flow, cellular automata = kinematic waves. Transportation
         Research Part B: Methodological, 40(5), 396-403. doi://dx.doi.org.prox.lib.ncsu.edu/10.1016/
         j.trb.2005.05.004

     · De Vlieger, I., De Keukeleere, D., & Kretzschmar, J. G. (2000). Environmental effects of driving
         behaviour and congestion related to passenger cars. Atmospheric Environment, 34(27),
         4649-4655.

     · Eliasson, J., Hultkrantz, L., Nerhagen, L., & Rosqvist, L. S. (2009). The stockholm
         congestion-charging trial 2006: Overview of effects. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
         Practice, 43(3), 240-250.

     · EPA. (1999). Regulatory announcements. Ann Arbor, MI: United States Environmental
         Protection Agency.

     · EPA. (2008). Integrated science assessment for oxides of nitrogen - health criteria (final report). ( No.
         EPA/600/R-08/071). Washington D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

     · EPA. (2010). Integrated science assessment for carbon monoxide (final report). ( No. EPA/600/R-09/
         019F). Washington D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

     · EPA. (2012). User guide for MOVES2010b. ( No. EPA-420-B-12-001b).United State
         Environmental Protection Agency.

     · EPA. (2014). Inventory of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions and sinks: 1990-2012. ( No. EPA
         430-R-14-003). Washington D.C.: U.S. EPA.

132 SHAMS TANVIR
· Etheridge, D. M., Steele, L. P., Langenfelds, R. L., Francey, R. J., Barnola, J., & Morgan, V. I.
   (1996). Natural and anthropogenic changes in atmospheric CO2 over the last 1000 years from
   air in antarctic ice and firn. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres (1984-2012), 101(D2),
   4115-4128.

· Faiz, A., Weaver, C. S., & Walsh, M. P. (1996). Air pollutation from motor vehicles: Standards and
   technologies for controlling emissions World Bank-free PDF.

· Frey, H. C., Zhai, H., & Rouphail, N. M. (2009). Regional on-road vehicle running emissions
   modeling and evaluation for conventional and alternative vehicle technologies. Environmental
   Science & Technology, 43(21), 8449-8455. doi:10.1021/es900535s; 10.1021/es900535s

· Frey, H. C., & Liu, B. (2014). Development and evaluation of a simplified version of MOVES
   for coupling with a traffic simulation model. Proceedings, 91st Annual Meeting of the
   Transportation Research Board,

· Frey, H. C., Rouphail, N. M., Unal, A., & Colyar, J. D. (2001). No title. Emissions Reduction
   through Better Traffic Management: An Empirical Evaluation Based upon on-Road Measurements,

· Frey, H. C., Yazdani-Boroujeni, B., Hu, J., Liu, B., & Jiao, W. (2013). Field measurements of
   1996 to 2013 model year light duty gasoline vehicles. Paper presented at the Proceedings, 106th
   Annual Conference, Air & Waste Management Association, Chicago, IL,

· Fujita, E. M., Campbell, D. E., Zielinska, B., Chow, J. C., Lindhjem, C. E., DenBleyker, A., . . .
   Lawson, D. R. (2012). Comparison of the MOVES2010a, MOBILE6. 2, and EMFAC2007
   mobile source emission models with on-road traffic tunnel and remote sensing
   measurements. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 62(10), 1134-1149.

· Gordon, P., Kumar, A., & Richardson, H. W. (1990). Peak-spreading: How much? Transportation
   Research Part A: General, 24(3), 165-175.

· Greene, D. L., & Plotkin, S. E. (2011). Reducing greenhouse gas emission from US
   transportation. Arlington: Pew Center on Global Climate Change,

· Gualtieri, G., & Tartaglia, M. (1998). Predicting urban traffic air pollution: A GIS framework.
   Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 3(5), 329-336.

· Health Effects Institute. Panel on the Health Effects of Traffic-Related Air Pollution. (2010).
   Traffic-related air pollution: A critical review of the literature on emissions, exposure, and health effects
   Health Effects Institute.

· Hurdle, V. F., & Son, B. (2000). Road test of a freeway model. Transportation Research Part A:
   Policy and Practice, 34(7), 537-564. doi://dx.doi.org.prox.lib.ncsu.edu/10.1016/
   S0965-8564(99)00031-2

· Jimenez-Palacios, J. L. (1998). Understanding and quantifying motor vehicle emissions with vehicle
   specific power and TILDAS remote sensing

· Karppinen, A., Kukkonen, J., Elolähde, T., Konttinen, M., Koskentalo, T., & Rantakrans, E.
   (2000). A modelling system for predicting urban air pollution: Model description and
   applications in the helsinki metropolitan area. Atmospheric Environment, 34(22), 3723-3733.

· Koupal, J., Cumberworth, M., Michaels, H., Beardsley, M., & Brzezinski, D. (2002). Design and

                                                                                                                                                            SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 133
         implementation of MOVES: EPA`s new generation mobile source emission model. Ann Arbor,
         1001, 48105.

     · Koupal, J., Michaels, H., Cumberworth, M., Bailey, C., & Brzezinski, D. (2002). (2002). EPA's
         plan for MOVES: A comprehensive mobile source emissions model. Paper presented at the
         Proceedings of the 12th CRC on-Road Vehicle Emissions Workshop, San Diego, CA,

     · Krzyzanowski, M., Kuna-Dibbert, B., & Schneider, J. (2005). Health effects of transport-related air
         pollution World Health Organization Copenhagen.

     · Lautso, K., & Toivanen, S. (1999). SPARTACUS system for analyzing urban sustainability.
         Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1670(1), 35-46.

     · Ligterink, N. E., & Lange, R. d. (2009). Refined vehicle and driving-behaviour dependencies in
         the VERSIT emission model. Paper presented at the ETAPP Symposium,

     · Lin, J., Chiu, Y., Vallamsundar, S., & Bai, S. (2011a). Integration of MOVES and dynamic traffic
         assignment models for fine-grained transportation and air quality analyses. Paper presented
         at the Integrated and Sustainable Transportation System (FISTS), 2011 IEEE Forum On, 176-181.

     · Lin, J., Chiu, Y., Vallamsundar, S., & Bai, S. (2011b). Integration of MOVES and dynamic traffic
         assignment models for fine-grained transportation and air quality analyses. Paper presented
         at the Integrated and Sustainable Transportation System (FISTS), 2011 IEEE Forum On, 176-181.

     · Lomax, T., Turner, S., Shunk, G., Levinson, H. S., Pratt, R. H., Bay, P. N., & Douglas, G. B.
         (1997). NCHRP report 398: Quantifying congestion. Transportation Research Board, National
         Research Council, Washington, DC,

     · Mahmassani, H. S., & Liu, Y. (1999). Dynamics of commuting decision behaviour under
         advanced traveller information systems. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies,
         7(2), 91-107.

     · Meyer, M. D. (1999). Demand management as an element of transportation policy: Using
         carrots and sticks to influence travel behavior. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
         Practice, 33(7), 575-599.

     · Mitchell, G., Namdeo, A., Lockyer, J., & May, A. D. (2002). The impact of road pricing and
         other strategic road transport initiatives on urban air quality. Paper presented at the
         Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Urban Transport and the Environment in the 21st
         Century, 481-490.

     · Nam, E. K., Brazil, H., & Sutulo, S. (2002) The integration of a fuel rate based modal
         emissions model (CMEM modified) into the VISSIM microscopic traffic model -
         inventory comparison with MOBILE6 in southfield michigan. . Proceedings of the 12th CRC
         on-Road Vehicle Emissions Workshop,

     · Namdeo, A., Mitchell, G., & Dixon, R. (2002). TEMMS: An integrated package for modelling
         and mapping urban traffic emissions and air quality. Environmental Modelling & Software, 17(2),
         177-188.

     · Newell, G. F. (1993). A simplified theory of kinematic waves in highway traffic: (I) general
         theory; (ii) queuing at freeway bottlenecks; (iii) multi-dimensional flows . Transportation
         Research Part B: Methodological, 27(4), 281-313.

134 SHAMS TANVIR
· Newell, G. F. (2002). A simplified car-following theory: A lower order model. Transportation
   Research Part B: Methodological, 36(3), 195-205.

· Ni, D., Leonard, J. D., & Williams, B. M. (2006). The network kinematic waves model: A
   simplified approach to network traffic. Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems, 10(1), 1-14.

· Noland, R. B., & Quddus, M. A. (2006). Flow improvements and vehicle emissions: Effects of
   trip generation and emission control technology. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
   Environment, 11(1), 1-14.

· Ntziachristos, L., Samaras, Z., Eggleston, S., Gorissen, N., Hassel, D., & Hickman, A. J. (2000).
   Copert iii. Computer Programme to Calculate Emissions from Road Transport, Methodology and
   Emission Factors (Version 2.1), European Energy Agency (EEA), Copenhagen,

· Oduyemi, K., & Davidson, B. (1998). The impacts of road traffic management on urban air
   quality. Science of the Total Environment, 218(1), 59-66.

· Roughgarden, T. (2012). The price of anarchy in games of incomplete information. Paper
   presented at the Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, 862-879.

· Samaranayake, S., Glaser, S., Holstius, D., Monteil, J., Tracton, K., Seto, E., & Bayen, A. (2014).
   Real-Time estimation of pollution emissions and dispersion from highway traffic.
   Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, 29(7), 546-558.

· Schrank, D. L., & Lomax, T. J. (2007). The 2007 urban mobility report Texas Transportation
   Institute, Texas A & M University.

· Schrank, D., Eisele, B., Lomax, T., & Bak, J. (2015). 2015 urban mobility scorecard. Texas: Texas
   A&M Transportation Institute and INRIX, Inc.

· Sivak, M., & Schoettle, B. (2012). Eco-driving: Strategic, tactical, and operational decisions of
   the driver that influence vehicle fuel economy. Transport Policy, 22, 96-99.

· Sjodin, A., Persson, K., Andreasson, K., Arlander, B., & Galle, B. (1998). On-road emission
   factors derived from measurements in a traffic tunnel. International Journal of Vehicle Design,
   20(1), 147-158.

· Smit, R. (2006). An examination of congestion in road traffic emission models and their application to
   urban road networks

· Song, G., Yu, L., & Zhang, Y. (2012). Applicability of traffic microsimulation models in vehicle
   emissions estimates. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
   2270(1), 132-141.

· Stathopoulos, F. G., & Noland, R. B. (2003). Induced travel and emissions from traffic flow
   improvement projects. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
   Board, 1842(1), 57-63.

· Tanvir, S., Karmakar, N., Rouphail, N. M., & Schroeder, B. J. (2016). Modeling freeway work
   zones with mesoscopic dynamic traffic simulator: Validation, gaps, and guidance.
   Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, (2567), 122-130.

· Tonne, C., Beevers, S., Armstrong, B., Kelly, F., & Wilkinson, P. (2008). Air pollution and
   mortality benefits of the london congestion charge: Spatial and socioeconomic inequalities.

                                                                                                                                                            SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 135
         Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 65(9), 620-627.

     · Twigg, M. V. (2007). Progress and future challenges in controlling automotive exhaust gas
         emissions. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, 70(1), 2-15.

     · USEPA. (2007). MOBILE 6 vehicle emission modelling software and documentation. (). Washington,
         DC: US Environmental Protection Agency.

     · Vallamsundar, S., & Lin, J. (. (2011). MOVES versus MOBILE. Transportation Research Record:
         Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2233(1), 27-35.

     · Xie, Y., Chowdhury, M. A., Bhavsar, P., & Zhou, Y. (2011). An integrated tool for modeling the
         impact of alternative fueled vehicles on traffic emissions: A case study of greenville, south
         carolina. Paper presented at the Transportation Research Board 90th Annual Meeting, (11-3880)

     · Yperman, I. (2007). The link transmission model for dynamic network loading (Ph.D. Thesis).

     · Zhai, H., Frey, H. C., Rouphail, N. M., Goncalves, G. A., & Farias, T. L. (2009). Comparison of
         flexible fuel vehicle and life-cycle fuel consumption and emissions of selected pollutants and
         greenhouse gases for ethanol 85 versus gasoline. Journal of the Air & Waste Management
         Association (1995), 59(8), 912-924.

     · Zhang, K., & Batterman, S. A. (2009). Time allocation shifts and pollutant exposure due to
         traffic congestion: An analysis using the national human activity pattern survey. Science of the
         Total Environment, 407(21), 5493-5500.

     · Zhou, X., Tanvir, S., Lei, H., Taylor, J., Liu, B., Rouphail, N. M., & Christopher Frey, H. (2015).
         Integrating a simplified emission estimation model and mesoscopic dynamic traffic simulator
         to efficiently evaluate emission impacts of traffic management strategies. Transportation
         Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 37, 123-136. doi://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
         j.trd.2015.04.013

CHAPTER 6

     · Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M.,
         Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed by the following creative commons license: CC
         BY-NC-SA 4.0

CHAPTER 7

     · Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M.,
         Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed by the following creative commons license: CC
         BY-NC-SA 4.0

CHAPTER 8

     · Greenblatt, J. B., & Shaheen, S. (2015). Automated vehicles, on-demand mobility, and
         environmental impacts. Current sustainable/renewable energy reports, 2(3), 74-81.

     · Walker, J., & Johnson, C. (2016). Peak car ownership: The market opportunity of electric
         automated mobility services. Rocky Mountain Institute.

     · SAE international. (2016). Taxonomy and definitions for terms related to driving automation

136 SHAMS TANVIR
   systems for on-road motor vehicles. SAE International,(J3016).

· Hu, L., Dong, J., Lin, Z., & Yang, J. (2018). Analyzing battery electric vehicle feasibility from
   taxi travel patterns: The case study of New York City, USA. Transportation Research Part C:
   Emerging Technologies, 87, 91-104.

· Alonso-Mora, J., Samaranayake, S., Wallar, A., Frazzoli, E., & Rus, D. (2017). On-demand high-
   capacity ride-sharing via dynamic trip-vehicle assignment. Proceedings of the National Academy
   of Sciences, 114(3), 462-467.

· Bischoff, J., & Maciejewski, M. (2016). Simulation of city-wide replacement of private cars
   with autonomous taxis in Berlin. Procedia computer science, 83, 237-244.

· Wenzel, T., Rames, C., Kontou, E., & Henao, A. (2019). Travel and energy implications of
   ridesourcing service in Austin, Texas. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
   Environment, 70, 18-34.

· Komanduri, A., Wafa, Z., Proussaloglou, K., & Jacobs, S. (2018). Assessing the impact of app-
   based ride share systems in an urban context: Findings from Austin. Transportation Research
   Record, 2672(7), 34-46.

· Castiglione, J., Cooper, D., Sana, B., Tischler, D., Chang, T., Erhardt, G., Roy, S., Chen, M., &
   Mucci, A. (2018, October). TNCs & congestion. Draft report, San Francisco County
   Transportation Authority.

· Castillo, J. C., Knoepfle, D., & Weyl, G. (2017, June). Surge pricing solves the wild goose chase.
   In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (pp. 241-242). ACM.

· Schaller, B. (2018). Making Congestion Pricing Work for Traffic and Transit in New York
   City. Schaller Consulting.

· Xu, Z., Yin, Y., & Ye, J. (2019). On the supply curve of ride-hailing systems. Transportation
   Research Part B: Methodological.

· Hall, J. D., Palsson, C., & Price, J. (2018). Is Uber a substitute or complement for public
   transit?. Journal of Urban Economics, 108, 36-50.

· Henao, A., & Marshall, W. E. (2018). The impact of ride-hailing on vehicle miles
   traveled. Transportation, 1-22.

· Bauer, G. S., Greenblatt, J. B., & Gerke, B. F. (2018). Cost, energy, and environmental impact of
   automated electric taxi fleets in Manhattan. Environmental science & technology, 52(8),
   4920-4928.

· Wadud, Z., MacKenzie, D., & Leiby, P. (2016). Help or hindrance? The travel, energy and
   carbon impacts of highly automated vehicles. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
   Practice, 86, 1-18.

· Meyer, J., Becker, H., Bösch, P. M., & Axhausen, K. W. (2017). Autonomous vehicles: The next
   jump in accessibilities?. Research in Transportation Economics, 62, 80-91.

· Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M., Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. (2019).
   Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions. Location: Regents of the University of
   California. Editor: V. Ramanathan. Co-Editors: Adam Millard-Ball; Michelle Niemann; Scott

                                                                                                                                                            SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 137
         Friese. Book published by the Regents of the Univ of California. Retrieved from
         https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6kr8p5rq. 815pp. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
         by-nc-sa/4.0/
CHAPTER 9
     · Sustainable Urban Freight Transport: a Global Perspective by TU Delft OpenCourseWare is
         licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
         International License.

138 SHAMS TANVIR
IMAGE CREDITS

This work contains copyrighted material the use of which has not always been specifically authorized
by the copyright owners. The creators of this OER believe in good faith that reuse of these materials
constitutes a "fair use" as described in Section 107 of the Copyright Act. Downstream users who wish
to use copyrighted material from this resource for purposes beyond those authorized by the fair use
doctrine should obtain permission from the copyright owner(s) of the original content.

   Unless noted below, all figures used in the text are the intellectual property of the content creators
and are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.

CHAPTER 1

     · Figure 1.1: Three pillars of sustainability by Neyda Abreu is under the following Creative
         Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 1.2: World Oil Production- History and Projections by Tom Ruen is under the Public
         Domain via Wikimedia Commons

     · Figure 1.3: Freeway Traffic by User Minesweeper via Wikimedia Commons is under the
         following Creative Commons license: CC-BY-SA-3.0

CHAPTER 2

     · Figure 2.1: "Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions" by Ramanathan et al. (2019) and
         reproduced from the Scripps CO2 Program from the Scripps Institution of Oceanography is
         under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 2.2: "Change in Total Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Different Sectors in the United
         States during 1990- 2023" by Shams Tanvir using data from the EPA is under the following
         Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 2.3: "Air pollution emissions yearly trends" by Ramanathan et al. (2019) and adapted
         from US Environmental Protection Agency 2019 is under the following Creative Commons
         license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 2.4: "California tailpipe HC performance standards for new light duty vehicle" by
         Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA
         4.0

     · Figure 2.5: "CO2 emissions, in grams per mile, for a representative database of passenger
         vehicle trips in Southern California" by Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the following
         Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 2.6: "Emission-speed plot of individual trips or trip segments" by Ramanathan et al.
         (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 2.7: "Possible use of traffic operation strategies in reducing on-road CO2 emissions" by

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 139
         Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA
         4.0
     · Figure 2.8: "General approach for calculating GHG emissions from transportation" by
         Ramanathan et al. (2019) is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA
         4.0

CHAPTER 3

     · Figure 3.1: Sharrow on US1 in West Palm Beach by Michael Rivera is under the following
         Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 4.0

     · Figure 3.2: Bike route along California State Highway 35 by Robert Ashworth is under the
         following Creative Commons license: CC BY 2.0

     · Figure 3.3: Bike lane on Pleasant Valley Parkway, Providence RI by Kenneth C. Zirkel is under
         the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 4.0

     · Figure 3.4: Bike route sign with directional information by Richard Drdul is under the
         following Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 2.0

     · Figure 3.5: Pandora cycle track 4 by Richard Drdul is under the following Creative Commons
         license: CC BY-SA 2.0

     · Figure 3.6: Protected intersection features by Pierre Rouzeau via Wikimedia Commons is
         under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-SA 4.0

CHAPTER 5

     · Figure 5.1: Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R.,
         Auffhammer, M., Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 5.2: Average passenger car GHG emissions normalized by distance traveled for
         different regions by Ramanathan et al. (2019) is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 5.3: The number of electric vehicles (EVs) being introduced for different regions is
         licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 5.4: Fuel utilization for the US transportation market, 2018 is licensed under CC BY-
         NC-SA 4.0

     · Table 5.1: Greenhouse Gas Emissions per Kilometer, relative to Gasoline-Powered Internal
         Combustion Engines, Full Energy Cycle by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M., Barth,
         M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 5.5: Modules of integrated traffic simulation and emission estimation. Produced with
         permission from the author Tanvir (2018).

CHAPTER 6

     · Figure 6.1: Los Angeles 1943: Degraded Unraban Air Quality by Ramanathan et al is licensed
         under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 6.2: Combustion by Ramanathan is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

140 SHAMS TANVIR
     · Figure 6.3: Combustion Impacts by Ramanathan et al is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
     · Figure 6.4: Power Generation Options by Ramanathan is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
     · Figure 6.5: Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Sector for 2016 by Analy Castillo is licensed under

         CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
     · Figure 6.6: Greenhouse Gas Emissions for the Transportation Sector in California by Analy

         Casillo is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

CHAPTER 7

     · Figure 7.1: Conductive Charging- AC by Electric Cars: Technology Electric Cars: Technology
         is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 7.2: Conductive Charging- DC by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC BY-
         NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 7.3: Inductive Charging- Static by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC BY-
         NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 7.4: Inductive Charging- Dynamic by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC
         BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Table 7.1 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
     · Figure 7.5: AC Charging Operations by Electric Cars: Technology is licensed under CC BY-

         NC-SA 4.0
     · Table 7.2: Summary of Common Level 1 to Level 4 Charging Facilities in North America is

         licensed under CC BY 4.0

CHAPTER 8

     · Table 8.1: Intelligent transportation system applications utilizing connected and automated
         vehicle technology from "Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions" by Ramanathan et al.
         is under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Figure 8.1: Potential energy/emissions impacts of automated technology from "Bending the
         Curve: Climate Change Solutions" by Ramanathan et al. is under the following Creative
         Commons license: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

CHAPTER 9

     · Figure 9.1: A Systems Approach to Urban Distribution from Sustainable Urban Freight
         Transport: a Global Perspective by through TU Delft OpenCourseWare is licensed under
         Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial Share Alike

     · Table 9.1: Overview of main actions public administrators can perform and potential
         reactions from the private sector is adapted from Muñuzuri et al. 2005) [Adapted from Van
         Duin et al. (2019)]

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 141
DERIVATIVE NOTES

Minor revisions not noted below include editing language for clarity, length, and flow as well as
corrections to and additions of hyperlinks and citations. Other revisions not listed below include
removing references to sections of the text that were not included in the book/article. The following
is a chapter list of source material used in the creation of the text.

CHAPTER 1

     · Sustainability: A Comprehensive Foundation byTom Theis and Jonathan Tomkin is Licensed
         under CC BY 4.0

     · Foundations in Sustainability Systems (EME 504) by Neyda Abreu is licensed under CC BY-
         NC-SA 4.0

CHAPTER 2

     · Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M.,
         Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Climate Change and Transportation, Climate Change and Variabilit by Yuri Yevdokimov is
         licensed under CC BY-NC-SA-3.0

CHAPTER 4

     · Vibrant Sidewalks in the United States: Re-Integrating Walking and a Quintessential Social
         Realm by Anastasia Loukaitou-Sideris and Renia Ehrenfeucht is licensed under CC BY-NC
         4.0

CHAPTER 5

     · Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M.,
         Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

CHAPTER 6

     · Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M.,
         Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Technology Mix Optimization for Zero-Emission Fleets Adopting a Multi-Criteria Decision
         Analysis within a Life Cycle Assessment Framework by Castillo, Analy is licensed under CC
         BY-NC-SA 4.0

     · Viable Pathways in the Energy Sector to Meet California Climate Goals with an Emphasis on
         Heavy-Duty Transportation and Refinery Emissions by Houck, Margaret is licensed under
         CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

142 SHAMS TANVIR
CHAPTER 7
     · Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M.,
         Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
     · Dynamic modeling and real-time management of a system of EV fast-charging stations by
         Yang, D., Sarma, N., Hyland, M., & Jayakrishnan, R is licensed under CC BY 4.0 Deed
     · Electric Cars: Technology by TU Delft OpenCourseWare is licensed under a Creative
         Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

CHAPTER 8
     · Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions by Ramanathan, V., Aines, R., Auffhammer, M.,
         Barth, M., Cole, J., Forman, F., et al. is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

CHAPTER 9
     · Transforming the Freight Industry in ACCESS Magazine, 1(20), 26-31 by Regan, A. is licensed
         by CC BY-NC 3.0
     · Sustainable Urban Freight Transport: a Global Perspective by Dr. J.H.R. van Duin, Dr. Johan
         Joubert, Dr. Russell Thompson, Ir. Tharsis Teoh, Prof.dr.ir. L.A. Tavasszy through TU Delft
         OpenCourseWare is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial Share
         Alike

                                                                                                                                                                    SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY 143
ERRATA AND VERSIONING HISTORY

MAVS OPEN PRESS

The peer review process for Mavs Open Press resources varies by publication and author. We strive
for transparency and describe the creation process in the front matter of each text so readers may
evaluate the work on its own merit. Because we offer web-based services, we can quickly and easily
address any errors that arise after publication. This page provides a record of edits and changes made
to the web version of this book since its initial publication.

   Changes logged here are reflected in the web text only until a new version of the resource is
released, at which point the file downloads are also updated. Version updates are noted in the Status
field below.

   If you have a correction to suggest, submit it to library-open@listserv.uta.edu. We will contact the
author then make and log necessary changes here. Below is a list of Correction Types we currently
update:

    1. Typo

    2. Broken link

    3. Addition

    4. Other factual inaccuracy in content

    5. Incorrect calculation or solution

    6. General/pedagogical suggestion or question

Date Submitted Format  Correction Type Location  Description  Status

144 SHAMS TANVIR
