Maternal-Newborn Nursing

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS

AMY GILES, BAYLOR UNIVERSITY
REGINA PRUSINSKI, OTTERBEIN UNIVERSITY
LAURA WALLACE, BRENAU UNIVERSITY
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2024 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Under this license, any user of this textbook or the textbook
contents herein must provide proper attribution as follows:

  - If you redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and HTML), then you
       must retain on every page the following attribution:
       "Access for free at openstax.org."

  - If you redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every physical page the
       following attribution:
       "Access for free at openstax.org."

  - If you redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format page view (including
       but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following attribution:
       "Access for free at openstax.org."

  - If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
       https://openstax.org/details/books/maternal-newborn-nursing in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

Kendall Hunt and the Kendall Hunt Logo are trademarks of Kendall Hunt. The Kendall Hunt mark is registered
in the United States, Canada, and the European Union. These trademarks may not be used without the prior
and express written consent of Kendall Hunt.

COLOR PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13  978-1-711472-87-4
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13    978-1-711472-86-7
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13       978-1-961584-43-3
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR     2024
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 OF 24
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax is an initiative of Rice University. As a leading research university with a distinctive commitment to
undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research, unsurpassed teaching, and
contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by cultivating a diverse community
of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of
partners, please visit openstax.org/foundation.

Arnold Ventures                                  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative                       Michelson 20MM Foundation
Chegg, Inc.                                      National Science Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  The Open Society Foundations
Digital Promise                                  Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
Ann and John Doerr                               Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
Girard Foundation                                Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go
Google Inc.                                      Stand Together
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
The Hewlett-Packard Company                      The Stuart Family Foundation
Intel Inc.                                       Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
Rusty and John Jaggers                           Valhalla Charitable Foundation
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     White Star Education Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          Schmidt Futures
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 William Marsh Rice University
The Maxfield Foundation
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                         When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.

                                                Our books are free and flexible, forever.
                         Get started at openstax.org/details/books/maternal-newborn-nursing

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
Contents

Preface       1

UNIT 1 INTRODUCTION TO MATERNAL-
NEWBORN AND WOMEN'S HEALTH NURSING

CHAPTER 1

Foundations in Maternal-Newborn and Women's Health Nursing

9

Introduction         9

1.1 Current Trends in Women's Health Care      10

1.2 Standards of Maternal, Newborn, and Gynecologic Nursing Care        14

1.3 Perinatal Care: Regional and Levels of Care and Transport     18

1.4 Ethical and Legal Concerns      21

Summary          27

Key Terms        27

Assessments          28

References       33

CHAPTER 2

Culturally Competent Nursing Care 39

Introduction         39

2.1 Person- and Family-Centered Care       40

2.2 Family Health and Cultural Factors     47

2.3 Culturally Competent Care       52

2.4 Families at Higher Risk for Poor Health Outcomes  55

Summary          60

Key Terms        60

Assessments          61

References       65

UNIT 2 WOMEN'S HEALTH THROUGH THE
LIFESPAN

CHAPTER 3

Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-
Person Care 71

Introduction         71

3.1 Factors Influencing the Health of Persons Assigned Female at Birth      72

3.2 Leading Causes of Death and Health Screenings     80

3.3 Health Promotion     93

3.4 Well-Person Care     111

3.5 Preconceptual Care         119
Summary            130
Key Terms           131
Assessments
References             132
                     139

CHAPTER 4

Influences on Fertility 147

Introduction        147

4.1 Fertility and Conception          147

4.2 Genetics        155

4.3 Causes of Infertility        164

4.4 Treating Infertility         173

Summary            188

Key Terms          188

Assessments         190

References         194

CHAPTER 5

Family Planning 201

Introduction        201

5.1 Contraception: The Nurse's Role             202

5.2 Natural Methods of Contraception            205

5.3 Barrier Methods of Contraception            210

5.4 Short-Acting Reversible Hormonal Methods of Contraception  219

5.5 Long-Acting Reversible Contraception             229

5.6 Emergency Contraception                235

5.7 Sterilization         238

5.8 Induced Abortion             241

Summary            245

Key Terms          246

Assessments         247

References         255

CHAPTER 6

Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

261

Introduction        261

6.1 Functional Disorders         262

6.2 Structural Disorders         275

6.3 Benign Growths          279

6.4 Malignant Neoplasms               283

Summary            291

Key Terms          291

Assessments         292

References         296

CHAPTER 7

Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System

Access for free at openstax.org
Infections 301

Introduction  301

7.1 Sexually Transmitted Infections        302

7.2 Vaginal Infections and Other Conditions       324

7.3 Urinary Tract Infections        331

Summary       337

Key Terms     337

Assessments   338

References    340

CHAPTER 8

Disorders of the Breast 345

Introduction  345

8.1 Benign Disorders of the Breast        346

8.2 Cancer of the Breast        352

Summary       375

Key Terms     375

Assessments   376

References    378

CHAPTER 9

Violence Against Women 383

Introduction  383

9.1 Incidence, History, and Psychosocial Factors       383

9.2 Domestic and Intimate Partner Violence        388

9.3 Sexual Abuse and Assault         391

9.4 Human Trafficking         397

9.5 Social and Cultural Practices of Violence Against Women       400

9.6 Psychological Trauma of Violence Against Women           403

Summary       407

Key Terms     407

Assessments   408

References    414

UNIT 3 CARE DURING PREGNANCY

CHAPTER 10

Pregnancy 421

Introduction  421

10.1 Physiologic Changes Due to Pregnancy         422

10.2 Psychosocial Aspects of Pregnancy          440

10.3 Common Discomforts of Pregnancy            444

10.4 Fetal Growth and Development          453

10.5 Choosing a Health Care Provider         467

10.6 Choosing a Birthing Place        469

Summary       473

Key Terms     474

Assessments   475

References    481
CHAPTER 11

Prenatal Care 485

Introduction      485

11.1 First Prenatal Visit        486

11.2 Care in the First Trimester of Pregnancy       513

11.3 Care in the Second Trimester of Pregnancy         515

11.4 Care in the Third Trimester of Pregnancy          519

11.5 Family Assessment and Nursing Interventions            525

Summary           528

Key Terms         528

Assessments       529

References        534

CHAPTER 12

Pregnancy at Risk 537

Introduction      537

12.1 Preconception Conditions Affecting Pregnancy           538

12.2 Conditions Limited to Pregnancy           554

Summary           578

Key Terms         578

Assessments       580

References        583

CHAPTER 13

Prenatal Testing 591

Introduction      591

13.1 Prenatal Testing during the First Trimester       592
                                                           599
13.2 Prenatal Testing during the Second Trimester
                                                       610
13.3 Prenatal Testing during the Third Trimester

Summary           622

Key Terms         622

Assessments       623

References        626

CHAPTER 14                                                    631
                                                       632
Childbirth Education Options

Introduction      631

14.1 Lamaze International Childbirth Education

14.2 Bradley Method              637

14.3 Hypnobirthing: The Mongan Method             639

14.4 Alexander Technique              642

14.5 Birth Plans       646

Summary           648

Key Terms         648

Assessments       648

References        654

Access for free at openstax.org
UNIT 4 CARE DURING LABOR AND BIRTH

CHAPTER 15

Process of Labor and Birth 657

Introduction     657

15.1 Factors Influencing the Process of Labor and Birth        658

15.2 Stages of Labor       671

15.3 Physiologic Adaptations during Labor and Birth         677

15.4 Psychosocial Adaptations during Labor and Birth           680

15.5 Family Adaptations during Labor and Birth        682

Summary          684

Key Terms        684

Assessments      685

References       689

CHAPTER 16

Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring 695

Introduction     695

16.1 Basic Terms of Fetal Heart Rate and Contraction Patterns       696

16.2 External and Internal Monitoring       711

16.3 Physiological Influences on Fetal Heart Rate Patterns          724

16.4 Nursing Interventions Based on Fetal Heart Rate and Uterine Contraction Patterns  726

16.5 Intrauterine Resuscitation        729

Summary          730

Key Terms        730

Assessments      731

References       738

CHAPTER 17

Pain Management During Labor and Birth 741

Introduction     741

17.1 Nonpharmacological Pain Management              742

17.2 Pharmacological Pain Management            753

17.3 Anesthesia       755

Summary          762

Key Terms        762

Assessments      763

References       766

CHAPTER 18

Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth 771

Introduction     771

18.1 Nursing Care During the First Stage of Labor         771

18.2 Nursing Care During the Second Stage of Labor          784

18.3 Nursing Care During the Third Stage of Labor         792

18.4 Nursing Care During the Fourth Stage of Labor        799

Summary          805

Key Terms        805
Assessments     806
References    809

CHAPTER 19

Complications of Labor and Birth 813

Introduction  813

19.1 Labor Dystocia       814

19.2 Medical Interventions During Labor         820

19.3 Obstetrical Conditions Affecting Labor and Birth          827

19.4 Preexisting Conditions of the Pregnant Person Placing the Delivery at Risk  839

19.5 Interventions During Birth       840

19.6 Cesarean Section            842

19.7 Obstetrical Emergencies          848

19.8 Complications of the Second Stage of Labor           854

19.9 Complications in the Third Stage of Labor         855

19.10 Monitoring the Person in Labor for Complications Developing During the Process of Labor and Birth  859

Summary       862

Key Terms     863

Assessments          864

References    871

UNIT 5 CARE DURING THE POSTPARTUM
PERIOD

CHAPTER 20

Postpartum Care 879

Introduction  879

20.1 Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period          879

20.2 Psychosocial Adaptation to Parenthood           900

20.3 Nursing Care During the Postpartum Period         905

Summary       916

Key Terms     916

Assessments          917

References    921

CHAPTER 21

Postpartum Complications 927

Introduction  927

21.1 Postpartum Infections            928

21.2 Postpartum Hemorrhage            932

21.3 Breasts and Breast-Feeding            942

21.4 Cesarean Birth Discomforts            945

21.5 Postpartum Mood Disorders and Psychiatric Disorders            950

Summary       954

Key Terms     954

Assessments          955

References    959

Access for free at openstax.org
UNIT 6 NEWBORN CARE

CHAPTER 22

Immediate Care of the Newborn 963

Introduction        963

22.1 Apgar Scoring        963

22.2 Physiological Adaptation and Transition  971

22.3 Neutral Thermal Environment        980

Summary       987

Key Terms     987

Assessments         988

References    992

CHAPTER 23

Newborn Assessment 995

Introduction        995

23.1 Physical Assessment of the Newborn       996

23.2 Estimation of Gestational Age of the Newborn and Newborn Behavioral Assessment  1019

Summary       1025

Key Terms     1025

Assessments         1026

References    1031

CHAPTER 24

Care of the Typical Newborn 1035

Introduction        1035

24.1 Basic Newborn Care        1035

24.2 Care of Common Problems in the Newborn           1065

24.3 Newborn Discharge Planning and Parent Education        1080

Summary       1090

Key Terms     1091

Assessments         1092

References    1096

CHAPTER 25

Care of the Newborn at Risk 1103

Introduction        1103

25.1 Birth-Related Complications     1104

25.2 Congenital, Genetic, and Acquired Complications        1109

25.3 Newborn Resuscitation        1125

25.4 Preterm Newborn        1131

25.5 Parent-Newborn Bonding and Attachment            1140

25.6 Discharge Planning        1143

Summary       1148

Key Terms     1148

Assessments         1150

References    1154
CHAPTER 26                                   1161

Perinatal Bereavement

Introduction        1161

26.1 Pregnancy Loss              1161

26.2 Intrapartum Fetal Death           1164

26.3 Newborn Loss         1169

Summary       1174

Key Terms     1174

Assessments         1175

References          1178

CHAPTER 27                                                      1181

Unfolding Case Study: Applying Clinical Judgment

Introduction        1181

27.1 Clinical Judgment within the Nursing Process  1181

27.2 Measuring Clinical Judgment within Nursing Practice  1186

Summary       1201

Key Terms     1201

Assessments         1201

References          1202

Answer Key          1203

Index         1209

Access for free at openstax.org
         Preface                                                                                                          1

PREFACE

About OpenStax

OpenStax is part of Rice University, which is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit charitable corporation. As an educational
initiative, it's our mission to improve educational access and learning for everyone. Through our partnerships with
philanthropic organizations and our alliance with other educational resource companies, we're breaking down the
most common barriers to learning. Because we believe that everyone should and can have access to knowledge.

About OpenStax Resources

Customization
Maternal-Newborn Nursing is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY) license,
which means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide attribution to
OpenStax and its content contributors.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or select only the sections that are most
relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain chapters and
sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your syllabus to the
sections in the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. Visit the Instructor
Resources section of your book page on OpenStax.org for more information.

Art Attribution
In Maternal-Newborn Nursing, art contains attribution to its title, creator or rights holder, host platform, and license
within the caption. Because the art is openly licensed, anyone may reuse the art as long as they provide the same
attribution to its original source.

Errata
All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook, errors
sometimes occur. In addition, the wide range of evidence, standards, practices, data, and legal circumstances in
nursing change frequently, and portions of the text may become out of date. Since our books are web-based, we can
make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it
through the link on your book page on OpenStax.org. Subject matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax
is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so you will also find a list of past and pending errata
changes on your book page on OpenStax.org.

Format
You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through OpenStax.org, and for a low cost in print. The web
view is the recommended format because it is the most accessible--including being WCAG 2.1 AA compliant--and
most current. Print versions are available for individual purchase, or they may be ordered through your campus
bookstore.

About Maternal-Newborn Nursing

Summary
Nurses in every area of specialty will care for persons assigned female at birth (AFAB). Therefore, nurses should be
aware of the nuances of care across the life stages, including adolescence, pregnancy, postpartum, perimenopause,
and menopause. People are unique, and nurses are in unique positions to promote health, detect vulnerability,
intimate partner violence, homelessness, depression, and impacts of social determinates of health. This text
introduces these concepts and encourages students to consider individual patient-centered care.

Maternal-Newborn Nursing is written with a focus on pregnancy, birth, postpartum, breastfeeding, and newborn
care. This text presents normal physiology and abnormal conditions specific to maternal/newborn care. The student
2  Preface

   will be able to implement the Clinical Judgement Measurement Model to recognize, analyze, prioritize, create, act
   on, and evaluate outcomes throughout the many normal and abnormal conditions presented. After reading
   Maternal-Newborn Nursing, students will be able to provide patient education regarding contraception, pregnancy,
   labor, or chronic pelvic pain; screen for mental health issues such as postpartum depression and anxiety, grief, or
   fear; determine a patient's access to care questioning transportation, insurance, employment; and integrate
   inclusive care by addressing patients by their preferred name, recognizing populations at higher risk for health
   disparities or complications, and providing a safe place for care.

   Pedagogical Foundation
   Maternal-Newborn Nursing uses cognitivism and connectivism as the learning framework. The text provides visual
   tools such as pictures, charts, and graphs that allow students to internalize information and create long-term
   knowledge. The text also builds on the students' knowledge and skills likely obtained in previous courses, and
   expands their learning of new concepts of maternal/newborn nursing. The technology and formats of the offering
   allows for teachers to build and expand on the existing information, rearrange chapters to fit the needs of the class,
   and connect students to resources through suggested websites and links. These unique abilities increase active
   learning, leading to increased cognitive development.

   Organizational Framework
   The table of contents for Maternal-Newborn Nursing presents content in 27 chapters, organized into 6 thematic
   units.

       · Unit 1 introduces the foundations of maternal-newborn and women's health nursing. It covers trends and
           standards across all areas, alongside current ethical and legal concerns. The focus on culturally competent
           care highlights issues affecting families and introduces foundational knowledge.

       · Unit 2 explores health promotion and prevention strategies, addressing fertility, family planning, and common
           reproductive system disorders, including both malignant and benign neoplasms. It explores sexually
           transmitted infections, vaginal and urinary tract infections, and breast disorders. Additionally, it tackles
           violence against women, including sexual abuse, human trafficking, and the resultant psychological trauma
           and its effects on families.

       · Unit 3 focuses on the physiological and psychological changes during pregnancy, detailed through prenatal
           care, screening, and education segmented by trimesters. The unit also presents abnormal pregnancy
           conditions and reviews various childbirth education models.

       · Unit 4 breaks down the birthing process into stages of labor, discussing physiological and psychological
           adaptations, maternal and fetal monitoring options, and detailed nursing care for each stage. Pain
           management techniques and interventions for labor complications, such as labor dystocia, cesarean births,
           and obstetrical emergencies, are thoroughly explored.

       · Unit 5 presents normal and abnormal postpartum adaptations, breastfeeding techniques, and the
           management of postpartum mood and psychiatric disorders. It also introduces postpartum nursing care and
           screening tools.

       · Unit 6 covers immediate post-birth recovery and ongoing care for the newborn. It presents newborn
           assessments, gestational age estimation, typical newborn care, and parent education for newborn care. The
           importance of discharge planning is emphasized, alongside discussions on complications like congenital
           malformations, newborn resuscitation, and various aspects of newborn loss. The final chapter brings all the
           information together in an unfolding case study. The case study uses the CJMM model and encompasses care
           from preconception to the newborn stage.

   Nursing Features
   To further enhance learning, Maternal-Newborn Nursing includes the following features:

       · Clinical Judgment Measurement Model boxes guide students through the application of the Clinical
           Judgment Measurement Model in maternal-newborn nursing. The content explores the critical thinking and
           decision-making processes necessary to navigate patient care at different points in the process, from
           recognizing cues to evaluating outcomes.

       · Clinical Safety and Procedures (QSEN) align with the Quality and Safety Education for Nursing competencies
           by providing detailed explanations of safety protocols and procedures specific to maternal-newborn nursing.
           This feature emphasizes the importance of patient safety and quality care and offers checklists, step-by-step,

   Access for free at openstax.org
Preface                                                                                                                   3

        or tips on various safety practices.
    · Cultural Context boxes explore the impact of cultural factors on maternal-newborn nursing. Some features

        describe care provided in other countries, while other features discuss cultural considerations for patients in
        the United States. Cultural Context boxes encourage students to approach each patient individually,
        respecting their culture and values.
    · Ethical/Legal Issues features explore topics concerning ethical or legal issues related to maternal-newborn
        care. One feature might provide information on legality of prescribing birth control to adolescents, while
        another feature discusses ethical concerns of genetic testing.
    · Life-Stage Context features describe topics that are affected by a patient's age. Age-related topics, such as
        advanced maternal age, allow the students to critically think about what influences certain conditions.
    · Link to Learning features provide a very brief introduction to online resources--videos, interactives,
        collections, maps, and other engaging resources that are pertinent to students' exploration of the topic at
        hand.
    · Pharmacology Connections features introduce students to specific medications utilized in maternal-newborn
        nursing. Each feature includes instructions on administration, mechanism of action, dosing, safety for
        pregnancy or breastfeeding, and patient education.
    · Real RN Stories feature firsthand accounts from registered nurses in the field of maternal-newborn nursing.
        These stories help students make connections to topics on a deeper level.
    · Unfolding Case Studies present a hypothetical client scenario that unfolds in three parts across chapters,
        with each subsequent part presenting new information on the same client, to help foster clinical judgment. In
        each part of an unfolding case feature, the scenario is followed by two questions that require students to
        apply their knowledge of evidence-based care and allow them to practice with questions that mimic the style
        of Next-Gen NCLEX. The answers to these questions, with explanations, are included in the Answer Key for
        students at the end of the book.

Pedagogical Features
To support student learning, Maternal-Newborn Nursing includes the following standard elements:

    · Learning Outcomes: Every chapter section begins with a set of clear and concise student learning outcomes.
        These outcomes are designed to help the instructor decide what content to include or assign and can guide
        students on what they can expect to learn and be assessed on.

    · Assessments: A variety of assessments allow instructors to confirm core conceptual learning, elicit brief
        explanations that demonstrate student understanding, and offer more in-depth assignments that enable
        learners to dive more deeply into a topic or history-study skill.
          Review Questions test for conceptual apprehension of key concepts.
          Check Your Understanding Questions require students to explain concepts in their own words.
          Reflection Questions and Competency-Based Assessment Questions dive deeply into the material to
              support longer reflection, group discussion, or written assignments.
          What Should the Nurse Do? and Critical Thinking About Case Study Questions assess students' clinical
              judgment skills using case-based scenarios. Students review either a single case or an unfolding case that
              reveals information gradually. In response to their observations of the patient, students must decide how
              to navigate the Clinical Judgment Measurement Model process. This approach challenges them to apply
              theoretical knowledge to practical situations, determining the most appropriate interventions based on
              the patient's specific circumstances.

    · Answers to Questions in the Book: The assessments are intended for homework assignments or classroom
        discussion; thus, student-facing answers are not provided in the book. Answers and sample answers are
        provided in the Instructor Answer Guide for instructors to share with students at their discretion, as is
        standard for such resources.

    · Chapter Summary: Chapter summaries assist both students and instructors by outlining the primary
        subtopics addressed within the chapter.

    · Key Terms: Key terms are presented in bold text and are followed by an explanation in context. Definitions of
        key terms are also listed in the end-of-chapter glossary.

    · References: References are listed at the end of each chapter.
4  Preface

   About the Authors

   Senior Contributing Authors

                                  Senior contributing authors: Amy Giles (left), Regina Prusinski (middle), Laura Wallace (right)

   Amy Giles, Baylor University. Dr. Giles has been a nurse-midwife since 2002. She received her bachelor's degree
   from Baylor University, master's degree in nursing, and post-master's certificate as a women's health nurse
   practitioner from Texas Woman's University, certificate in nurse-midwifery from University of Texas Southwestern
   Medical School/Parkland School of Nurse-Midwifery, and her Doctor of Nursing Practice from Touro University. She
   owns Allen Midwifery & Family Wellness, a birth-center, hospital practice, and wellness center outside of Dallas,
   Texas. Dr. Giles is also certified in Lifestyle Medicine and provides care for clients who struggle with preventable
   chronic diseases, as well as pregnancy, gynecological, and psychosocial issues through lifestyle modifications. Dr.
   Giles has taught undergraduate and graduate nursing students at Texas Woman's University, Texas Tech Health
   Science Center, and is a Clinical Assistant Professor in the DNP program at the Louise Herrington School of Nursing
   at Baylor University where she teaches nurse-practitioner and nurse-midwifery students. Dr. Giles encourages the
   next generation of healthcare providers to treat each patient individually using compassion and shared decision-
   making. Dr. Giles has served on the Texas Mortality Task Force, Steering Committee for the Texas-Aim Birth Center
   Workshops, secretary and legislative representative of the Consortium of Texas Certified Nurse-Midwives, member
   of the American College of Nurse-Midwives' Program Committee and Core Competency Committee, and member of
   the Southwest Association of Educators' Exam Committee. She has presented at state and national conferences and
   has been published in peer reviewed journals. Recently she was inducted into the Fellowship of the American
   College of Nurse-Midwives.

   Regina Prusinski, Otterbein University. Dr. Prusinski holds a BSN from the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
   an MSN in Acute Care Pediatric Nurse Practitioner from Duke University, a post-master's certificate in Family Nurse
   Practitioner (FNP) from Otterbein University, and a Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP) from The Ohio State University.
   Dr. Prusinski has been a nurse for over 20 years with clinical practice in pediatric and adult congenital health care.
   She has been a nursing professor since obtaining a DNP in 2013 from OSU, teaching at all levels within the nursing
   program at Otterbein university with a focus on critical care, pediatrics, and family health. She is the Graduate
   Nursing Director and FNP Director for Otterbein University Department of Nursing. She has been a clinical
   practitioner at Nationwide Children's Hospital in the Heart Center since 2007. She was the co-writer for the
   successful Nurse Education Grant Program provided by the Ohio Board of Nursing from 2021 to 2023. She was
   awarded the Heart Center travel award in 2022 and the Otterbein Summer Writing Award in 2023. She is a member
   of the National League for Nursing (NLN) and the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses (AACN), a charter
   member of both the Beta Epsilon and Kappa Lambda Chapters of the Sigma Theta Tau International Honor Society
   of Nursing and a peer reviewer for both Open RN texts and the CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing Journal.

   Laura Wallace, Mercer College. Dr. Wallace received a BSN from Spalding University in Louisville, an MS with a
   focus in Nurse-Midwifery from the University of Minnesota, and a PhD in Adult Education from Capella University.
   She is Assistant Professor-D at Chamberlain University, teaching in the BSN prelicensure program and Faculty
   Emeritus at Brenau University. Dr. Wallace's nursing career spans more than 40 years as a maternity nurse and
   certified nurse-midwife. Her nursing education career began over 20 years ago in an ADN program. Throughout her
   nursing education experience, she has taught nurses across all academic levels, from ADN to PhD in both on-ground
   and online learning environments. Dr. Wallace is a member of the Georgia Association for Nursing Education.

   Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     Preface  5

Contributing Authors
Leah Elliott, Bakersfield College
Rachel Hill, California State University, Sacramento
Debra Hrelic, University of North Carolina Wilmington
Kelly LaMonica, Penn Medicine Princeton Health
Emily Langley, Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital
Rachael Mooney, Northwood Technical College
JoAnn Peterson, University of Kansas
Courtney Watson, Georgetown University
Nicole Wheeler, Wayne State University
Reviewers
Ashley Anderson, Athena Health and Wellness
Stephane Blundell, University of Massachusetts Global
Beth Condley, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
Jessica Crockett, Pensacola Christian College
Samantha Crouch, Baylor University
Janine Eagon, Marquette University
Amber Essman, Victoria Haynes, University of North Dakota The Ohio State University
Kelley Hicks, Managing Care Solutions
Stacey Hobbick, University of North Florida
Karyn Holt, Drexel University
Jennifer Johnson, Chamberlain University
Yuko Kawasaki, West Valley-Mission Community College
Brittney Kenney, University of Missouri-St. Louis
Thanayi Lambert, University of Texas at Arlington
Wendy Martin, Gordon State College
Angela McCain, Southern University Shreveport
Mikki Meadows-Oliver, New York University
Autumn Mels, University of Chicago
Jacqueline Mendoza-Lu, Herzing University
Melanie Mertz, Gordon State College
Michael Mooney, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Nicole M. Murry, University of Texas at Austin
Lauren Olvera, Baylor University
J. Paulat, Concordia-St. Paul University
Claudia Reed, Seattle University
6  Preface

   Sarah Shealy, Mount Saint Mary's University

   Joy Ferretti Shoemaker, Otterbein University

   Katie Sleaford, St. Ambrose University

   Mary Williams, Gordon State University

   Rachel Wooten, Jacksonville State University

   Additional Resources

   Student and Instructor Resources
   We have compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including Getting Started Guides, an
   instructor's answer guide, test bank, and image slides. Instructor resources require a verified instructor account,
   which you can apply for when you log in or create your account on OpenStax.org. Take advantage of these resources
   to supplement your OpenStax book.

   Instructor's answer guide. Each component of the instructor's guide is designed to provide maximum guidance for
   delivering the content in an interesting and dynamic manner.

   Test bank. With more than 1,100 assessments, instructors can customize tests to support a variety of course
   objectives. The test bank includes review questions (multiple-choice, identification, fill-in-the-blank, true/false),
   short answer questions, and long answer questions to assess students on a variety of levels. The test bank is
   available in Word format.

   PowerPoint lecture slides. The PowerPoint slides provide learning objectives, images and descriptions, feature
   focuses, and discussion questions as a starting place for instructors to build their lectures.

   Academic Integrity
   Academic integrity builds trust, understanding, equity, and genuine learning. While students may encounter
   significant challenges in their courses and their lives, doing their own work and maintaining a high degree of
   authenticity will result in meaningful outcomes that will extend far beyond their college career. Faculty,
   administrators, resource providers, and students should work together to maintain a fair and positive experience.

   We realize that students benefit when academic integrity ground rules are established early in the course. To that
   end, OpenStax has created an interactive to aid with academic integrity discussions in your course.

   Visit our academic integrity slider (https://view.genial.ly/61e08a7af6db870d591078c1/interactive-image-defining-academic-integrity-
   interactive-slider). Click and drag icons along the continuum to align these practices with your institution and course policies. You may then
   include the graphic on your syllabus, present it in your first course meeting, or create a handout for students. (attribution: Copyright Rice
   University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

   At OpenStax we are also developing resources supporting authentic learning experiences and assessment. Please
   visit this book's page for updates. For an in-depth review of academic integrity strategies, we highly recommend
   visiting the International Center of Academic Integrity (ICAI) website at https://academicintegrity.org/
   (https://academicintegrity.org/).

   Access for free at openstax.org
Preface                                                                                                                7

Community Hubs
OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer
Community Hubs on OER Commons--a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that support
OpenStax books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own materials or
download resources to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching material, multimedia, and
relevant course content. We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects most relevant to your teaching
and research as an opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with other faculty. To reach the
Community Hubs, visit www.oercommons.org/hubs/openstax.

Technology partners
As allies in making high-quality learning materials accessible, our technology partners offer optional low-cost tools
that are integrated with OpenStax books. To access the technology options for your text, visit your book page on
OpenStax.org.

Special Thanks
The Division of Digital Learning at the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board (THECB) has a history of dedicated
research initiatives, services, and programs that have advanced open education in Texas by providing support,
advocacy, and resources to Texas institutions in their OER efforts. The Division maintains a diverse OER portfolio
including OERTX, a digital library and community space for open education work. The leadership and collaboration
of the Division of Digital Learning staff made the OER Nursing Essentials (ONE) project possible, throughout
research, planning, and development phases of the eight-textbook series.

This work was supported in whole or in part by the THECB. The opinions and conclusions expressed in this
document are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the opinions or policies of the THECB.
8  Preface

   Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 1

Foundations in Maternal-Newborn and
Women's Health Nursing

FIGURE 1.1 Perinatal Nurses The birthing parent and newborn make a couplet. Perinatal nurses care for the pregnant person, the fetus,
and then the newborn. (credit: "Cesarean Birth" by Robyn Alvarez/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
1.1 Current Trends in Women's Health Care
1.2 Standards of Maternal, Newborn, and Gynecologic Nursing Care
1.3 Perinatal Care: Regional and Levels of Care and Transport
1.4 Ethical and Legal Concerns

INTRODUCTION Maternal-newborn and women's health nursing encompasses the lifespan of those assigned
female at birth (AFAB). This care can focus on contraception and preconception care as well as preventive health
care. The nurse can provide education on health promotion and disease prevention during an annual exam. For
those persons who become pregnant, perinatal nurses provide education, support, referrals, and care in the office,
the hospital, and the community. After the newborn arrives, the perinatal nurse cares for the parent-newborn
couplet, providing breast-feeding education and support, parenting education, postpartum depression screening,
and anticipatory guidance of the postpartum period.
Nurses learn the fundamentals of maternal-newborn and women's health care to provide quality, safe care. Many
nurses will care for a parent-baby couplet and ensure the antepartum, intrapartum, and postpartum person and
newborn are transitioning well. Other nurses care for persons assigned female at birth (AFAB) throughout the
lifespan in a gynecologic office.
Maternal-newborn and women's health nurses are advocates for their patients. These nurses screen for intimate
partner violence, human trafficking, substance use disorders, depression, and discrimination. The nurse advocates
for persons of color, LGBTQIA+ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex, and asexual) persons,
marginalized families, and people experiencing homelessness. Through patient circumstances involving ethical
10  1 · Foundations in Maternal-Newborn and Women's Health Nursing

    dilemmas, the nurse provides supportive, nonjudgmental care. Nurses also serve on hospital committees and work
    with organizations to influence policies and laws regarding health issues affecting persons AFAB.

    Special populations require individualized care. The nurse tailors care to the individual needs of the person. The
    care plan is created with the person's physical, mental, social, and emotional needs along with cultural and religious
    considerations. The care of persons AFAB is enhanced by the care provided by maternal-newborn and women's
    health nurses.

    1.1 Current Trends in Women's Health Care

    LEARNING OBJECTIVES
    By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Discuss the goals of Healthy People 2030 for improvement of the health of persons AFAB
        · Explain morbidity and mortality of persons AFAB and children and quality improvements to address their

            health status
        · Recognize taboos in the health care of persons AFAB
        · Describe how persons AFAB advocate for themselves

    Health care evolves as new information is provided by research and new treatments become available.
    Organizations focused on health promotion and disease prevention can provide goals and objectives to guide the
    public in improving self-care and well-being. U.S. statistics on morbidity and mortality are published yearly and
    scrutinized by researchers and health-care providers to make improvements. Many quality improvement initiatives
    are implemented to address these poor outcomes. Recognizing taboos and stigma related to reproductive health
    can improve outcomes for persons AFAB. As taboos are addressed and education is provided to the public, persons
    AFAB continue to advocate for positive changes to create positive outcomes.

    Healthy People 2030

    The U.S. Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion reviews data regarding the health of the nation to
    identify conditions negatively affecting the population and creating objectives to address these conditions. Healthy
    People 2030 (n.d.) is a set of evidence-based objectives aimed at improving health and wellness. Evidence-based
    care refers to utilizing research to guide decisions and interventions to provide the safest, most effective care.
    Nurses and health-care providers use these guidelines to provide the most up-to-date care.

    Healthy People 2030 (n.d.) objectives address health conditions such as addiction, heart disease, obesity,
    pregnancy, and sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Objectives also address health behaviors such as child
    development, family planning, preventive care, vaccinations, and violence prevention. Populations addressed in the
    objectives range from children to adolescents to older adults, as well as LGBTQIA+ persons and people with
    disabilities. Many settings such as global health, schools, hospital services, and the workplace are covered. The
    objectives also address social determinants of health that affect economics, education, health-care access,
    neighborhoods, and communities.

    Many objectives are dedicated to the health and wellness of persons AFAB, including pregnancy, childbirth, violence
    protection, and gender inequity. The nurse uses these objectives to help educate people regarding health promotion
    and disease prevention. Patient education based on these objectives can help prevent cervical cancer, heart
    disease, and adolescent pregnancies, as well as elevate the health and wellness of persons assigned female at birth
    (Healthy People 2030, n.d.). Refer to Chapter 3 Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person
    Care for further discussion of Healthy People 2030.

            LINK TO LEARNING

    The nurse can explore objectives addressing many different diseases and health conditions (https://openstax.org/r/
    77/healthypeople) as well as different populations of people and groups by reviewing Healthy People 2030.

    Health Status of Women and Children

    In 2021, the top three leading causes of death in the United States for persons AFAB were heart disease, cancer,

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     1.1 · Current Trends in Women's Health Care                          11

and stroke; 10 percent of persons AFAB smoked cigarettes; and 42.1 percent were obese (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention [CDC], 2023b). Persons AFAB have unique health issues involving pregnancy, childbirth,
menopause, osteoporosis, and physical violence. The nurse must be aware of social disparities and differing access
to health care when educating and caring for these patients.

Morbidity and Mortality
Morbidity and mortality are terms used in epidemiology. Morbidity is a term used to describe a specific condition or
disease affecting people. Mortality is a term used to describe the number of deaths due to a specific condition or
disease. These terms are usually reported as a ratio or rate. The results are used to evaluate the health of a
population to investigate the cause of the death or illness.

Maternal Mortality
The death of a person while pregnant or within 42 days of birth or termination of pregnancy that was not accidental
is called maternal mortality (Hoyert, 2023). The maternal mortality rate in the United States for 2021 was 32.9
deaths per 100,000 births (Hoyert, 2023). The World Health Organization (WHO; 2023) reported more maternal
mortality in low-income countries; causes for those deaths include severe bleeding, infections, hypertension
(preeclampsia and eclampsia), complications from delivery, and unsafe abortions. In the United States, maternal
mortality occurred 2.6 times more often in non-Hispanic Black persons than in non-Hispanic White persons (Hoyert,
2023), and overall the United States has the highest maternal mortality rate of any developed country. Figure 1.2
summarizes maternal death by ethnicity. Research from 2017 to 2019 from 36 states has also shown that more
than 80 percent of pregnancy-related deaths were preventable (CDC, 2022a). Table 1.1 lists causes of preventable
maternal deaths. Nurses caring for pregnant patients should be aware of the causes of preventable maternal deaths
and help develop guidelines to mitigate those risks.

FIGURE 1.2 Maternal Death Rate by Ethnicity The maternal mortality rate (number of deaths per 100,000 births) is strikingly increased
for Black non-Hispanic persons in the United States (Buchholz, 2022). (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)

Cause of Preventable Death                                                                     Persons Who
                                                                                               Died from
                                                                                               This Cause
                                                                                               (%)

Mental health conditions (e.g., suicide, overdose/poisoning related to substance use disorder) 22.7

Hemorrhage (excludes aneurysms or stroke)                                                      13.7

Cardiac and coronary conditions (e.g., coronary artery disease, pulmonary hypertension [HTN],  12.8
congenital valve and heart disease, HTN/cardiovascular disease, and Marfan syndrome;
excludes cardiomyopathy and HTN disorders of pregnancy)

Infection                                                                                      9.2

TABLE 1.1 Preventable Pregnancy-Related Deaths (Trost et al., 2022)
12  1 · Foundations in Maternal-Newborn and Women's Health Nursing

    Cause of Preventable Death                                                         Persons Who
                                                                                       Died from
                                                                                       This Cause
                                                                                       (%)

    Embolism-thrombotic                                                                8.7

    Cardiomyopathy                                                                     8.5

    Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy                                                6.5

    Anaphylactoid syndrome of pregnancy (previously known as amniotic fluid embolism)  3.8

    Injury (homicide, poisoning, unknown cause of intent of injury)                    3.6

    Cerebrovascular accident                                                           2.5

    Cancer                                                                             1.9

    Metabolic/endocrine conditions                                                     1.2

    Pulmonary conditions                                                               1.2

    TABLE 1.1 Preventable Pregnancy-Related Deaths (Trost et al., 2022)

    Fetal Mortality
    The intrauterine demise of the fetus at any gestational age is called fetal mortality; however, most states in the
    United States require reporting those deaths occurring only at and after 20 weeks' gestation (Gregory et al., 2022).
    The U.S. fetal mortality rate for 2020 was 5.74 deaths per 100,000 for the population overall and 10.34 deaths per
    100,000 Black people (Gregory et al., 2022). The top reasons for fetal death included death of unknown cause;
    complications with the placenta, cord, or membranes; maternal complications of pregnancy; maternal conditions
    unrelated to pregnancy; and congenital malformations (Gregory et al., 2022).

    Infant Mortality
    The death of an infant before their first birthday is called infant mortality. In 2020, the U.S. infant mortality rate
    was 5.4 deaths per 1,000 births, and the most common causes of infant mortality included birth defects, preterm/
    low birth weight birth, sudden unexplained infant death syndrome (SUIDS), injuries, and maternal pregnancy
    complications (CDC, 2022b). Infant mortality also skews higher in non-Hispanic Black people, with 10.6 deaths per
    1,000 births in 2020 (CDC, 2022b).

    Childhood Mortality and Morbidity
    The death of a child under 5 years of age is called childhood mortality. In 2021, the childhood mortality rate was
    25 deaths per 100,000 people in the United States, with the most common causes being accidents, congenital
    malformations and chromosomal abnormalities, and homicide (CDC, 2023a). The WHO (n.d.-b) revealed a
    worldwide reduction in childhood mortality from 12.8 million in 1990 to 5 million in 2021. The most common
    causes of childhood morbidity (illness) worldwide are congenital anomalies, injuries, and noncommunicable
    diseases (WHO, n.d.-a).

            CULTURAL CONTEXT

    Maternal Mortality in Pakistan

    Omer et al. (2021) published a paper on the social and cultural practices in Pakistan that affect maternal mortality.
    Pakistan, the fifth most populated country in the world, has a maternal mortality rate of 140 deaths per 100,000

    Access for free at openstax.org
1.1 · Current Trends in Women's Health Care                                                                              13

births. Culture and religion play a role in this high mortality rate. Muslim women many times use "faith-based"
health-care providers instead of medically trained providers. Also, Pakistan is a patriarchal society, and women are
treated as subordinates with little or no say in their reproductive health. They lack autonomy to seek health care and
often lack transportation to areas with medical facilities. The Three Delays Model explains that complications of
pregnancy could be avoided if the following were not delayed:

    · delay in making the decision to seek care
    · delay in reaching a health-care facility
    · delay in receiving the required maternal health care

It is important for nurses to consider the cultural background of their pregnant patients.

Quality Improvement Measures
In 2020, the Surgeon General's Call to Action to Improve Maternal Health suggested that everyone could contribute
to lowering the maternal mortality rate by following these suggestions:

    · Recognize the need to address mental and physical health across the life course--starting with young girls and
        adolescents and extending through childbearing age.

    · Support healthy behaviors that improve women's health, such as breast-feeding, smoking cessation, and
        physical activity.

    · Recognize and address factors that are associated with overall health and well-being, including those related
        to social determinants of health.

    · Understand that maternal health disparities exist in the United States, including geographic, racial, and ethnic
        disparities, and work to address them.

    · Acknowledge that maternal age and chronic conditions such as hypertension, obesity, and diabetes are risk
        factors for poor maternal health.

    · Learn about early "warning signs" of potential health issues that can occur at any time during pregnancy or in
        the year after delivery.

    · Work collaboratively to recognize the unique needs of women with disabilities and include this population of
        women in existing efforts to reduce maternal health disparities.

Nurses can help decrease maternal mortality by providing their patients with education on these suggestions.

Destigmatizing Topics in Women's Health Care

Many sensitive topics exist in women's health care, such as abortion and birth control. These sensitivities are related
to religious affiliation, infertility related to cultural norms and expectations, and menstrual problems related to
concepts of modesty. Not only does the public shy away from discussing these issues, but persons AFAB may be
afraid to seek help for these issues when necessary. In response to this problem, many organizations and groups are
advocating for policy changes and improved public education. For example, the Kenyan Policy on Menstrual Hygiene
Management attempts to debunk taboos and stigmas by providing education to destigmatize menstruation (Olson et
al., 2022). In the United States, access to reliable contraceptives is a vital tool to reduce unintended pregnancies
and to plan for safe, healthy pregnancies. The American Care Act requires that insurance plans make contraceptives
available to women at no out-of-pocket cost (Planned Parenthood, 2018).The rate of teen pregnancy has decreased
with the accessibility of birth control. Sexual dysfunction is rarely discussed but impacts people's lives and
relationships. Some providers are using the 5 A's model of Ask, Advise, Assess, Assist, Arrange Follow-up to ensure
that the topic of sexual dysfunction is always discussed at a health-care visit, removing the burden of initiating this
conversation from the patient (Arthur et al., 2022). Teen Health Mississippi, an educational website for teens,
addresses several taboos surrounding birth control, including "If you get on birth control, it means you get around,"
and "A woman should not carry condoms because it's not ladylike" (Travis, 2020). Nurses can help destigmatize
these taboos and educate their patients on the normality of these situations. Nurses can also provide support and
resources to help their patients.
14  1 · Foundations in Maternal-Newborn and Women's Health Nursing

            LINK TO LEARNING

    The teen website Teen Health Mississippi (https://openstax.org/r/77/teenhealth) addresses taboos surrounding
    birth control.

    Women Advocating for Themselves

    Some conditions such as heart disease and cancer are diagnosed later in persons AFAB than in persons assigned
    male at birth (AMAB), and persons AFAB are being educated to advocate for themselves. Self-advocacy is the ability
    to overcome challenges in health care in which a person's preferences, needs, and values are met (Thomas et al.,
    2021). An article discussing cardiovascular health suggested for persons AFAB to:

        · pay attention to what their body is telling them;
        · make sure their health-care provider listens to them;
        · ask questions about treatment; and
        · gather support from friends, families, and health groups (Doner, 2022).

    Persons who self-advocate can improve their quality of life and possibly reduce health-care disparities (Thomas et
    al., 2021). The nurse can assist the patient to advocate for themselves by encouraging questions and discussing
    expectations of health treatment plans.

    New Generations, New Expectations

    The new generation of persons AFAB who are seeking health care have expectations of being treated fairly, being
    presented information for informed consent, having their health-care information remain private and confidential,
    and being a part of the decision-making process (American Hospital Association, n.d.). A survey of persons born
    between 1981 and 1996 found that 93 percent want a relationship with their provider; however, 85 percent of those
    surveyed felt health-care providers cared about them only when they were ill (American Hospital Association, n.d.).
    The survey also found that this population wanted holistic health to be supported, for providers to support their total
    well-being, and for providers to produce a relevant, personalized experience. Nurses are taught to listen to patients,
    support their decisions, and provide information for health promotion and disease prevention and can meet the
    needs of this new generation.

    1.2 Standards of Maternal, Newborn, and Gynecologic Nursing Care

    LEARNING OBJECTIVES
    By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Define the patients seeking gynecologic and obstetric care
        · Discuss the history of gynecologic and obstetric care in the United States
        · Contrast the history of childbirth to contemporary childbirth in the United States

    Women's health care was defined in 1997 by the Expert Panel on Women's Health of the American Academy of
    Nursing as health promotion, maintenance, and restoration of physical, psychologic, and social well-being of women
    throughout the lifespan (Nichols, 2000). Maternal, newborn, and gynecologic nursing has evolved over the last
    century. Reproductive care became more accessible and persons AFAB fought for equity in health-care research,
    treatment, and shared decision making. Nurses and nursing organizations supported this evolution in standards for
    women's health care.

    Who Are the Patients Seeking Gynecologic and Obstetric Care?

    People seeking gynecologic and obstetric care can be of any age, race, education level, or marital status. The
    American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) suggests persons AFAB see a gynecologic health-care
    provider between the ages of 13 and 15 to discuss normal hormonal changes and menstrual cycle issues
    (Cummings, 2022). The American Academy of Pediatrics and ACOG (2017) also suggest that people should see an
    obstetric health-care provider at or before the 12th week of pregnancy. Older persons AFAB will seek care for
    menopause and screening exams.

    Access for free at openstax.org
1.2 · Standards of Maternal, Newborn, and Gynecologic Nursing Care                                                    15

Most OB-GYN patients are cisgender (that is, their gender identity aligns with their sex assigned at birth) and
heterosexual. But LGBTQIA+, including transgender, and nonbinary persons can seek care with an OB-GYN provider.
In practice, only about 50 percent of transgender men routinely see a gynecologic provider (Aliabadi, 2022). A
transgender man is a man who was assigned female at birth. Gynecologic providers can provide testosterone, birth
control, STI testing and treatment, Pap smears, breast exams, and health promotion education (Aliabadi, 2022).
Obstetric providers can care for transgender men if they choose to become pregnant and start a family. Nurses can
provide education on health-care screening, hormones, support groups, and birth control options, along with the
interactions those medications can have when taken with other medications (Hanson & Haddad, 2023). For more
information on caring for transgender patients, see Chapter 2 Culturally Competent Nursing Care.

History of Women's Reproductive Rights in the United States

The history of women's reproductive rights in the United States began in the 1900s when Margaret Sanger fought for
women to have the right to access contraception (Nichols, 2020). This fight for reproductive rights continued in the
1960s and 1970s as The Women's Health Movement and other activist groups supported the Supreme Court
decision of Roe v. Wade, allowing the legalization of abortion (Nichols, 2000), though that ruling was later
overturned in June 2022. The common goal of those activists in the 1970s was the demand for improved, nonsexist
health care for all women (Nichols, 2000). Activists also advocated for inclusion of persons AFAB in research to
provide new treatments, medications, and vaccinations. Consequently, in 2006, the human papillomavirus (HPV)
vaccination was produced (National Institutes of Health [NIH], n.d.-a).

History of Childbirth in the United States

Birth among pioneer women in the 1700s took place in homes and was attended by a woman's lay female friends
and relatives and a midwife or nurse (McCool & Simeone, 2002). Childbirth for the Mohawk and Mohican Indians
was more solitary. People of these tribes would go to a secluded place near a stream and prepare a shelter with
provisions as they waited for the birth alone (Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media, 2018).

Birth was noninterventional, and maternal deaths during childbirth declined in the 1800s and 1900s; however,
when birth moved into hospitals, postpartum infection occurred more often and was traced back to contamination
from physicians' unwashed hands (McCool & Simeone, 2002). In the 1900s, birthing persons who wanted labor pain
relief gave birth in hospitals and had an increased risk of dying from infection. Many of the infectious risks were
mitigated with the utilization of evidence-based practice and emphasizing hand washing. The transition of birth from
home to the hospital changed the focus of supporting the birthing person during unmedicated labor to pain control
and disease care (McCool & Simeone, 2002). This medical model is the same model used in most U.S. hospitals
today.

Evolution of Maternal Health Care
The Women's Health Movement helped change childbirth practices in the 1960s and 1970s; it focused on less
medical intervention and encouraged husbands or partners to be present during childbirth (Nichols, 2020). This
movement was part of the larger women's movement in the United States (Figure 1.3). During this time, Lamaze
International and the International Childbirth Education Association were formed with the goals of advocating for
choice during childbirth and preparing parents for birth through education (Nichols, 2000). In the 1980s, many
hospitals changed from traditional maternity care to a more family-centered care and began to offer childbirth
education classes (Nichols, 2000).
16  1 · Foundations in Maternal-Newborn and Women's Health Nursing

    FIGURE 1.3 The U.S. Women's Movement Women in the 1960s fought for equal rights and liberation from discrimination. (credit:
    "Women's Lib" March, Washington, D.C., by Warren K. Leffler, 1970/Library of Congress, Public Domain)

    Evolution of Maternal-Newborn Nursing
    The Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses (AWHONN) has been a leader in the evolution of
    maternal-newborn nursing practices. The organization focuses on promoting diversity in the profession and
    advocates regarding issues that impact nurses that care for women and newborns while maintaining a commitment
    to research and education in the field. The mission is to "Empower and support nurses caring for women, newborns,
    and their families through research, education, and advocacy" (AWHONN, 2021a, para 2). Nichols (2000) described
    the core concepts in women's health nursing as:

        · recognizing the diversity of women's health needs
        · emphasizing empowerment through informed participation in one's health care
        · acknowledging the importance of research in gender differences in disease and response to drugs
        · recognizing the need for a multidisciplinary team approach
        · striving for symmetry in provider-patient relationships
        · providing access to information
        · engaging in shared decision making
        · striving for change

    Providers caring for women increased in number and demand. Nurses were able to become certified in their
    respective specialties.

    Contemporary Childbirth

    When birth moved from home to the hospital setting, those giving birth were no longer supported by grandmothers,
    sisters, friends, or partners. Instead, they were alone without their partner in an unfamiliar medical space and
    possibly under the influence of a powerful medication (a mixture of morphine and scopolamine that caused memory
    loss in the birthing parent and neonatal respiratory depression in the newborn) referred to as "twilight sleep." The
    combination of these factors caused birthing patients to feel vulnerable and afraid. Therefore, in the 1960s,
    childbirth education became a way to empower pregnant persons and prepare them for what to expect in childbirth
    (Walker et al, 2009).

            LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

    The Age of First Pregnancy

    In the 1970s, the average age of a person's first pregnancy was 21.4 years, whereas the average age of first
    pregnancy in 2021 was 27.3 years (CDC, 2002; Schaeffer & Aragao, 2023). Speculation is that people delay
    pregnancy to stay in the workforce or to attend college. In the 1970s, people had more than three children, while in
    2020, the average was two children (Schaeffer & Aragao, 2023).

    Access for free at openstax.org
1.2 · Standards of Maternal, Newborn, and Gynecologic Nursing Care                                                      17

Moving from the rigidity of the 1950s and 1960s, gender roles have given way to more flexible approaches to
parenting. Fathers are more involved in childrearing and household chores, while many mothers hold leadership
positions and are the primary breadwinners for their families (Jensen, 2023). Birthing families have become more
educated and desire more supportive, family-centered care during labor and birth.

Contemporary childbirth has become more medicalized, as seen in increased labor inductions, planned cesarean
births, and routine use of medical interventions (Jansen et al., 2013). Some pregnant persons became dissatisfied
with this type of pregnancy care, and up to 50 percent of pregnant persons seek adjunct care from complementary
medicine practitioners (Steel et al., 2019). Reasons for patients using complementary medicine practitioners
include lack of continuity in care provider, lack of empowerment, lack of personal autonomy and decision making,
and increased use of medications and interventions in childbirth (Steel et al., 2019). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) released a committee opinion regarding approaches to limit interventions
during labor and birth. The committee opinion acknowledged that laboring patients who have continuous one-to-
one emotional care have improved labor outcomes; routine interventions such as amniotomy, continuous electronic
fetal monitoring, and continuous intravenous fluid administration are not necessary for low-risk patients; and
birthing facilities should have family-centric interventions, such as clear drapes during a cesarean birth.
Contemporary childbirth educators, nurses, and health-care providers are working to improve autonomy and
individualized care for the laboring person. For further information on childbirth education, see Chapter 14
Childbirth Education Options.

Family-Centered Care
The set of principles that guide health-care delivery according to the strengths and needs of the person, family, and
community, promoting involvement of family in informed decision making is considered family-centered care
(Franck & O'Brien, 2019). This model views the birthing parent and infant as a couplet cared for as one unit. Family-
centered care can be seen in multiple areas of maternal-child nursing. For example, neonatal intensive care units
(NICUs) adopted family-centered care and found that by focusing on parent-NICU team communication and
education, parents' stress, anxiety, and depressive symptoms decreased (Franck & O'Brien, 2019). Family-centered
cesarean births were introduced to increase maternal satisfaction, breast-feeding initiation, and maternal physical
well-being (Schorn et al., 2015). Family-centered cesarean birth includes preparing the laboring person and partner
prior to the cesarean, encouraging the birthing parent to bring music of their choice, making sure the support person
is present, allowing the birthing person and support person to view the birth, placing the newborn skin-to-skin on
the birthing parent, and initiating breastfeeding if possible (Schorn et al., 2015).

Culturally Competent Care
In the United States, maternal, fetal, and infant mortality rates differ greatly among races, with Black people having
the highest mortality rates (Hoyert, 2023). Transgender men and nonbinary persons have poorer outcomes than
cisgender persons and higher rates of discrimination in the health care system. To address these issues, health-care
providers, nurses, and hospitals have adopted standards to improve cultural competence, such as using gender-
affirming language, nurse/health-care provider training, and use of the four major components of cultural
competence. Cultural sensitivity components consist of awareness of personal bias, attitude of openness to
differing views or opinions, knowledge of different cultures, and skills to manage differences effectively (BCT
Partners, 2021). You can read more about cultural competence in Chapter 2 Culturally Competent Nursing Care.

        LINK TO LEARNING

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) uses a monitoring system to share and better understand the
risk factors for pregnancy-related deaths. Visit the CDC website to review its data on pregnancy-related deaths
(https://openstax.org/r/77/mortality) from 1987 through 2019 and mortality ratio by race/ethnicity from 2017
through 2019.
18  1 · Foundations in Maternal-Newborn and Women's Health Nursing

    1.3 Perinatal Care: Regional and Levels of Care and Transport

    LEARNING OBJECTIVES
    By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Recognize reasons for regionalization of perinatal health-care services
        · Discuss community-based care
        · Distinguish between community health nursing and community-based nursing

    Perinatal care is provided in many different settings. Some settings, such as a regional care facility, are safest for a
    high-risk pregnancy. Community settings are designed for low-risk pregnancies. By identifying the level of care
    available and required, health-care providers can collaborate with their patients to make informed decisions on
    where a person's perinatal care should take place. Not all states have adopted this model.

    Community health nurses and community-based nursing both support people in the community and neighborhoods.
    Community health nurses become aware of issues in the community and develop education to address those issues.
    Community-based nurses provide hands-on nursing care to different populations for specific disorders. The nurse is
    an integral part of the care of low- and high-risk pregnant persons and people in the community.

    Regionalization of Perinatal Health Care Services

    Regionalization of health care refers to matching the patient's needs with the hospital capable of providing the
    appropriate level of care. According to Kunz et al. (2020), regionalization began in the United States in the 1970s
    after the March of Dimes published "Improving the Outcomes of Pregnancy," which focused on preterm infants
    being born in facilities with high-level neonatal intensive care units (NICUs). In turn, regionalization has decreased
    neonatal complications, increased survival, and reduced morbidity and mortality.

    Regionalization of maternal care services began in 2015 with ACOG's "Levels of Maternal Care Obstetric Care
    Consensus" (reaffirmed in 2019), which showed that higher-risk patients who gave birth in low-acuity facilities had
    higher rates of severe maternal morbidity than those who birthed at higher-acuity facilities (Kilpatrick et al., 2019).
    Therefore, hospitals were labeled by the level of acuity they could safely treat, and higher-risk persons were
    transferred to the appropriate facilities for the continuation of their care. The levels of maternal care include level 1
    through 4, with the higher levels of care treating the greater risks of acuity (Kilpatrick et al., 2019). All facilities,
    regardless of level, should be able to stabilize a perinatal person prior to transfer to a higher level of care. Table 1.2
    summarizes further information on levels of maternal care.

    Level of      Definitions        Capabilities                   Health-Care Providers
    Care

    Birth center  Care for low-risk  Capable of providing low-risk  Nurse-midwives, midwives, doctor of
                  pregnant           care                           medicine (MD), doctor of osteopathic
                  persons with                                      medicine (DO)
                  uncomplicated
                  singleton term
                  vertex
                  pregnancies

    Level 1:      Care of low to     Capable of beginning an        Nurse-midwife, family physician, or OB-
    Basic Care    moderate risk      emergency cesarean birth,      GYN; trained RNs; certified registered
                  pregnancies,       limited ultrasound, support    nurse anesthetists (CRNAs) or
                  able to stabilize  services readily available,    anesthesiologists available at all times
                  unanticipated      ability to initiate massive
                  problems until     transfusion protocol
                  the patient can
                  be transferred

    TABLE 1.2 Levels of Maternal Care (Kilpatrick et al., 2019)

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             1.3 · Perinatal Care: Regional and Levels of Care and Transport  19

Level of      Definitions       Capabilities                     Health-Care Providers
Care

Level 2:      Level 1 PLUS      Level 1 PLUS ability for         Level 1 PLUS
Specialty     care of           computed tomography (CT)         board-certified OB-GYN available at all
Care          moderate to       scans, magnetic resonance        times; maternal-fetal medicine (MFM)
              high risk         imaging (MRI) scans, non-OB      available via phone, telemedicine, or on-
              antepartum,       ultrasounds, echocardiogram      site; anesthesiologist, internal medicine
              intrapartum, and                                   specialist, and general surgeon readily
              postpartum                                         available at all times
              conditions

Level 3:      Level 2 PLUS      Level 2 PLUS in-house            Level 2 PLUS nursing leaders and adequate
Subspecialty  more complex      availability of all blood        number of RNs who are specially trained
Care          maternal          components; ability to           for complex OB complications; board-
              medical           perform CTs, MRIs, Doppler       certified OB physically present at all times;
              conditions, OB    studies, specialized OB          MFM readily available; anesthesiologist
              complications,    ultrasounds, interventional      physically present at all times; and full
              and fetal         radiology; on-site ventilation;  complement of subspecialties
              conditions        on-site ICU; accept maternal
                                transfers

Level 4:      Level 3 PLUS on-  Level 3 PLUS on-site medical     Level 3 PLUS MFM team and MFM provider
Regional      site medical and  and surgical care of complex     readily available; nursing service line
Perinatal     surgical care of  conditions including ICU; co-    leadership with advanced degrees and
Health Care   the most          management with MFM and          national certifications; continuous
Center        complex           ICU specialists; perinatal       availability of adequate RNs;
              maternal          system leadership and            anesthesiologist physically present at all
              conditions;       collaboration with other         times; at least one available: neurosurgery,
              critically ill    facilities in the region         cardiac surgery, or transplant
              pregnant person
              and fetus

TABLE 1.2 Levels of Maternal Care (Kilpatrick et al., 2019)

Community-Based Care

Low- to moderate-risk pregnant persons are provided perinatal care in their communities. Most U.S. pregnant
persons fit into this category (Kunz et al., 2020). Community hospitals offer basic care for those in rural and
underserved communities and defer to higher-acuity facilities to care for high-risk patients. Research has shown
that community-based care can reduce health inequities and improve maternal and neonatal clinical outcomes
(Rayment-Jones et al., 2021).

Community-based care has been shown to reduce the cost of maternity care and improve patient experiences,
especially for people of color and those with low income (Zephyrin et al., 2021). Because community-based care is
tailored to low-risk pregnancies, care can include the use of nurse-midwives, family practice providers, nurse
practitioners, and birth centers (Figure 1.4).
20  1 · Foundations in Maternal-Newborn and Women's Health Nursing

    FIGURE 1.4 Patient and Provider at a Birth Center Having a postpartum visit at a birth center allows new parents to ask questions in a
    relaxed atmosphere. (reproduced with permission from Amy Giles)

    Community Health Nursing
    A nurse who provides education and health promotion outside the hospital setting, directly to the public, is called a
    community health nurse (Galan, 2022). Responsibilities of a community health nurse may include

        · being a community advocate;
        · providing referrals;
        · encouraging health promotion through nutrition, wellness, and disease prevention;
        · providing health screenings; and
        · providing family planning education (Galan, 2022).

    Community health nurses develop trusting relationships and become aware of social factors that influence the
    health of people in the community. Strategies for care can be developed around social determinants of health
    related to health inequities in that community (Heath, 2020). Education and dissemination of information to the
    community at large and to specific at-risk populations are the ways a community health nurse cares for their
    patients and community. Their responsibilities include advocacy, referrals, health promotion, screenings, and family
    planning education.

    Community-Based Nursing
    The delivery of care in the community is called community-based nursing. Mobile health clinics are an example of
    community-based nursing. By walking to a mobile health clinic parked at a church or community center, people in
    the community can access care without traveling. Many times these citizens will trust the care providers because
    the community allows them in the neighborhood (Heath, 2020). Community-based care can reach people who
    cannot afford care, do not have transportation, and may feel marginalized by previous health-care experiences
    (Heath, 2020). The visit is done in the home or at a local site where patients can be seen.

    Community-based nursing delivers care to the community. The focus of community health is broad, while the focus
    of community-based nursing care is more specific (e.g., diabetes, hypertension). Both types of care help the people
    in the community by providing low-cost, local, individualized care.

            LINK TO LEARNING

    Watch this video explaining the difference between community health nursing and community-based nursing
    (https://openstax.org/r/77/healthnursing) from Level Up RN.

    Access for free at openstax.org
1.4 · Ethical and Legal Concerns                                                                                           21

1.4 Ethical and Legal Concerns

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Discuss the standards of practice for nurses
    · Explain risk management and QSEN
    · Describe legal issues in maternal-newborn nursing
    · Review ethical issues in maternal-newborn nursing

Nurses are guided by standards of practice to ensure safe and high-quality care. Risk management helps hospital
systems, nurses, and health-care providers anticipate areas of risk and address interventions to decrease those
risks. Nurses are taught the Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN), a system to encourage quality of care
by focusing on implementing quality and safety competencies. Nurses in maternal-newborn nursing are faced with
many legal and ethical issues, such as maternal-fetal conflict, autonomy, informed consent, research, and abortion.
The responsibility of the nurse is to support the patient and to not allow personal feeling to interfere with care.

Standards of Practice

The American Nurses Association (ANA, 2021) publishes standards of care for nurses to ensure the safety of the
public. These standards are descriptions of duties all registered nurses must follow regardless of specialty
population. A competency is linked to the standard. When the nurse maintains these standards and competencies,
safe nursing care is ensured. The ANA Standards of Practice consist of:

  1. Assessment
  2. Diagnosis
  3. Outcomes Identification
  4. Planning
  5. Implementation
  6. Evaluation
  7. Ethics
  8. Advocacy
  9. Respect and Equitable Practice
10. Communication
11. Collaboration
12. Leadership
13. Education
14. Scholarly Inquiry
15. Quality of Practice
16. Professional Practice Evaluation
17. Resource Stewardship
18. Environmental Health (ANA, 2021)

Every state also has a nurse practice act that describe the laws governing the practice of nursing. Every state board
of nursing is responsible for enforcing these laws. A registered nurse uses knowledge, critical thinking, and skills to
interpret these laws and follow standards of care.

In 2015, WHO developed a framework to improve quality in maternity care. The framework addresses quality
hospital care using quality provision of care and experience of care (Lazzerini et al., 2019). Provision of care includes
"evidence-based practice, efficient information, and referral systems" and experience of care includes "effective
communication, respect, dignity, and emotional support" (Lazzerini et al., 2019, p.1). It is hypothesized that the
following issues continue to be barriers to quality maternity care:

    · non implementation of evidence-based care
    · fear of litigation resulting in overmedicalization of maternity care
    · lack of systems to evaluate and monitor quality of maternity care using quantitative indicators
    · lack of inclusion of maternal perceptions of care (Lazzerini et al., 2019)

The Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses (AWHONN) also sets standards of care. Staffing
22  1 · Foundations in Maternal-Newborn and Women's Health Nursing

    in maternal-newborn care units, like the one shown in Figure 1.5, affects the safety and quality of care. AWHONN
    (2021b) has published evidence showing that inadequate staffing leads to negative patient outcomes. To determine
    staffing needs, the clinical situation and patient acuity must be assessed. AWHONN's (2022) Standards for
    Professional Registered Nurse Staffing for Perinatal Units are listed in Table 1.3.

    FIGURE 1.5 Perinatal Nurse The newborn should have one-to-one nursing care during the initial recovery period. (credit: "Newborn DA" by
    Robyn Alvarez/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

    Risk Management
    According to a health-care risk management company, risk is defined as "anything that can result in an unexpected
    outcome or loss," and risk management involves identifying risk factors by analyzing processes and procedures and
    implementing programs to address risk and prevent patient harm (Performance Health Partners, 2023, p.1). Some
    risk management projects are born from negative patient outcomes. Risk management nurses work with
    administration and health-care providers to determine potential risks for patients while also working alongside the
    legal team to identify breeches in standards of care (Legal/Risk Management, n.d.). Risk management involves
    disclosing errors or unanticipated outcomes to the patient in language a layperson can understand along with an
    apology and plan for correction (Russell, 2018). Disclosing this information allows the patient and family to ask
    questions, the nurse and hospital to express their apologies, and the patient to have closure (Russell, 2018).

    In perinatal care, a treatment or an assessment by a nurse that is not performed is called an error of omission.
    Haftu et al. (2019) studied perinatal care in Ethiopia and found that in both developed and developing countries,
    labor and delivery nurses omitted the following care elements most:

      1. physical exam
      2. ongoing and timely monitoring of patient status
      3. intake and output measures
      4. response to rapidly changing conditions or deterioration
      5. reassuring the mother
      6. documentation
      7. timely nurse-to-patient communication
      8. completing review of the history
      9. general comfort care based on patient need
    10. repositioning when patient needs it

    According to this study, 74.6 percent of nurses studied missed at least one nursing element of care. The reason for
    the omissions was primarily lack of labor resources (inadequate staffing and inexperienced staff), teamwork,
    material resources (medications or equipment not available in a timely manner), and communication. Teamwork
    and communication are extremely important for patient safety and risk management.

    Risk management programs investigate why errors occur. The most common errors in medicine occur in relation to
    communication issues. Xuejiao and Xuejiao (2022) found that obstetric nurses who were interrupted during

    Access for free at openstax.org
1.4 · Ethical and Legal Concerns                                                                                         23

preparation, management, and documentation made more medication errors. Nursing interruption in this study
referred to "external behavior that occurs suddenly, interrupts or delays things, and distracts the nurse when the
nurse provides standard nursing functions in a prescribed time, role, and environment ... interruption of care leads to
interruption of work and the result is unpredictable" (Xuejiao & Xuejiao, 2022 p. 3). Another cause of nurse error is
communication issues. Communication errors cause 72 percent of perinatal deaths (Lippke et al., 2021).
Communication must improve between patient, nurse, and health-care provider to decrease errors and increase
safety.

Unfortunately, Zabari and Southern (2018) discovered that obstetric nurses and health-care providers report errors
less frequently than other specialties. The study hypothesizes that birth is not perceived as a medical procedure;
therefore, families' expectations are for perfect births. Because of this expectation, obstetric nurses feel shame and
guilt upon making errors and in turn do not report them (Zabari and Southern, 2018). This lack of reporting does not
allow for risk management opportunities and interventions to overcome these errors. The nurse plays a very
important role in the identification of risk and the implementation of changes to reduce these risks.

QSEN
The Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN) project started in 2005 to address the need for improvement in
quality of health care (Dolansky et al., 2024). Six quality and safety competencies and knowledge, skill, and attitude
statements (KSA) were developed and consisted of the following:

  1. patient-centered care
  2. teamwork and collaboration
  3. evidence-based practice
  4. quality improvement
  5. safety
  6. informatics (Dolansky et al., 2024)

The QSEN competencies were designed to change nursing from focusing on tasks to focusing on the KSA concepts
for quality and safety (Altmiller & Hopkins-Pepe, 2019). These competencies were developed for nursing education
but have been used by nursing organizations, in the development of continuing education, and by hospital
administration to provide continual quality and safety of care (Altmiller & Hopkins-Pepe, 2019). Nurses are integral
in utilizing evidence-based care to ensure effective, safe, and quality nursing care.

Legal Issues in Maternal Newborn Nursing

Obstetrics and gynecology are specialties with high rates of litigation. Baird et al. (2019) list the following as
possible reasons for the high rate of malpractice suits filed by intrapartum patients:

    · Childbirth is an intense, emotional experience, which is subject to each family's expectations.
    · Parents may be well-informed consumers of health care.
    · Obstetric care is high pressure and rapidly changing, where accidents, errors in judgment and negligence

        occur.
    · Nurses are being given more accountability and autonomy.

Nurses are held to the standard of care for OB patients and expected to use judgment, as any "ordinary, prudent"
nurse would when caring for patients in the same situation (Baird et al., 2019). If the health-care team does not
meet the standard of care and a negative outcome occurs, some patients and families will turn to the law and
medical malpractice.

The most common errors for which OB health care team members are sued include the following:

    · improper administration of magnesium sulfate, oxytocin, insulin, and/or heparin
    · failure to assess and monitor for side effects of medication or intervention
    · improper use of equipment or availability of equipment
    · poor/inadequate communication and/or collaboration
    · failure to act as a patient advocate and initiate the chain of command
    · failure to follow provider orders
    · failure to verify informed consent
24  1 · Foundations in Maternal-Newborn and Women's Health Nursing

    Nurse-midwife and obstetrician practices have closed in many areas of the United States. due to financial
    constraints, low delivery numbers, and the issues surrounding professional liability, such as extremely high
    malpractice premiums and fear of litigation (Harvard Law Review, 2021). This creates an environment of fewer
    providers and higher expectations for OB nurses, along with areas of the United States described as "birthing
    deserts," areas with no delivery hospitals. Nurses must follow their nurse practice acts and standards of care and
    hospital policies. Nurses should also be proactive in reporting unsafe working conditions, such as too few nursing
    staff, higher complexity of patients, and equipment failures. This diligence increases quality and safety.

    Ethical Issues in Maternal Newborn Nursing

    Several ethical issues surround maternal newborn nursing, one issue being surrogacy. Surrogates are persons who
    carry and birth a baby with the intent of giving the child to another person or couple (Dickens, 2020). Some
    surrogates carry DNA from one parent, both parents, or neither parent. Surrogacy has some people questioning the
    ethics of "selling their reproductive abilities," while other people support this option of family building (Hanson,
    2021). Some countries do not allow surrogacy, and in the United States, states are responsible for laws surrounding
    surrogacy. The price of surrogacy in the United States is approximately $100,000 and includes the health-care fees,
    legal fees, and sometimes travel fees (Hanson, 2021). Most insurance companies do not cover these fees, bringing
    up the ethical issue of only financially secure persons being able to utilize surrogacy.

    Another ethical issue nurses may encounter is female genital mutilation and cutting (FGM/C), which is the
    removal of all or part of the external female genitalia for nonmedical reasons (Nabaneh & Muula, 2019). According
    to Nabaneh and Muula (2019), more than 200,000 girls and women in Africa, the Middle East, and Asia have been
    cut. Some people argue that FGM/C is a cultural or religious practice, but others consider this practice a violation of
    human rights. The nurse should provide support and education to the patient and family.

    Another ethical issue is informed consent and autonomy in maternity care. Kingma (2020) notes that if a health-care
    provider touches a patient's ear or knee without consent, there are few consequences. When a health-care provider
    touches a patient's vulva or vagina without consent, devastating emotional trauma can occur. Health-care providers
    and nurses must remember that 30 percent of persons AFAB in the United States have experienced sexual assault
    (Kingma, 2020). Nurses can be the gatekeepers of informed consent, especially during physical exams of laboring
    persons.

            LINK TO LEARNING

    The McMaster Demystifying Medicine Program has put together a video that explains obstetric violence
    (https://openstax.org/r/77/violence) and how nurses can prevent it.

    Ethical Guidelines in Perinatal Nursing Research
    Prior to beginning research, investigators must apply for approval from an institutional review board (IRB). The
    board must consider pregnant persons as "scientifically complex" and consider both the pregnant person and fetus
    when recruiting participants (ACOG, 2015). Historically, persons AFAB have been excluded from medical research,
    but the National Institutes of Health (NIH) now requires researchers to include women in NIH-funded research
    unless inappropriate (ACOG, 2015). Without perinatal research, medications and treatment cannot be determined
    as harmful or safe for pregnant persons and fetuses. ACOG (2015) notes that if thalidomide had been widely
    researched, many birth defects could have been prevented.

    Informed consent, including benefits and risks, must be thoroughly explained. Research causing benefit or harm to
    the fetus could require paternal consent as well. Requirements of maternal and paternal consent are described in
    Table 1.3.

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   1.4 · Ethical and Legal Concerns       25

Required  Regulation
Consent

Maternal  Consent from the pregnant person is provided when the information explained shows a potential
consent   direct benefit to the pregnant person and the fetus, or no prospect of benefit for the pregnant
          person or the fetus when risk to the fetus is minimal and the purpose of the research is the
          development of important biomedical knowledge that cannot be obtained any other way.

Paternal  Consent from both the pregnant person and their partner. The partner does not have to give consent
consent   if they are unavailable, incompetent, or incapacitated or if the pregnancy resulted from rape or
          incest. Information about the choice needs to show that the research has a chance of direct benefit
          solely to the fetus.

TABLE 1.3 Requirements for Informed Consent (ACOG, 2015)

Embryonic Tissue and Stem Cell Research
Undifferentiated cells that can renew themselves and develop into different types of cells are called stem cells
(NIH, n.d.-b). Embryonic stem cells are able to differentiate into any cells except placental cells (Pathak & Banerjee,
2021). Stem cells have been used for cardiac repair, breast cancer treatment, repair of skeletal muscle, and many
more conditions (Pennisi et al, 2017).The history of research using embryonic tissue began in 1954 with the growth
of polio in fetal brain tissue that led to the development of polio, varicella, and measles vaccines (Gelber et al,
2015). Fetal tissue has also been used in investigating treatments for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection, immune disorders, diabetes, transplantation rejection, and cancer (MacDuffie et al., 2021). Use of human
fetal tissue has been controversial because of the donation of tissue from terminated pregnancies. In 2019, the
government put restrictions on the use of NIH funding for research using fetal tissue, while in 2021 some
restrictions were lifted (MacDuffie et al., 2021). The use of stem cells in research will continue to be a controversial
issue due to differing ethical and moral opinions.

Maternal-Fetal Conflict
Two patients must be considered while making medical decisions during maternity care, and at times maternal
interests and fetal interests are incompatible, called maternal-fetal conflict (Aburas & Devereaux, 2017). Health-
care providers must consider both the pregnant person's rights and the fetus's rights. Many times, the pregnant
person is treated as the secondary patient, and the fetus is the main priority. The idea of "maternal self-sacrifice" is
common, but it does not describe everyone's ideals (Kingma, 2020).

Maternal-fetal conflict can occur when the pregnant person chooses to terminate the pregnancy or uses harmful
substances during pregnancy. Other examples can be a cesarean birth for fetal distress, which can cause increased
risk for the pregnant person, or maternal treatment for cancer during pregnancy, which can cause harm to the fetus
(Aburas & Devereaux, 2017). A difficult conflict occurs when a pregnant person declines medical treatment that
could increase fetal well-being. A health-care provider deciding to perform treatment, even for fetal distress,
without the pregnant person's consent (e.g., emergency cesarean) can be prosecuted for assault. The American
Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Bioethics suggested the following are the only three reasons a health-care
provider should question a maternal decision:

1. The fetus is susceptible to irrevocable harm if treatment is not administered.
2. The treatment is indicated properly and is likely to work.
3. There is minimal risk to the pregnant person (Aburas & Devereaux, 2017).

Autonomy and informed consent are extremely important in maternity care, and obstetric nurses are charged with
protecting the autonomy of laboring persons and the health of the fetus. This ethical dilemma can be challenging for
everyone involved.

Abortion
Any pregnancy loss before 20 weeks' gestation is considered an abortion. It is a complex, controversial issue in
women's health care. The laws governing legality and access to abortion care have changed multiple times over the
past two centuries. McSpedon (2022) reviews the history of abortion in the United States, stating that in the 1800s
26  1 · Foundations in Maternal-Newborn and Women's Health Nursing

    abortions were legal until the time of quickening (when the pregnant person feels fetal movement at approximately
    20 weeks' gestation). The use of herbs to induce abortion was widely practiced. McSpedon (2022) points out that
    early abortion laws in the 1820s were designed to protect women from poisons sold at apothecaries, not to limit
    abortions. In the 1900s, physicians influenced states to create laws to limit abortions so that the procedure could
    be "professionalized and controlled by medical practice," and abortion became illegal in 1910 (McSpedon, 2022, p.
    43). In the 1960s, abortion was being discussed more openly, and in 1973, Roe v. Wade made abortion legal again.
    According to O'Donnell and Rogers (2023), political and antiabortion groups put pressure on lawmakers, and laws
    were created to ban the use of Medicaid funds for abortion care in 1977. In 2022, Roe v. Wade was overturned by
    the Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization decision.

    Abortion is both a personal issue and a global issue. Almost half of all pregnancies worldwide in 2022 were
    unplanned, nearly 121 million (United Nations Population Fund, 2022). Reproductive care is very limited for most of
    these patients.

    The subject of abortion is polarizing. The discussion of abortion centers on when life begins. The job of the OB/GYN
    nurse is to support the patient, not allowing the nurse's personal feelings or moral judgements to influence the
    quality of care. ACOG (2022) states that the best health care is free from political interference.

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  1 · Summary 27

Summary

1.1 Current Trends in Women's Health Care

Recent changes in women's health are focused on promoting health, decreasing mortality, decreasing stigma, and
supporting persons AFAB in advocating for themselves to receive quality health care. Organizations such as the CDC
and WHO have published recommendations and practice suggestions to guide health-care policy and address social
determinants of health. Nurses play an important role in decreasing the stigma of taboo topics by providing
education and support. Nurses also encourage self-advocacy in health care by practicing shared decision making
and informed consent. The nurse can be a strong change agent.

1.2 Standards of Maternal, Newborn, and Gynecologic Nursing Care

Persons AFAB of all ages, races, gender identities, and stages of life seek OB-GYN care. OB-GYN care has evolved
over the past century to become more inclusive, self-motivated, and focused on the desires of the patient. Childbirth
care and education evolved from home care to hospital care. And hospital care evolved so that partners were able to
attend the births of their babies and birthing persons were able to have support necessary to progress through labor
to birth. These evolutions in care have led to and evolved into a group effort, a team-based approach in which all
parties work together with best outcomes as the goal.

1.3 Perinatal Care: Regional and Levels of Care and Transport

Regionalizing health care directs high-risk pregnant persons to a high-acuity facility to decrease maternal and
neonatal morbidity and mortality. It also promotes the use of birth centers and community hospitals for low-risk
pregnancies. Community health services focus on the persons in a specific area to increase health promotion and
disease prevention. Community health nursing is focused on assessing the health of the community, developing
plans to address inequities, and providing education for those in the community. Community-based nursing provides
care to people in the community, such as diabetes treatment, COVID-19 testing, and blood pressure assessments.
Nurses play an important role in the health and well-being of the community.

1.4 Ethical and Legal Concerns

The maternal-newborn nurse is engaged in situations featuring ethical and legal issues. At times, these issues can
cause distress when the nurse does not agree with their patient's decisions. The nurse can use the standards of
practice to guide safe, nonjudgmental care. Risk management and QSEN are utilized to prevent or address errors,
such as medication administration errors or errors of omission. Nurses are committed to providing the best care
with quality outcomes.

Key Terms

abortion any pregnancy loss before 20 weeks' gestation.
childhood mortality death of a child under 5 years of age
community health nurse provide education and health promotion outside the hospital setting, directly to the

    public
community-based nursing delivery of nursing care in the community
error of omission treatment or an assessment by a nurse that is not performed
family-centered care set of principles that guide health-care delivery according to the strengths and needs of the

    person, family, and community, promoting involvement of the family in informed decision making
female genital mutilation and cutting (FGM/C) removal of all or part of the external female genitalia for

    nonmedical reasons
fetal mortality intrauterine demise of the fetus at any gestational age
infant mortality death of an infant before their first birthday
maternal mortality death of a person while pregnant or within 42 days of birth or termination of pregnancy that

    was not accidental
maternal-fetal conflict when maternal interests and fetal interests are incompatible
risk management identifying risk factors by analyzing processes and procedures and implementing programs to

    address risk and prevent patient harm
stem cells undifferentiated cells that can renew themselves and develop into different types of cells
28 1 · Assessments

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. What is one purpose of the Healthy People 2030 objectives?
           a. Stop world hunger.
           b. Prevent conflict and war in other countries.
           c. Address issues in health care to solve cancer.
           d. Recommend changes to increase health promotion and disease prevention.

    2. The nurse is caring for a pregnant person who is living in an underserved area of town with a history of
        childhood abuse, opioid use disorder, and asthma. What can the nurse do to decrease the risk of maternal
        mortality?
           a. Connect the patient to a counselor.
           b. Educate the patient on the risk factors for maternal mortality.
           c. Give prn albuterol for asthma.
           d. Discuss how they need to move out of the poor area of town.

    3. The nurse is doing a review of systems on a person in the clinic. The nurse asks if the patient has any
        problems with sexual dysfunction. Why is it important for the nurse to ask all patients this question?
           a. Some people may not bring up the topic of sex due to taboos and stigma.
           b. All patients will eventually have sexual problems.
           c. Nurses should ask because other health-care providers are not trained to ask those questions.
           d. Sexual dysfunction is a taboo only for persons AFAB.

    4. The nurse is answering the phone in the OB-GYN clinic. The person asks, "I am a lesbian. Can an OB-GYN
        provider care for me?" What is the nurse's best response?
           a. "All LGBTQIA+ persons are welcome and can be treated by an OB-GYN provider."
           b. "We can see you if you will be the person in the relationship that will get pregnant."
           c. "We suggest you see a provider that specializes in LGBTQIA+ persons."
           d. "Our OB-GYN provider can give you gynecologic care but not pregnancy care."

    5. The nurse is caring for a person AFAB who is 15 years old. Why would a gynecologic provider see a person at
        this age?
           a. The person's partner desires permanent sterilization.
           b. Their family told the person they had to get a Pap smear.
           c. The person was late starting care because the first visit should be before the age of 13.
           d. The person may want to discuss their menstrual cycle and hormonal changes.

    6. What is the best description of the history of gynecologic care in the United States over the past century?
           a. Reproductive health care has been under control of persons AFAB since the 1900s.
           b. The health-care system has always been fair to persons AFAB with regard to shared decision making.
           c. Activist groups are fighting sexism in health care.
           d. Researchers had to stop including persons AFAB in pharmacologic research trials.

    7. What occurred after childbirth migrated from the home to the hospital?
           a. Infection rates dropped in the hospital.
           b. Laboring persons were given greater support in labor.
           c. The childbirth model became a medical model.
           d. Pain relief allowed laboring persons to spend more time with their partners in labor.

    8. A nurse is working in a Level 4 hospital. What type of patient would the nurse expect to see?
           a. a first-time pregnant person with good fetal movement
           b. a pregnant person who needs neurosurgery

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          1 · Assessments 29

         c. a postpartum person with asthma
         d. a pregnant person who plans to birth in a birth center

 9. A community health nurse recognizes an increase in maternal mortality in the neighborhood. What could the
      community health nurse do?
         a. Conduct weekly prenatal appointments in their home.
         b. Draw blood on all pregnant persons to look for anemia.
         c. Assess the health of a baby using an ultrasound.
         d. Develop an educational pamphlet discussing signs of preeclampsia.

10. The nurse is describing the difference between community-based nursing and community health nursing.
      What response best describes the difference?
         a. A community-based nurse would provide care in a mobile unit in the neighborhood.
         b. A community-based nurse only provides education.
         c. A community health nurse performs cardiac assessments.
         d. A community health nurse only provides hands-on care.

11. What is the purpose of the standards of care for nurses?
         a. to guide hospital administration to promote nurses
         b. to ensure nurses are assessing patients
         c. to protect the public's safety
         d. to protect the health-care providers

12. What statement best describes risk management?
         a. identifying risk factors by analyzing processes and procedures
         b. creating disciplinary actions for nursing errors
         c. identifying health-care providers who are derogatory to patients
         d. implementing programs to keep errors secret

13. The nurse makes an error of omission. What is an example of an error of omission?
         a. placing the fetal monitor incorrectly
         b. not recording input/output amounts
         c. not covering the computer screen when documenting
         d. removing an IV

14. The nurse is discussing legal issues surrounding OB nursing. What statement might that nurse make?
         a. "Legal issues are the concern of the OB."
         b. "I'm glad that people understand that all childbirth carries risk."
         c. "Medical malpractice insurance is cheap."
         d. "OB nurses are held to a standard of care and can be sued if proper care is not provided."

15. What is a good example of informed consent?
         a. The nurse hands the patient the stack of consents and asks them to sign them.
         b. The nurse tells the patient not to worry about reading the consents.
         c. The nurse alerts the OB that the patient has questions about the cesarean consent.
         d. The nurse explains that it is not their job to answer questions.

16. What statement by the nurse demonstrates an understanding of an ethical maternal-newborn dilemma?
         a. "Female genital mutilation/cutting is a violation of human rights in the United States, but I can
              understand it is part of their culture."
         b. "I can't understand why the patient got mad when I checked her cervix. I just forgot to ask first."
         c. "Surrogacy should not happen because the surrogate is just in it for the money."
         d. "Every country should have abortion rights."
30 1 · Assessments

  17. What is an example of maternal-fetal conflict?
           a. The pregnant person agrees to treatment no matter what happens to them.
           b. The pregnant person has cancer but cannot start treatment until the fetus is delivered.
           c. The fetus is in distress, and the pregnant person agrees to a cesarean birth.
           d. The parents of a fetus agree to a labor induction.

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. How can nurses use the Healthy People 2030 objectives to advance the health of their patients?

    2. List four ways persons AFAB can advocate for themselves for their cardiac health.

    3. Name three core concepts of women's health nursing.

    4. Discuss the benefits of regionalization of prenatal care.

    5. Explain how surrogacy can be an ethical dilemma.

    6. List the three reasons the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) suggests that health-care providers should
        question a maternal decision.

Reflection Questions

    1. Explain why addressing taboos in women's health is so crucial.

    2. Describe family-centered care.

    3. Discuss community perinatal-care locations, benefits, and providers.

What Should the Nurse Do?

The patient, Jocelyn, a 35-year-old person AFAB, presents at a local community health clinic. Jocelyn comes
seeking medical attention due to persistent abdominal pain and irregular menstrual cycles. She reports
experiencing discomfort during menstruation, along with bloating and fatigue. Jocelyn has a medical history of
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and is currently not taking any medications. Vital signs reveal a slightly elevated
blood pressure of 130/85 mm Hg, a heart rate within normal limits at 78 bpm, and a body mass index (BMI)
indicating overweight. As the nurse begins the assessment, Jocelyn expresses concerns about the impact of PCOS
on her overall health.

    1. How can the goals outlined in Healthy People 2030 contribute to addressing the health concerns that
        Jocelyn, as a person AFAB, is experiencing, such as abdominal pain, irregular menstrual cycles, and concerns
        related to PCOS?

    2. Considering Jocelyn's symptoms and medical history, how might health-care providers apply quality
        improvement initiatives to enhance the management of PCOS and address the potential morbidity associated
        with reproductive health issues?

    3. How might the existence of taboos surrounding reproductive health, as discussed in the chapter, impact
        Jocelyn's willingness to seek medical attention for issues like irregular menstrual cycles and pelvic
        discomfort?

    4. In what ways can Jocelyn, as a person AFAB with PCOS, engage in self-advocacy based on the
        recommendations mentioned in the chapter, and how can health-care professionals support her in this
        process?

Saara, a 28-year-old female, presents at the women's health clinic for her routine gynecologic check-up with chief
complaints of irregular menstrual cycles and occasional pelvic pain. Disclosing a medical history of polycystic ovary
syndrome (PCOS), a common endocrine disorder affecting reproductive-aged individuals, Saara's symptoms align
with the characteristic hormonal imbalances and ovarian cysts associated with PCOS. The irregularities in her
menstrual cycles, suggestive of anovulation, may contribute to her reported pelvic pain, potentially linked to ovarian
cysts or menstrual cramps. The diagnosis of PCOS raises considerations for hormonal imbalances affecting her
menstrual cycles and fertility, often associated with insulin resistance, obesity, and metabolic syndrome. Despite
not currently taking prescribed medications, exploring the absence of pharmacologic management is essential in
the context of her symptoms and overall health. Saara's vital signs, including a blood pressure of 120/70 mm Hg, a

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             1 · Assessments 31

heart rate of 72 bpm, and a healthy BMI, provide baseline assessments of her cardiovascular health and overall
well-being.

    5. Considering Saara's visit to the women's health clinic at the age of 28, how does her demographic fit into the
        range of people seeking gynecologic and obstetric care, and what age-related considerations might health-
        care providers need to address during her routine checkup?

    6. Considering Saara's routine gynecologic checkup, how does her access to reproductive health care today
        reflect the historical struggles outlined in the chapter, such as fights for reproductive rights and the evolution
        of standards? In what ways has the history of women's health movements influenced Saara's ability to seek
        routine care?

    7. In Saara's case, how do her experiences and expectations align with or differ from historical practices
        discussed in the chapter, such as the shift from home to hospital births and the influence of movements like
        The Women's Health Movement? Consider factors like medicalization, patient autonomy, and family-centered
        care in your response.

Emily is a 32-year-old female who arrives at a local community health clinic for her prenatal care. Emily is in the
22nd week of her first pregnancy. She expresses excitement and a bit of anxiety about the upcoming changes in her
life. During the intake assessment, Emily shares additional details about her medical history, revealing that she was
diagnosed with hypertension 3 years ago. She mentions that her blood pressure has been well controlled with the
antihypertensive medication prescribed by her primary care physician. In exploring her medical history further, it is
discovered that Emily has a family history of gestational diabetes, prompting additional monitoring and counseling
on nutrition and blood sugar management during her pregnancy. As Emily discusses her current medical problems,
she mentions experiencing occasional headaches, which she attributes to stress related to her job. The community
health nurse takes note of this and explores potential stress management strategies to ensure the overall well-being
of both Emily and her developing fetus. Emily reports having no significant complications or concerns related to her
pregnancy, but she expresses curiosity about childbirth education classes and breast-feeding support available
within the community.

    8. Considering Emily's situation, how might regionalization of perinatal care benefit pregnant persons with
        preexisting conditions, such as hypertension or a family history of gestational diabetes? How can
        regionalization contribute to better outcomes for high-risk pregnancies?

    9. In Emily's case, how does community-based care, such as education on nutrition and stress management,
        contribute to her overall well-being during pregnancy? How does community-based care align with the
        principles of personalized, low-risk perinatal care?

  10. In Emily's scenario, how might community health nursing and community-based nursing collaborate to
        support her throughout her pregnancy? What distinct roles might community health nurses and community-
        based nurses play in addressing Emily's needs?

Jessica is a 28-year-old female eagerly anticipating the arrival of her first child. She is currently being admitted to
the maternity ward of a local hospital. Jessica, at full term, is navigating a range of emotions, from excitement to
nervousness, as the delivery approaches. Delving into Jessica's detailed medical history, it's noteworthy that she
has experienced a generally uncomplicated pregnancy with routine prenatal care. However, it's essential to
recognize that Jessica has a history of gestational diabetes, which required careful management throughout her
pregnancy. During admission, Jessica's vital signs are meticulously assessed to ensure a comprehensive
understanding of her health status. The recorded values indicate a blood pressure of 120/70 mm Hg, a heart rate of
80 bpm, and a temperature of 98.6°F. These vital signs serve as baseline data for the health-care team as they
closely monitor Jessica's well-being throughout the labor process.

  11. How do the American Nurses Association (ANA) Standards of Practice apply to Jessica's maternity care?
        Identify specific standards that are relevant to assessing, planning, implementing, and evaluating her care.

  12. Considering Jessica's history of gestational diabetes, how might risk management principles be applied to
        anticipate and address potential risks during her labor and delivery? How can the Quality and Safety
        Education for Nurses (QSEN) competencies contribute to enhancing the safety and quality of Jessica's care?

  13. How do legal considerations come into play in Jessica's maternity care, especially with her history of
        gestational diabetes? What legal responsibilities do nurses have in addressing potential complications related
        to gestational diabetes during labor and delivery?

  14. Explore the ethical considerations surrounding Jessica's care, given her history of gestational diabetes. How
32 1 · Assessments

        can health-care providers balance maternal autonomy and fetal well-being in situations where there might be
        maternal-fetal conflict, such as in cases of gestational diabetes?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. Explain the goals of Healthy People 2030 related to improving the health of persons assigned female at birth
        (AFAB). How can evidence-based care contribute to achieving these goals, and how do nurses apply these
        objectives in patient education?

    2. Discuss the morbidity and mortality rates affecting persons AFAB and children, citing specific examples. How
        can quality improvement initiatives contribute to addressing and improving the health status of these
        populations, and what role do nurses play in implementing such initiatives?

    3. Identify and discuss specific taboos related to women's health care, such as abortion, birth control, and
        menstrual problems. How can health-care providers, including nurses, contribute to destigmatizing these
        taboos and ensuring that persons AFAB seek necessary help?

    4. Explain the concept of self-advocacy for persons AFAB. Provide examples of how persons can advocate for
        their preferences, needs, and values in health care. How can nurses support and encourage self-advocacy
        among their patients?

    5. Define the persons seeking gynecologic and obstetric care. Discuss the diverse characteristics, including age,
        race, education level, and marital status, of persons accessing such care. How do health-care organizations,
        such as the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), provide guidelines for the timing of
        gynecologic and obstetric care?

    6. Provide a historical overview of gynecologic and obstetric care in the United States. Include key events and
        movements, such as Margaret Sanger's advocacy for reproductive rights and the Women's Health Movement.
        How has the evolution of women's reproductive rights influenced health-care practices and access?

    7. Contrast the historical practices of childbirth, including home births and the Women's Health Movement's
        influence in the 1960s and 1970s, with contemporary childbirth in the United States. How has childbirth
        evolved from a focus on unmedicated labor to a more medicalized approach? What are the factors
        contributing to dissatisfaction with contemporary pregnancy care, and how are health-care providers
        addressing these concerns?

    8. Explain the concept of regionalization in perinatal care. What were the origins of regionalization in the United
        States, and how has it contributed to improved outcomes for neonates and pregnant persons? Identify the
        levels of maternal care as outlined by ACOG and the significance of matching the patient's needs with the
        appropriate level of care.

    9. Define community-based care in the context of perinatal services. How does community-based care differ
        from regionalized care, and what populations benefit from community-based care? Discuss specific care
        providers and settings involved in community-based perinatal care.

  10. Differentiate between community health nursing and community-based nursing. What are the primary
        responsibilities of community health nurses, and how do they contribute to promoting health in the
        community? Contrast this with the focus and activities of community-based nursing.

  11. Explain the significance of the American Nurses Association (ANA) Standards of Practice for nurses. Identify
        and discuss at least three specific standards from the ANA related to maternal-newborn nursing. How do
        these standards contribute to safe and high-quality care?

  12. Define risk management in health care, specifically in the context of perinatal care. Discuss how risk
        management programs identify and address potential risks for maternal-newborn patients. Explain how the
        Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN) project contributes to improving the quality of maternity care.

  13. Discuss legal issues in maternal-newborn nursing. Provide examples of legal concerns, such as informed
        consent, obstetric malpractice, and implications of maternal-fetal conflict. Explain the role of nurses in
        adhering to state nurse practice acts and ensuring patient safety.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                1 · References 33

  14. Explore ethical issues in maternal-newborn nursing, covering topics such as surrogacy, female genital
        mutilation, autonomy, and abortion. Discuss the nurse's role in addressing these ethical dilemmas and
        maintaining patient-centered care.

References

Aburas, R., & Devereaux, M. (2017). Maternal fetal conflict from legal point of view comparing health law in the
   United States and Islamic law. Open Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 7(8). https://www.scirp.org/journal/
    paperinformation.aspx?paperid=78107

Aliabadi, T. (2022, June 6). Trans men are avoiding the gynecologist: Why is transgender gynecology so important?
    https://www.draliabadi.com/womens-health-blog/why-is-transgender-gynecology-important

Altmiller, G., & Hopkins-Pepe, L. (2019). Why Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN) matters in practice.
   The Journal of Continuing Education in Nursing, 50(5), 199-200. https://doi.org/10.3928/
    00220124-20190416-04

American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017). Guidelines for
   prenatal care, 8th ed. https://www.acog.org/clinical-information/physician-faqs/-/media/
    3a22e153b67446a6b31fb051e469187c.ashx

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). (2015). Committee Opinion No. 646: Ethical
   considerations for including women as research participants. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/
    committee-opinion/articles/2015/11/ethical-considerations-for-including-women-as-research-participants

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). (2019a, February). Committee Opinion No. 766:
   Approaches to limit intervention during labor and birth.. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/
    committee-opinion/articles/2019/02/approaches-to-limit-intervention-during-labor-and-birth

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). (2019b, August). Obstetric Care Consensus No. 9:
   Levels of maternal care. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/obstetric-care-consensus/articles/
    2019/08/levels-of-maternal-care

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). (2022). Policy priorities. https://www.acog.org/
    advocacy/policy-priorities

American Hospital Association. (n.d.). Millennials speak up about their health care expectations.
    https://www.aha.org/aha-center-health-innovation-market-scan/2019-12-17-millennials-speak-about-their-
    health-care

American Nurses Association. (2021). Nursing: Scope and standards of practice (4th ed.). Author.

Arthur, S., Dorfman, C., Massa, L., & Shelby, R. (2022). Managing female sexual dysfunction. Urologic Oncology:
   Seminars and Original Investigations, 40(8), 359-365. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.urolonc.2021.06.006

Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses (AWHONN). (2021a). About AWHONN.
    https://www.awhonn.org/about-us/

Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses (AWHONN). (2021b). Staffing standards executive
   summary: Standards for professional registered nurse staffing for perinatal units. https://www.awhonn.org/
    education/staffing-exec-summary/

Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses (AWHONN). (2022). Standards for professional
   registered nurse staffing for perinatal units. Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing, 51(4),
    S5-S98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jogn.2022.02.003

Baird, S. M., Kennedy, B. B., & Baudhuin, S. L. (2019). Liability issues in intrapartum nursing. OBGYN Key.
    https://obgynkey.com/liability-issues-in-intrapartum-nursing/

BCT Partners. (2021, May 4). What is cultural competence, and why is it important? https://www.bctpartners.com/
    post/what-is-cultural-competence-and-why-is-it-important
34 1 · References

Buchholz, K. (2022, May 18). The uneven burden of U.S. maternal mortality. https://www.statista.com/chart/27465/
    pregnancy-related-deaths-in-the-united-states-per-100000-live-births/

Bustreo, F. (2015, February 20). Ten top issues for women's health. World Health Organization. https://www.who.int/
    news-room/commentaries/detail/ten-top-issues-for-women's-health

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2002). American women are waiting to begin families.
    https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/pressroom/02news/ameriwomen.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2022a, September 19). Four in 5 pregnancy-related deaths in
   the U.S. are preventable. CDC Newsroom. https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2022/p0919-pregnancy-related-
    deaths.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2022b, June 22). Infant mortality rate. Reproductive Health.
    https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/infantmortality.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2023a, July 25). Child health. National Center for Health
    Statistics. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/child-health.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2023b, July 25). Women's health. National Center for Health
    Statistics. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/womens-health.htm

Cummings, H. W. (2022). Should my teen see an Ob-Gyn? Here's what I tell parents. ACOG. https://www.acog.org/
    womens-health/experts-and-stories/the-latest/should-my-teen-see-an-ob-gyn-heres-what-i-tell-parents

Dickens, B. M. (2020). Paid surrogacy abroad does not violate public policy: UK Supreme Court. Ethical and Legal
   Issues in Reproductive Health, 150, 129-133. https://doi.org/10.1002/ijgo.13197

Dolansky, M. A., Dick, T., Byrd, E., Miltner, R. S., & Layton, S. S. (2024, March-April). The QSEN competency legacy
   threaded through the entry-level AACN Essentials: Shaping the future. Nurse Educator, 49(2), 73-79.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/NNE.0000000000001511

Doner, K. (2022, February 24). Positive self-advocacy for female-centered care. Mayo Clinic Press.
    https://mcpress.mayoclinic.org/women-health/positive-self-advocacy-for-female-centered-care/

Franck, L., & O'Brien, K. (2019). The evolution of family-centered care: From supporting parent-delivered
   interventions to a model of family integrated care. Birth Defects Research, 111(15), 1044-1059. https://doi.org/
    10.1002/bdr2.1521

Galan, N. (2022, April 26). Community health nurse career overview. Nurse Journal. https://nursejournal.org/
    articles/top-community-health-nursing-jobs/

Gelber, S. E., McCullough, L. B., & Chervenak, F. A. (2015). Fetal tissue research: An ongoing story of professionally
   responsible success. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 213(6), 819.e1-819.e4. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.ajog.2015.09.079

Gregory, E., Valenzuela, C., & Hoyert, D. (2022). Fetal mortality: United States, 2020. National Vital Statics Reports,
   71(4), 1-20. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr71/nvsr71-04.pdf

Haftu, M., Girmay, A., Gebremeskel, M., Aregawi, G., Gebregziabher, D., & Robles, C. (2019). Commonly missed
   nursing cares in the obstetrics and gynecologic wards of Tigray general hospitals; Northern Ethiopia. PloS One,
   14(12), e0225814-e0225814. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0225814

Hanson, A., & Haddad, L. M. (2023). Nursing rights of medication administration. StatPearls [Internet]
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK560654

Hanson, D. T. (2021, October 6). Becoming a parent through surrogacy can have ethical challenges--but is a positive
   experience for some. The Conversation. https://theconversation.com/becoming-a-parent-through-surrogacy-
    can-have-ethical-challenges-but-it-is-a-positive-experience-for-some-167760

Harvard Law Review. (2021, April). The legal infrastructure of childbirth. Reproductive Justice: Developments in the
   Law, 134(6). https://harvardlawreview.org/print/vol-134/the-legal-infrastructure-of-childbirth/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                1 · References 35

Healthy People 2030. (n.d.). U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Heath, S. (2020). The difference between community health, community-based health. Patient Engagement HIT.
    https://patientengagementhit.com/news/the-difference-between-community-health-community-based-health

Hoyert, D. L. (2023). Maternal mortality rates in the United States, 2021. NCHS Health E-Stats. https://dx.doi.org/
    10.15620/cdc:124678

Jansen, L., Gibson, M., Bowles, B. C., & Leach, J. (2013). First do no harm: Interventions during childbirth. The
   Journal of Perinatal Education, 22(2), 83-92. https://doi.org/10.1891/1058-1243.22.2.83

Jensen, R. (2023). Being a parent through the ages: From the 1950s to 2023. Medium.
    https://medium.com/@rauljensen/being-a-parent-through-the-ages-from-the-1950s-to-2023-1a32122b8044

Kaczor, C. (2022). The ethics of abortion: Women's rights, human life, and the question of justice. Taylor and Francis.
    https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003305217

Kilpatrick, S. J., Menard, M. K., Zahn, C. M., & Callaghan, W. M. (2019). Obstetric Care Consensus #9: Levels of
   maternal care. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 221(6), B19-B30. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.ajog.2019.05.046

Kingma, E. (2020, December 11). Harming one to benefit another: The paradox of autonomy and consent in
   maternity care. Bioethics, 35, 456-464. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1111/bioe.12852

Kunz, S. N., Phibbs, C. S., & Profit, J. (2020). The changing landscape of perinatal regionalization. Seminars in
   Perinatology, 44(4), 151241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semperi.2020.151241

Lazzerini, M., Valente, E. P., Covi, B., Semenzato, C., & Ciuch, M. (2019). Use of WHO standards to improve quality of
    maternal and newborn hospital care: A study collecting both mothers' and staff perspective in a tertiary care
   hospital in Italy. BMJ Open Quality, 8(1), e000525. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjoq-2018-000525

Legal/risk management. (n.d.). Lippincott Nursing Center. https://www.nursingcenter.com/clinical-resources/
    practice-specialties/legal-risk-management

Lippke, S., Derksen, C., Keller, F. M., Kötting, L., Schmiedhofer, M., & Welp, A. (2021). Effectiveness of
   communication interventions in obstetrics--A systematic review. International Journal of Environmental
   Research and Public Health, 18(5), 2616. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18052616

MacDuffie, K. E., Hyun, I., Krogen, M. M., Dempsey, J. C., Murry, C. E., Copp, A. J., Glass, I. A., & Doherty, D. (2021).
   Rescuing human fetal tissue research in the United States: A call for additional regulatory reform. Stem Cell
   Reports, 16(12), 2839-2843. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2021.10.016

McCool, W. F., & Simeone, S. A. (2002). Birth in the United States: An overview of trends past and present. Nursing
   Clinics of North America, 37(4), 735-746. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0029-6465(02)00020-8.

McSpedon, C. (2022). Historical feature: A long history of abortion. AJN, American Journal of Nursing, 122(10),
    42-44. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.NAJ.0000890220.55803.89

Nabaneh, S., & Muula, A. S. (2019, March 13). Female genital mutilation/cutting in Africa: A complex legal and
   ethical landscape. Ethical and Legal Issues in Reproductive Health, 145, 253-257. https://doi.org/10.1002/
    ijgo.12792

National Institutes of Health. (n.d.-a). Office of research on women's health: Historical timeline--30 years of
   advancing women's health. https://orwh.od.nih.gov/sites/orwh/files/docs/ORWH21_Timeline_508C.pdf

National Institutes of Health. (n.d.-b). Stem cell basics. https://stemcells.nih.gov/info/basics/stc-basics

Nichols, F. H. (2000). History of the women's health movement in the 20th century. Journal of Obstetrics,
   Gynecologic & Neonatal Nursing, 29(1), 56-64. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1552-6909.2000.tb02756.x

O'Donnell, K., & Rogers, N. (2023). Revisiting the history of abortion in the wake of the Dobbs decision. Bulletin of
   the History of Medicine, 97(1), 1-10. https://doi.org/10.1353/bhm.2023.0000
36 1 · References

Office of the Surgeon General. (2020). The surgeon general's call to action to improve maternal health [Internet]. US
    Department of Health and Human Services. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK568218/

Olson, M. M., Alhelou, N., Kavattur, P. S., Rountree, L., & Winkler, I. T. (2022). The persistent power of stigma: A
   critical review of policy initiatives to break the menstrual silence and advance menstrual literacy. PLOS Global
   Public Health, 2(7), e0000070. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0000070

Omer, S., Zakar, R., Zakar, M. Z. & Fischer, F. (2021). The influence of social and cultural practices on maternal
   mortality: A qualitative study from South Punjab, Pakistan. Reproductive Health, 18(97). https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s12978-021-01151-6

Pathak, S., & Banerjee, A. (2021). Stem cells and aging. Elsevier Science & Technology.

Pennisi, C. P., Prasad, M. S., & Rameshwar, P. (Eds.). (2017). The stem cell microenvironment and its role in
   regenerative medicine and cancer pathogenesis. Taylor & Francis. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003339779

Performance Health Partners. (2023, June 23). Avoid unnecessary risk: Fundamentals of risk management in
   healthcare. https://www.performancehealthus.com/blog/fundamentals-risk-management-in-healthcare-
    fundamentals

Planned Parenthood. (2018, February 23). Trump-Pence administration takes aim at birth control access under the
   nation's reproductive health care program [Press release]. https://www.plannedparenthood.org/about-us/
    newsroom/press-releases/trump-pence-administration-takes-aim-at-birth-control-access-under-the-nations-
    reproductive-health-care-program.

Rayment-Jones, H., Dalrymple, K., Harris, J., Harden, A., Parslow, E., Georgi, T., & Sandall, J. (2021). Project20: Does
    continuity of care and community-based antenatal care improve maternal and neonatal birth outcomes for
   women with social risk factors? A prospective, observational study. PLoS ONE 16(5): e0250947. https://doi.org/
    10.1371/journal.pone.0250947

Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media. (2018). Native American customs of childbirth.
    https://teachinghistory.org/history-content/ask-a-historian/24097

Russell, D. (2018). Disclosure and apology: Nursing and risk management working together. Nursing Management,
   49(6), 17-19. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.NUMA.0000533773.14544.e2

Schaeffer, K., & Aragao, C. (2023, May 9). Key factors about moms in the U.S. https://www.pewresearch.org/short-
    reads/2023/05/09/facts-about-u-s-mothers/

Schorn, M., Moore, E., Spetalnick, B. M., & Morad, A. (2015). Implementing family-centered cesarean birth. Journal
   of Midwifery & Women's Health, 60(6), 682-690. https://doi.org/10.1111/jmwh.12400

Steel, A., Hall, H., Diezel, H., Wardle, J., & Adams, J. (2019). Filling the gaps in contemporary maternity care: The
    perceptions of complementary medicine practitioners providing care to women during pregnancy.
   Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice, 34, 174-178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctcp.2018.11.017

Thomas, T. H., Donovan, H. S., Rosenzweig, M. Q., Bender, C. M., & Schenker, Y. (2021). A conceptual framework of
   self-advocacy in women with cancer. ANS: Advances in Nursing Science, 44(1), E1-E13. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    ANS.0000000000000342

Travis, K. (2022). Three stigmas about contraceptives that you should cancel in 2020. Teen Health Mississippi.
    https://teenhealthms.org/blog/three-stigmas-about-contraceptives-that-you-should-cancel-in-2020/

Trost, S., Beauregard, J., Chandra, G., Njie, F., Berry, J., Harvey, A., & Goodman, D. (2022). Pregnancy-related
   deaths: Data from Maternal Mortality Review Committees in 36 US states, 2017-2019. Centers for Disease
    Control and Prevention, US Department of Health and Human Services. https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/
    maternal-mortality/erase-mm/data-mmrc.html

United Nations Population Fund. (2022). Nearly half of all pregnancies are unintended--a global crisis says new
   UNFPA report. https://www.unfpa.org/press/nearly-half-all-pregnancies-are-unintended-global-crisis-says-new-
    unfpa-report

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                1 · References 37

Walker, D. S., Visger, J. M., & Rossie, D. (2009). Contemporary childbirth education models. Journal of Midwifery &
   Women's Health, 54(6), 469-476. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmwh.2009.02.013.

World Health Organization (WHO). (2023). Maternal mortality. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
    maternal-mortality

World Health Organization (WHO). (n.d.-a). Child morbidity. The Global Health Observatory. https://www.who.int/
    data/gho/data/themes/topics/topic-details/mca/child---morbidity

World Health Organization (WHO). (n.d.-b). SDG Target 3.2 End preventable deaths of newborns and children under
   5 years of age. The Global Health Observatory. https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/topics/sdg-
    target-3_2-newborn-and-child-mortality

Xuejiao, Z., & Xuejiao, W. (2022). Prevention of nursing interruption disputes in obstetrics and gynecology based on
   nursing process reengineering. Mobile Information Systems, 2022, 1-10. https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/
    2225473

Zabari, M. L., & Southern, N. L. (2018). Effects of shame and guilt on error reporting among obstetric clinicians.
   Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing, 47(4), 468-478. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.jogn.2018.03.002

Zephyrin, L. C., Seervai, S., Lewis, C., & Katon, J. G. (2021, March 4). Community-based models to improve maternal
   health outcomes and promote health equity. The Commonwealth Fund. https://www.commonwealthfund.org/
    publications/issue-briefs/2021/mar/community-models-improve-maternal-outcomes-equity
38 1 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 2

Culturally Competent Nursing Care

FIGURE 2.1 Appreciating Cultural Differences Each person and family is unique, with their own needs and preferences. (credit:
modification of work "School diversity many hands held together" by Wonder woman0731/Flickr, CC BY 2.0).

CHAPTER OUTLINE
2.1 Person- and Family-Centered Care
2.2 Family Health and Cultural Factors
2.3 Culturally Competent Care
2.4 Families at Higher Risk for Poor Health Outcomes
INTRODUCTION The patients and families who come from our communities represent unlimited diversity that can
be both visible and invisible. But even seemingly visible factors like a person's race and age may not be what they
appear. Nurses must not make assumptions about their patients. Only by being culturally competent and
systematically asking culturally sensitive questions are nurses able to provide the best care.
To be inclusive of all patients who require obstetric and gynecologic care, this textbook uses the terms person
assigned female at birth (AFAB) and pregnant person as well as others. In addition to caring for people of all races,
ages, abilities, ethnicities, and religions, nurses care for people of all gender identities and sexual orientations. All
are members of the community served by nurses, and all deserve culturally competent nursing care.
40  2 · Culturally Competent Nursing Care

    2.1 Person- and Family-Centered Care

    LEARNING OBJECTIVES
    By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Describe nursing interventions to care for all persons assigned female at birth and their families during
            family-centered care

        · Identify challenges to delivering the best care for all families and persons assigned female at birth across
            a range of cultures, religious backgrounds, and family structures

        · Discuss barriers to care for LGBTQIA+, disabled, and culturally diverse persons and families that the
            nurse can help mitigate

    In 1970, the sociologists Firth and Firth (2014) defined family and kinship as "a set of ties socially recognized to
    exist between persons because of their genealogical connection ... relationships thought to be created between
    them by marriage and/or procreation of children" (p. 1). In 2023, family continues to be seen as a group of people
    related by kinship; however, kinship is now made of many different types of connections, such as adoption,
    surrogacy, friendship, cohabitation, and fostering. Other types of families are single-parent, dual-career, single
    adult, extended, and blended or binuclear families. The nurse cares for a person while considering their family's role
    or influence on the person.

    Communities and cultures include, but are not limited to, LGBTQIA+ persons, persons speaking other languages,
    religious communities, and persons with disabilities; these differences in social and ethnic backgrounds, gender,
    and sexual orientation represent a community's diversity (Servaes et al., 2022). The nurse uses inclusive language
    and advocates for policies that allow all persons to feel included in the health-care process. The nurse should also
    find individual ways to care for those with disabilities to respect their autonomy yet provide needed assistance.

    Care of Families

    Nurses encounter people from a variety of backgrounds; therefore, it is essential that nurses provide culturally
    competent care. The lifelong process of applying evidence-based nursing in agreement with the cultural values,
    beliefs, worldview, and practices of patients to produce improved patient outcomes is called cultural competence.
    The process of determining proper care and providing the best treatment for a person by understanding, respecting,
    and integrating a person's cultural beliefs into their health care is called culturally responsive care. When people
    are valued for all aspects of their identity, background, and experiences, they feel safe, understood, and, most
    importantly, valued. Culturally responsive care is required for a trusting, effective nurse-patient relationship. Nurses
    must be intentional in learning about other cultures and belief systems.

    Influence of Family Structure
    Family structure includes the people considered family members, where the person falls in the birth/sibling order,
    how many parents are in the household, whether a parent is single by choice or by circumstances, nuclear or
    extended families, and the origin of the family. Family structure helps people determine their roles in society.
    Dysfunctional families lead to persons with mental health issues, trauma or abuse, abandonment, and neglect.
    Functional families lead to accomplishing tasks that lead to individual well-being, the ability to adapt to changes,
    and the ability to balance individual needs with family needs (Booysen et al., 2021).

            LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

    Stepparents' Rights and Responsibilities

    In the United States, stepparents have limited legal rights and responsibilities. The legal authority for decision
    making belongs to the two biological parents. The stepparent can help their spouse, the biological parent of the
    child, but cannot make decisions regarding school, medical care, religion, or other important matters related to the
    child. If the stepparent and the biological parent divorce, some states will allow visitation rights to the stepparent.

    Paperwork allowing the stepparent to seek care for patients may exist, for example, a signed consent-to-treat letter
    that is notarized and signed by both biological parents or legal guardian(s).

    A stepparent can adopt the child if the other biological person agrees to terminate their parental rights. The courts

    Access for free at openstax.org
2.1 · Person- and Family-Centered Care                                                                                   41

state that a stepparent must be married to the biological parent for a year and live with the child for at least 6
months to be eligible to adopt the child (Law Offices of Hector A. Montoya, 2021).

Dual-Career Family
A dual-career family is defined as a household in which both parents work. In a survey of families from 2015 to
2017 (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020), dual-career families with children under 6 years of age brought in an
income $53,873 higher than single-career families (not single-family households). In dual-career families, health
insurance is usually available and affordable compared to households without employment. The issues or concerns
of these families are related to time management, such as not having enough time to deal with family
responsibilities. The increased stress of meeting all family members' needs plus career needs may create role
conflict both professionally and in relation to the family. Women may experience more stress than men in a dual-
career couple due to women still taking on most household tasks and childcare (Center for Equity, Gender, &
Leadership [EGAL], 2020). When interviewing families, the nurse should focus on gathering information on how the
family roles are assumed by each partner.

Single-Career Family
A single-career family is defined as a household in which one parent works and the other stays home. In the past,
this pattern meant that the stay-at-home parent was the woman. Currently, 1 in 5 stay-at-home parents in the
United States are fathers (Fry, 2023). When a parent is available for childcare, finances are not required for outside
childcare, and significantly more family income is kept within the home. Future employment options for the stay-at-
home parent may be limited when they return to the workforce because employers can view a significant gap in
work history negatively.

Single-Parent Family
Single-parent families are defined as children living with one parent. Nearly 24 million children in the United States
live in a single-parent home, and 14.5 million of those children live in a mother-only household (The Annie E. Casey
Foundation, 2023). According to The Annie E. Casey Foundation (2023), nearly 30 percent of single parents live in
poverty compared to only 6 percent of married couples; the children of these parents experience more physical,
mental, and behavioral problems due to growing up poor. This foundation emphasizes that single-parent families
also have strengths and benefits, such as the parent being able to focus on the children rather than dividing their
attention between children and a significant other. In the case of divorce from a violent partner, violence or anger is
resolved, and the stress of violence is greatly reduced (Ratini, 2023). In the health-care setting, the nurse should
make sure that the parent who is present with the child is the legal guardian prior to discussing health-care
information, and documentation should include this information.

Extended Family
An extended family consists of grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins. In some cultures, the nuclear family lives
in the same house as their extended family. Many families struggling financially will live in one house to save money.
Other families move grandparents into their home due to their failing health. Nurses caring for a person with
extended family in the room should ask the person if they desire their extended family to be included in their plan of
care prior to discussing private health-care information.

Blended or Binuclear Family
A blended family, also known as a binuclear or stepfamily, consists of parents and children who are not biologically
related to the other parent. A blended family is usually created after a death or divorce but can also include those
who have never married. According to the Step Family Foundation (n.d.), more than 50 percent of U.S. families are
remarried or recoupled. Children of blended families may have trouble adjusting to their new parent and siblings.
They may feel their new stepparent is trying to replace their other parent. Stepparents may feel the stepchild is not
giving them a chance to be a family. Blended families can cause stress for the parents and children. Nurses should
be aware of family stress as they are caring for a person.
42  2 · Culturally Competent Nursing Care

            CULTURAL CONTEXT

    Foster Care: Children's Aid

    Foster care is a service provided by states that provides temporary homes to children who cannot live with their
    families. Different states offer different foster care programs. New York has a program called Children's Aid foster
    care. This program is unique because it places children with families in their neighborhood to maintain relationships
    and familiar surroundings, such as school, church families, friends, and support systems. Children's Aid currently
    has 500 to 600 children and young people in stable homes in their own neighborhoods across New York. If the birth
    family is unable to reunite with the child, Children's Aid will help in the adoption process with a new family.

    For more information, visit the Children's Aid (https://openstax.org/r/77ChildrensAid) website.

    Care of LGBTQIA+ Persons and Families
    The biggest barrier to accessing culturally competent health care for LGBTQIA+ families is the lack of knowledge on
    the part of health-care providers. Providers and nurses may find themselves confused about pronouns, terminology,
    how to provide gender-affirming care, and what professional guidelines are specific to transgender and gender-
    nonconforming persons. Table 2.1 lists some current LGBTQIA+ terminology.

    Terminology                            Definition

    Transgender      An umbrella term for a person whose gender identity and gender expression may differ from
                     the gender they were assigned at birth

    LGBTQIA+         Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer or questioning, intersex, asexual, and any other
                     identity

    Bisexual         A person who is attracted to people with male and female gender identities

    Cisgender        A person whose gender identity matches the sex they were assigned at birth

    Gender           The process of aligning gender expression, social perception, and physical appearance with
    affirmation      gender identity

    Gender           The way a person communicates gender identity through behavior and/or appearance
    expression

    Gender identity  A person's internal sense of their gender; being male, female, or both male and female,
                     neither male nor female, or something else

    Gender           People whose gender does not fit within traditional expectations of masculinity and
    nonconforming    femininity; this can include identities such as gender fluid, gender expansive, and gender
                     queer

    Queer            Any sexual orientation that is not straight or any gender identity that is not cisgender

    Sexual           A person's emotional, romantic, or sexual attraction to other people
    orientation

      Transfeminine A person assigned male at birth identifying as trans/nonbinary

    TABLE 2.1 Gender Identity and Sexual Orientation Terminology (ACOG, 2022)

    Access for free at openstax.org
                         2.1 · Person- and Family-Centered Care                                                           43

Terminology  Definition

Transgender  A person with a male gender identity who was assigned female at birth
man

Transgender  A person with a female gender identity who was assigned male at birth
woman

  Transmasculine A person assigned female at birth identifying as trans/nonbinary

TABLE 2.1 Gender Identity and Sexual Orientation Terminology (ACOG, 2022)

Historical Trauma
The cumulative trauma associated with a specific cultural, racial, marginalized, or ethnic group is called historical
trauma. It provides a useful theory for the nurse to examine the experiences of LGBTQIA+ persons within the U.S.
health-care system currently and in previous generations. When people who identify as LGBTQIA+ arrive for care,
they carry the weight of discrimination that their family and friends have experienced, along with cumulative pain,
bias, and mistreatment (Mirza & Roney, 2018). This leads to persons expecting to be treated with those same
biases. In a 2018 survey, 8 percent of LGBTQIA+ respondents reported that a clinician refused to see them at an
office visit due to their perceived sexual orientation, 7 percent reported that a clinician refused to recognize a child
of a same-sex partner, 9 percent reported that a health-care provider used harsh or abusive language while treating
them, and 7 percent reported experiencing unwanted physical contact from a health-care provider (such as
fondling, sexual assault, or rape) (Mirza & Roney, 2018). For many LGBTQIA+ people, the health-care system
continues to be perceived as an unsafe space. Using evidence-based resources, the nurse has the responsibility and
power to provide culturally competent, supportive nursing care.

Using Affirming and Inclusive Language
There are many evidence-based gender-affirming interventions the nurse can implement in the clinic to improve
patient outcomes and create safer spaces for the LGBTQIA+ community. Language that accurately describes a
person's gender identity, called gender-affirming language, is imperative in the health-care setting. Using
inappropriate or inaccurate language to describe a person's gender can be detrimental to the patient's mental
health, causing them to be distrustful of the nurse, health-care providers, and the health-care system as a whole
(Dawson & Leong, 2020). Health-care offices and hospitals can add gender-affirming language to intake forms, ask
which pronouns the patient prefers, ask the patient's gender identity, or ask how they identify. Nurses can introduce
themselves and provide the pronouns they prefer, then ask the patient their preferred pronouns. Nurses should
remember that words can heal. By using appropriate gender-affirming language, the nurse can establish trust and
provide supportive care.

Safe Health-Care Spaces
Health-care offices and hospitals must consider if the environment they provide is inclusive of all persons. Language
used in electronic health records or office paperwork should also be gender affirming or gender neutral. Check-in
logs should provide choices beyond male or female for gender identity. Relationship status should also be inclusive.
Nurses can advocate for safe spaces for all patients, including having a private physical space to allow private
disclosure of a person's gender identity, sexual orientation, sex assigned at birth, and preferred pronouns. The nurse
can also advocate for independent electronic health record tablets to be used independently by the patient to
disclose this information (Deutsch & Buchholz, 2015). The nurse can play an important role in advocating for and
integrating diverse, equitable, and inclusive care throughout the office and hospital.

LGBTQIA+ Images in Offices and Hospitals
Another way to ensure diverse, equitable, and inclusive care for all patients is by including images of people and
families that look like them. The nurse can advocate for updated illustrations and educational materials reflecting
gender-affirming language and LGBTQIA+-friendly materials. In 2014, the Gay & Lesbian Medical Association
released a guideline for clinicians to create safer spaces for LGBTQIA+ persons. The guidelines stated that
LGBTQIA+ persons often "scan" the office for cues that they are welcome; those cues include rainbow flags, unisex
bathrooms, and even small LGBTQIA+ stickers or symbols. The guidelines also recommended exhibiting posters of
44  2 · Culturally Competent Nursing Care

    racially and ethnically diverse same-sex couples or transgender people, along with posters from nonprofit
    LGBTQIA+ and HIV/AIDS organizations. Brochures about LGBTQIA+ health related to breast cancer, safe sex,
    hormone therapy and treatment, mental health, sexually transmitted infection (STI) testing and treatment, and a
    posted nondiscrimination statement are recommended.

    Affirmative Language in Charting Systems
    The electronic health record (EHR) is one of the biggest areas of discrimination for LGBTQIA+ patients. Most EHRs
    contribute to microaggressions long before the person even meets the clinician. EHRs are not programmed to
    accommodate diverse options for a person's gender identity, chosen name, or preferred pronouns. Imagine a
    transgender man giving birth in a labor and delivery unit, repeatedly asking that the gender on his wristband be
    changed to male and being told that the EHR could not accommodate that. Deficits like this cause people to feel
    invisible to clinicians and deny them access to the care they desire and deserve. Additionally, being misidentified
    can cause a patient posttraumatic stress, depression, and anxiety.

    The EHR should also be updated to allow patients to choose or enter the descriptors that apply to them. Recently,
    the Human Rights Campaign (2018) found that less than 50 percent of health-care facilities in the United States
    have specific policies ensuring appropriate, welcoming interactions with transgender persons. Nurses can advocate
    for their hospital to provide LGBTQIA+ persons appropriate care in a safe, protected environment such as maternal
    health units.

    Family Planning for the LGBTQIA+ Family
    All people who have a uterus should be offered full reproductive care including preconception, pregnancy,
    contraceptive, and abortion care (Dawson & Leong, 2020). One issue faced by LGBTQIA+ persons is that few
    facilities provide care specific to their community, including fertility preservation services (Dawson & Leong, 2020).
    Fertility preservation is the process of freezing embryos, eggs, ovarian tissue, sperm, or testicular tissue for future
    reproduction. According to a study conducted by Jones et al. (2020) on nonhospital facilities providing abortion
    care, estimates suggest 462 to 530 transgender people obtained abortions primarily at facilities that did not provide
    transgender-specific health care. Additionally, recent surveys suggest that in most states, 20 to 30 percent of
    LGBTQIA+ persons are raising children (Movement Advancement Project, 2024). Nurses may care for LGBTQIA+
    persons who are making a family via adoption, use of a surrogate, or pregnancy through artificial insemination.

    In addition to planned pregnancies, LGBTQIA+ patients can experience unplanned pregnancies as a result of
    consensual sex and sexual assaults. Data suggest that LGBTQIA+ people experience sexual assault at higher rates
    than cisgender and heterosexual people (Human Rights Campaign, 2022.). Therefore, sexual assault nurse
    examiners (SANE) and emergency department staff must be culturally competent to care for survivors who are
    LGBTQIA+.

            LINK TO LEARNING

    The National LGBT Health Education Center, a part of the Program of the Fenway Institute, is an interdisciplinary
    center for research, education, training, and policy development for LGBTQIA+ people. They have created best
    practices that nurses can use to update guidelines in clinics and hospitals for transgender and gender-
    nonconforming patients (https://openstax.org/r/77LGBTHealthCtr) in a free downloadable document.

    Challenges in Caring for Families

    Clear and effective communication between the patient and the nursing professional is essential. Communication
    can be hindered by a language barrier. Quality nursing care can be negatively affected by not supplying language-
    appropriate resources in the form of medical interpreters and printed health information in a patient's native
    language.

    Different Languages
    Culturally and linguistically appropriate services (CLAS) are "respectful of and responsive to the health beliefs,
    practices and needs of diverse patients" (Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services, 2023, p. 1). Language-
    appropriate health care provides care in the person's native language. The Agency for Healthcare Research and

    Access for free at openstax.org
2.1 · Person- and Family-Centered Care                                                                                   45

Quality defines linguistic competence as "providing readily available, culturally appropriate oral and written
language services to limited English proficiency (LEP) members through such means as bilingual/bicultural staff,
trained medical interpreters, and qualified translators" ("What Is Cultural and Linguistic Competence?" 2019, p. 1).

All educational materials, instructions, and consent forms should be offered in the patient's preferred language.
When caring for a person whose primary language is not English and who has a limited ability to speak, read, write,
or understand the English language, the nurse should seek the services of a trained medical interpreter. The Joint
Commission (2021) requires that interpretative services be provided by trained bilingual staff, contracted
interpreting services, or employed language interpreters. The requirement states that if the health-care provider is
bilingual and communicates with the patient in their preferred language, an interpreter is not needed.

Nurses should refrain from asking a patient's family member to act as an interpreter. The patient may withhold
sensitive information from them, or family members may possibly edit or change the information provided.
Unfamiliarity with medical terminology can also cause misunderstanding and errors.

Medical interpreters may be on-site or available by videoconferencing or telephone. The nurse should also consider
coordinating patient and family member conversations with other health-care team members to streamline
communication, while being aware of cultural implications such as who can discuss what health-care topics and
who makes the decisions. When possible, the nurse should obtain a medical interpreter of the same gender as the
patient to prevent potential embarrassment if a sensitive matter is being discussed.

        CULTURAL CONTEXT

Guidelines for Working with a Medical Interpreter

    · Allow extra time for the interview or conversation with the patient.
    · Whenever possible, meet with the interpreter beforehand to provide background.
    · Document the name of the medical interpreter in the progress note.
    · Always face and address the patient directly, using a normal tone of voice. Do not direct questions or

        conversation to the interpreter.
    · Speak in the first person (using "I").
    · Avoid using idioms, such as, "Are you feeling under the weather today?" Also avoid abbreviations, slang, jokes,

        and jargon.
    · Speak in short paragraphs or sentences. Ask only one question at a time. Allow sufficient time for the

        interpreter to finish interpreting before beginning another statement or topic.
    · Ask the patient to repeat any instructions and explanations given to verify that they understood.

Disability
Culturally competent care also applies to those with physical and intellectual disabilities. For pregnant or laboring
persons with disabilities, the nurse must work with the person to determine a plan of care that meets their needs
and respects their uniqueness (Schnaith et al., 2021). For example, among U.S. women aged 18 to 39,
approximately 4.7 percent experience hearing loss; pregnant persons who are hard-of-hearing can experience
adverse health outcomes due to inadequate communication (Mitra et al., 2020). Nurses should be aware that this
population has higher rates of chronic conditions and pregnancy complications (preterm birth and low birth weight)
(Mitra et al., 2020). The nurse needs to determine if the patient is verbal and, if not, determine how the patient best
communicates. If the patient is deaf, the nurse should use an American Sign Language interpreter to discuss health
history and expectations for labor and birth.

For people who are visually impaired, pregnancy brings different challenges. To assist the person, the nurse can
provide a tour of the labor and birth unit, allowing the person to become familiar with the surroundings. Health-care
providers and nurses should always introduce themselves due to the patient's inability to read their name tag. Other
actions to consider are to warn the patient you are about to touch them, announce yourself when entering the room,
and announce that you are leaving the room (Jillings, 2017). Written information should be available in Braille or by
audio. To assist with care of the newborn, the nurse can describe the newborn's facial expressions or behaviors in
response to certain interventions.
46  2 · Culturally Competent Nursing Care

    Nursing care for persons with physical disabilities is tailored for their specific needs. Hospitals, offices, and clinics
    should have wheelchair access to the facility, bathrooms with bars and wheelchair access, wide doors, and exam
    tables that are easily accessible for those with physical disabilities (Figure 2.2). The nurse should ask the person
    which activities require assistance and which do not, respecting the person's independence but providing help when
    needed. The nurse can also order special equipment such as a bedside commode or shower chair to make daily
    activities easier for the person. During birth, the nurse can assist the person into a position that is easiest and most
    comfortable to the birthing person.

    FIGURE 2.2 Wheelchair Access Hospitals and health-care offices should be wheelchair accessible and address the needs of persons with
    physical disabilities. (credit: "Access to the ramp in a wheelchair" by www.gov39.ru/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 4.0)

            LINK TO LEARNING

    Mayo Clinic provides information regarding care of the pregnant person with disabilities (https://openstax.org/r/
    77Pregdisab) for patients. The website provides information on navigating the health-care system, finding support
    before and after birth, getting financial help, and understanding the rights of parents with disabilities.

    Culture
    The set of norms, attitudes, and beliefs that a group of people accept and pass along to the next generation is called
    culture. Many cultures have beliefs that explain what causes illness, how illnesses can be treated or cured, and who
    should be involved in the process. Culture also affects how people communicate with providers in terms of language
    or eye contact or what can be discussed in terms of the person's body, health, or illness. A person's culture affects
    everything from how they think and feel about health and illness, to how receptive they are to treatment
    recommendations, to how, when, and from whom they receive care.
    Spirituality and Religion
    Throughout history, spirituality, religion, and health have often gone together. Spirituality and religion are not the
    same, however. Spirituality is what a person feels and believes that brings that person peace and understanding of
    the meaning of life. It is important to ask the patient how they nurture their spirit. Religion is a belief system that is
    practiced as a group or community. In many healing traditions, healers also serve as religious leaders. Many people
    rely on their religious and spiritual beliefs when making medical decisions. For instance, Jehovah's Witnesses
    believe that it is against God's will to accept blood products and will therefore not allow blood transfusions. A
    person's religious beliefs can affect their dietary intake. For example, many people following the religions of
    Hinduism, Jainism, and Buddhism are vegetarian (Tesfamariam, 2020). Health-care providers must be prepared to
    take patients' religious and spiritual preferences into account as an important part of the treatment plan (Swihart et
    al., 2022). A thorough cultural assessment should include information on a patient's religious and spiritual beliefs
    that might affect their care.

    Access for free at openstax.org
2.2 · Family Health and Cultural Factors                                                                                   47

        CULTURAL CONTEXT

Adolescent Parenthood in Western Cultures versus Other Cultures

According to the National Vital Statistics Reports (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2022), the U.S.
teen birth rate was 15.4 per 1,000 females ages 15 to 19 in 2020, which was down 8 percent from 2019 and 75
percent from 1991. Factors associated with teen pregnancy and birth in the United States are having a mother who
gave birth as a teen and had lower levels of education; not feeling connected with family; living in communities with
higher rates of substance misuse, violence, and hunger; and being Black or Hispanic and having less access to family
planning services and information and more distrust due to mistreatment by the medical community (U.S.
Department of Health & Human Services, n.d.-a).

In other countries, such as Ghana, where 20 percent of girls become pregnant before the age of 18, adolescent
pregnancy is associated with health risks and social and economic hardships for adolescents, families, the
community, and society (Amoadu et al., 2022). An estimated 21 million adolescent girls become pregnant annually
in developing countries, and 12 million below the age of 16 give birth (Amoadu et al., 2022). In Ghana, confounding
factors include lack of knowledge about or accessibility of contraception. Sexuality is a taboo subject, sex education
in schools is restricted to abstinence messages, and child marriage is prevalent (Amoadu et al., 2022). Adolescent
pregnancies in the United States are associated with higher incidences of violence in marriage, decreased education
and employment opportunities, social stigma, and rejection from parents and communities.

2.2 Family Health and Cultural Factors

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Describe family development and roles and how culture impacts the family as a unit
    · Describe the components of a family assessment
    · Describe health beliefs, approaches, and norms of families

Family development refers to the life cycle of a family and how it adapts to change. Culture plays a large part in
defining a family and family roles. When discussing a person's health history, the nurse also takes a thorough family
history to look for possible genetic issues but also to understand traditions and roles that are important to the
person.

Ideas of health and health care differ in certain cultures and families. Many cultures and religions have spiritual
healers and traditions that nurses must respect. Childbirth and childbearing are especially steeped in tradition;
religious rituals are carried out by families or religious leaders. The nurse can inquire about these traditions prior to
the birth to help facilitate the customs.

Family Development

Family development has been studied for many years. Family development was defined in the 1950s as "the
systematic and patterned changes experienced by families as they move through their life course" (International
Encyclopedia of Marriage and Family, 2023, p.1). The family development theory was developed after World War II,
with family stages defined as early marriage, families with young children, the launching of children out of the home,
and the empty nest (International Encyclopedia of Marriage and Family, 2023). Family development has adapted
throughout the years to include many different positions, norms, roles, stages, and variations.

Family Assessment
The family assessment is an important part of a person's health assessment. The nurse understands that the family
plays an important role in a person's personal, emotional, mental, and physical health. Table 2.2 lists the
components of a family assessment.
48  2 · Culturally Competent Nursing Care

    Family Assessment by             Questions
    Nurse

    Describe the family              · Who is considered part of the family?
                                     · What is the patient's position and role in the family?
                                     · What are the ages and sexual orientations of the family members?
                                     · What are their occupations?
                                     · Are there any issues that would affect a family member's ability to help with

                                        care needs?

    Determine family                 · Can the family meet the needs of the patient?
    resources                        · Is the home safe?
                                     · Does the patient foresee any financial limitations to their treatment plan?
                                     · What are the patient's health insurance resources?
                                     · What connections does the family have with friends, neighbors, church, and

                                        community?
                                     · Are there any transportation limitations? Does the patient own a car? Do all the

                                        adults in the family drive? Does the patient rely on public transportation?

    Assess family                    · What is the level of education of the family members?
    education, lifestyle,            · What is the primary language spoken in the home?
    and beliefs                      · What is the cultural background?
                                     · Does the patient or their family have any cultural or family preferences

                                        surrounding life events, e.g., birth or death?
                                     · Does the family use traditional practices of healing?
                                     · Are there any conflicts between cultural practices and recommended practices

                                        by health-care professionals?
                                     · What are the family's dietary patterns?
                                     · What, if any, religion does the family practice?
                                     · Are there any religious beliefs or practices that the care team should be aware

                                        of?

    Determine teaching               · What is most important to the patient and family?
    needs                            · Do the patient and family agree with the treatment plan?
                                     · Are there any physical or cognitive limitations to learning?

    TABLE 2.2 Family Assessment

    Cultural Influences on Families
    Families respond to their environment through learned cultural experiences. Culture influences how families
    communicate, love, deal with stress, and even feel pain. Each family member is a combination of their individualism
    and their culture.

    Physiologic Differences
    Certain ethnocultural groups are at higher risk for specific diseases. (See Chapter 3 Health Promotion, Disease and
    Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care for a discussion of social determinants of health.) Certain ethnicities are
    prone to ancestry-based genetic diseases, and people with these ethnicities are more likely to carry the recessive
    genes that cause these diseases. (See Chapter 4 Influences on Fertility for a discussion of genetic diseases that may
    impact people of certain ethnicities.)

    Psychologic Differences
    One main psychologic distinction between cultures that affects how people think and make decisions is

    Access for free at openstax.org
2.2 · Family Health and Cultural Factors                                                                                 49

individualism versus collectivism. In individualism, people respect independence and view themselves as separate
from others, with personal ideals and goals (Hampton & Varnum, 2020). People from individualistic cultures are
encouraged to make choices for their own benefit and to emphasize independence and self-reliance. Health care
tends to be viewed as a personal responsibility. Most Western countries, such as the United States, the United
Kingdom, and other parts of Western Europe, have individualistic cultures (Fatehi et al., 2020). Knowledge that the
patient and their family are from these regions assists the nurse in developing a plan of care with specific self-
efficacy tasks.

In contrast, in collectivism, people believe in interconnectedness with others and respect relationships (Hampton &
Varnum, 2020). Collectivist cultures place an emphasis on community and cooperation. Decisions are made for the
benefit of the collective. These cultures believe that it is best for society when everyone works together as a group,
and the needs of the individual come secondary to the needs of the greater good. Some countries that practice
cultural collectivism include China, Japan, India, Brazil, and Guatemala (Collectivist Countries 2024, 2024). The
nurse can use this information to include other family members and community resources in the planning of care.

Cultural Influences on Pain
Different cultures have varying views on pain, including how to express it, how to treat it, and what it means. Pain is
a universal physical experience, but it involves emotions and behaviors that are influenced by the patient's cultural
viewpoint (Givler & Bhatt, 2022). Pain is a subjective experience. In many cultures, childbirth is seen as an event
that is challenging, but the intense sensations are not the same as "pain." Ideally, the nurse should discuss pain
management for labor prior to the person experiencing pain; however, the nurse should not assume the person's
pain level strictly by their outward appearance. Misunderstandings about pain due to cultural differences can result
in overtreatment or undertreatment of the patient's pain and should be avoided.

  CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

  Take Action--Culturally Sensitive Nursing Interventions for Pain

  Even though the ways in which people experience and express pain are influenced by their cultural background,
  pain is an individual experience. As a nurse, it is important to be aware of cultural differences so that you can
  treat a person in a way that best suits their pain. Culturally sensitive nursing interventions for pain may include
  the following:

      · Ensure translation services are available as needed.
      · Ask the person about their expectations of pain during labor. Their beliefs may be representative of their

          cultural background, or they may not--do not make assumptions without listening to the person.
      · Provide thorough education on pain assessment to the patient; this is necessary. Do not rely on nonverbal

          cues.
      · Use a pain scale tool to determine the patient's individual response to pain and thereby establish the

          patient's pain level (Dydyk and Grandhe, 2023).
      · Allow the person to incorporate traditional remedies whenever possible. Make sure to gather a thorough

          history of all medicines, herbs, plants, and foods the patient ingests to avoid any possible interactions.
      · Assure the patient that you are there to help treat their pain in a way that is the most appropriate and

          suitable for them.
      · Adjust the patient's care plan to reflect their cultural needs.

  (Givler & Bhatt, 2022)

Family Roles

Family roles are individual to each family. The nurse should never assume what role each member plays without
asking. Family roles do not include just mother, father, and child. Family roles could include the nurturer (a person
who is empathetic and nurturing to their partner and/or children), the cheerleader (a person who is supportive and
encouraging to their other family members), and the truth teller (a person who is able to critically share their
thoughts, hopefully in an appropriate way) (Applebury, 2020). Other family roles might include the troublemaker,
peacemaker, caretaker, doer, or martyr. In most families, the parents are expected to be the leaders, and the
50  2 · Culturally Competent Nursing Care

    children are expected to follow that leadership. However, parents and children can play many roles. According to the
    role and personality of the person, the nurse may need to change their approach to education and care.

    Health Beliefs and Practices in the Family

    Health beliefs and health practices can differ because of cultural, familial, and socioeconomic influences. Religion
    and spirituality also determine health-care decisions. Beliefs may be due to negative past experiences or
    discrimination. Some families are unfamiliar with the health-care system and how to navigate it. Families coming
    from a country with universal health care will lack an understanding of the U.S. health-care system. Nurses should
    assist families in understanding the role of the health-care system.

    Religion and Spirituality's Influence on Maternal-Child and Women's Health
    Religion and spirituality are prominent cultural elements that influence values and beliefs and can influence
    pregnancy, birth, and women's health. Spirituality is the individual beliefs and practices in which a person finds
    meaning and value; it is separate from religion. The nurse can inquire what spiritual beliefs are important
    surrounding pregnancy, birth, contraception, and preventive health care, and ask what accommodations would help
    support those beliefs.

    Many topics in maternal-child and women's health are influenced by religious or cultural norms. Circumcision
    decisions are often made based on religious beliefs. Taboos regarding menstruation can be influenced by religion,
    and some religious ceremonies are prohibited while a person is menstruating. Fasting during pregnancy is a decision
    based on religious beliefs. Other reproductive health topics related to religion include abortion, sex, baby care,
    pregnancy, and postpartum traditions. Some patients prefer traditional healers to modern health-care providers or
    refuse recommended treatment because it goes against their religious beliefs. The American College of
    Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019) released a committee opinion stating that pregnancy does not give a health-
    care provider reason to coerce, manipulate, or threaten a person to "save" a fetus if a patient refuses treatment.
    Nurses should ask what religious beliefs are important to the patient and how they can tailor their care to respect
    those beliefs.

    Practitioners and Traditions outside Mainstream Medicine
    Every culture develops its own ways of dealing with health and illness. The various medicines and healing practices
    around the world that differ from the modern, Western health-care system is called traditional healing (World
    Health Organization, 2023). Traditional healing encompasses a vast range of traditions and practices that differ
    across regions and cultures. During pregnancy and breast-feeding, asking about traditional healing regimens is
    important to assess for safety to the fetus and newborn. Table 2.3 reviews different healing traditions and their
    characteristics.

    Healing                                Chief Characteristics
    Tradition

    Traditional  Belief in the idea of balance as the root of health; based in concepts of qi and yin and yang;
    Chinese      practices include acupuncture, cupping, herbs, tai chi
    medicine
    (TCM)

    Ayurveda     Hindu form of medicine from India, based on the idea that disease is caused by imbalance; seeks
                 to cure imbalances using Ayurvedic medicine, including diet, herbal medicines, yoga, and
                 meditation

    African      Extremely diverse and varies by tribe; some believe that ancestral spirits are closely involved in the
    traditional  lives of the living; healers offer spiritual education and care and function as counselors and social
    healing      workers

    TABLE 2.3 Major Healing Traditions

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           2.2 · Family Health and Cultural Factors                        51

Healing                             Chief Characteristics
Tradition

American    Believe that spiritual and physical health are intertwined; the healer's role is to help the person as
Indian      they help themselves; ritual and ceremony have key roles in healing
traditions

Hispanic    Curanderismo is a holistic practice rooted in beliefs that health is achieved through the right
traditions  balance of mind, body, and spirit; healers focus not only on the person's physical health but also on
            their mental health, diet, personal relationships, and more; use various healing methods including
            prayer, oils, herbs, special diets, and other spiritual rituals

Western     Role of patient at the center of the patient-healer relationship is crucial; has a strong foundation in
European    using medicines created from natural elements, including herbs, plants, minerals, and animals
traditions

TABLE 2.3 Major Healing Traditions

Childbearing and Childrearing Practices
The American Psychological Association (n.d.) defines child-rearing as "a pattern of raising children that is specific
to a particular society, subculture, family, or period in cultural history. Child-rearing practices vary in such areas as
methods of discipline, expression of affection, and degree of permissiveness" (para 1). Health beliefs regarding
childbearing and child-rearing are dependent on cultural and family practices. Many cultures see birth as a natural,
nonmedical event and tend to use midwives. After a birth in Iran, mothers, sisters, and aunts traditionally "shower"
the birthing person with special oils, give them a facial, and paint them with henna as a reward for their hard work
(Boggan, 2015). Andean communities in Argentina place importance on care of the placenta, which is revered as a
younger sibling. Parents must care for and bury the placenta properly (Colangelo, 2020). Many Hispanic people
celebrate cuarentena, 40 days of recuperation and rest after the birth. In the Muslim culture, parents celebrate the
birth by performing tahnik and aqiqah rituals in which a small amount of date or honey is placed on the baby's
palate and the dua is recited (Gatrad & Sheikh, 2001).

Some parents place a heavy emphasis on achievement in childhood. Chinese American and Taiwanese Chinese
parents rate persistence, politeness, concentration, and precision as important parenting goals (He et al., 2021).
Indian parenting styles focus on interdependence of all family members, where shared goals and the focus on the
family is a priority (Sahithya et al., 2019). In Hinduism, couples without children are stigmatized as barren, but
having a son is celebrated for allowing the family line to continue (V, n.d.).

        LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

Jehovah's Witnesses and Blood Products

Jehovah's Witnesses belong to a Christian sect that prohibits the use of blood transfusions or blood products. Their
beliefs are based on verses of the Bible, including the following:

        Genesis 9:4: "But flesh meat with blood shall ye not eat."
        Leviticus 17:12-14: "No soul of you shall eat blood, whosoever eateth it shall be cut off."
        Acts 15:29: "That you abstain from blood ..."
        Acts 21:25: "Gentiles keep themselves from things offered to idols and from blood."

Some Witnesses will accept minor blood products such as cryoprecipitate and immunoglobulins. Elders of the
church can be useful consultants for members deciding which products they agree to accept. Health-care providers
can use iron replacement, erythropoiesis-stimulating agents, tranexamic acid, recombinant factor VIIa, prothrombin
complex concentrate, and other agents to help prevent the need for blood products during planned surgeries. The
nurse should take a detailed history of any previous complications from surgery, bleeding complications, or genetic
predisposition for clotting or bleeding. The nurse will also document what measures the person agrees to if bleeding
52  2 · Culturally Competent Nursing Care

    does occur. Health-care providers and nurses must be nonjudgmental in their discussions of blood products and
    hemorrhage.

    (DeLoughery, 2020)

    2.3 Culturally Competent Care

    LEARNING OBJECTIVES
    By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Discuss transcultural nursing and culturally competent care
        · Describe a cultural assessment

    Nurses are aware of cultural differences and are interested in making patients feel supported and safe. Culturally
    competent health-care providers take time to assess the person's spiritual, emotional, and cultural needs and
    integrate them into the plan of care. The Cultural Care Theory, the Transcultural Assessment Model, and the Four Cs
    of Cultural Assessment guide nurses in determining interventions that value traditions and allow the person to trust
    the health-care system.

    Transcultural Nursing

    As you have learned, cultural competence is a lifelong process of applying evidence-based nursing while respecting
    the cultural values, beliefs, worldview, and practices of patients to produce improved patient outcomes. Culturally
    competent care requires nurses to combine their knowledge and skills with awareness, curiosity, and sensitivity
    about their patients' cultural beliefs. Cultural competence takes motivation, time, and practice to develop and
    evolves throughout the nursing career. Culturally competent nurses have the power to improve the quality of care,
    leading to better health outcomes for culturally diverse patients.

    The theoretical roots of culturally competent care are found in the original transcultural nursing concept developed
    by Dr. Madeleine Leininger, a nurse and anthropologist (Leininger, 1988). The concept of transcultural nursing
    incorporates cultural beliefs and practices of people to help them maintain and regain health or to face death in a
    meaningful way. This theory forms the basis of all culturally competent care.

    Dr. Leininger developed the Culture Care Theory, which states that health care cannot be effectively provided
    without considering the person's cultural background (Leininger, 1988). The theory emphasizes the importance of
    understanding the people's cultural values, beliefs, and practices to provide appropriate care. According to
    Leininger, culture is a fundamental component of human life and influences a person's perception of health, illness,
    and health care. Therefore, health-care providers must approach each person with cultural sensitivity and strive to
    deliver care that is respectful and tailored to the person's cultural needs. Culture Care Theory is an important
    framework for promoting culturally competent care and achieving health equity for all people.

    The Transcultural Assessment Model
    Giger and Davidhizar (2002) developed the Transcultural Assessment Model as a way for nurses to assess and
    provide care for culturally diverse people. According to this model, each person is unique. Assessment should
    consider the following six cultural phenomena: communication, personal space, social organization, time
    orientation, environmental control, and biological variations.

        · Communication. This includes the language, tone, and nonverbal cues used by the person and the health-care
            provider. Communication styles vary across cultures and can impact the effectiveness of health-care
            interactions.

        · Personal space. All communication occurs in the context of space. There are four distinct zones of
            interpersonal space: intimate, personal, social and consultative, and public (Hall, 1966) (Figure 2.3.) This
            includes the physical and emotional distance between the person and the health-care provider. Cultural
            norms around personal space and touch vary across cultures.

        · Social organization. This includes the person's cultural values and beliefs related to family, community, and
            social roles. Cultural expectations around family involvement in health-care decisions, for example, vary
            across cultures.

        · Time orientation. Time is an important aspect of interpersonal communication. This includes the person's

    Access for free at openstax.org
2.3 · Culturally Competent Care                                                                                                     53

   cultural beliefs and practices related to time, such as punctuality and the perception of time as linear or
   cyclical.
· Environmental control. This includes the person's cultural beliefs and practices related to controlling their
   environment, such as beliefs about the causes of illness and the use of traditional healing practices.
· Biological variations. These include the person's cultural beliefs and practices related to biology, such as
   beliefs about the causes of illness and the use of alternative therapies. Cultural beliefs regarding pain
   management and the use of medication can also vary across cultures.

FIGURE 2.3 Our Zones of Personal Space Nurses and health-care providers should be aware of and respect a patient's personal space.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

        CULTURAL CONTEXT

Patients and Personal Space

The amount of space that a person surrounds themselves with to feel comfortable is influenced by culture. For
example, for some people, it would feel awkward to stand 4 inches away from another person while holding a social
conversation, but for others, a small personal space is expected. There are times when a nurse must enter a
person's personal space, which can cause emotional distress for some people. The nurse should always ask for
permission before entering a personal space and explain why and what is about to happen.

Patients may also be concerned about their modesty or being exposed. A person may deal with the violation of their
space by removing themselves from the situation, pulling away, or closing their eyes. The nurse should recognize
these cues as an expression of cultural preference and allow the person to assume a position or distance that is
comfortable for them.

Like cultural influences on personal space, touch is also culturally determined. This has implications for nurses
because it may be culturally inappropriate for a male nurse to provide care for a female patient and vice versa. In
some cultures, it is also considered rude to touch a person's head without permission.

Cultural Traditions Surrounding Nutrition
In some cultures, certain food is classified as taboo. For example, in Indonesia, persons who are pregnant and
breast-feeding are prohibited from eating certain fruits, meat, and fish; soda, coconut water, and cold beverages are
also considered taboo (Tobing et al., 2019). People in rural Zulu communities also consider certain fruits taboo, and
consuming sweets, ice, and alcohol may be prohibited; for postpartum recovery, their culture recommends soft
porridge, all fruits and vegetables, beetroot, and tea (Ramulondi et al., 2021). In areas of Asia, after birth, people
can eat rice, but meat is taboo until after 2 months postpartum; however, persons in areas of food insecurity are
allowed to eat some taboo foods earlier than 2 months postpartum (Smith et al., 2021). Many cultures recommend
postpartum foods that consist of easy-to-digest, high in protein and fats, warm cooked, brothy foods (soups and
stews) that are nourishing and hydrating.
54  2 · Culturally Competent Nursing Care

    During menopause, many people in South Asia eat mostly plant-based diets and experience fewer hot flashes, night
    sweats, and changes due to lack of estrogen (Vohra, 2021). Some Spanish women eat a Mediterranean diet
    featuring olive oil, fruits, fish, white meats, and alcohol. Their low consumption of sugars and processed meats is
    associated with less menstrual pain, shorter cycles, and less bleeding (Onieva-Zafra et al., 2020). A Malaysian belief
    is that only rice and cassava root should be eaten during menstruation due to fear of bad health or bad luck. In some
    areas of India, menstruating persons cannot eat sour foods like curds, tamarind, or pickles in fear they will disturb
    or stop their menstrual flow (Syed Abdullah, 2022).

    Cultural Nursing Assessment

    Nurses providing culturally competent care integrate the patient's cultural beliefs into their health care by showing
    respect and creating an environment that is culturally sensitive. The following interventions support culturally
    sensitive care:

        · Introduce yourself by name and role when entering the room and initially meeting the person and their family.
            Acknowledge any family members or visitors. Address the person using their title and last name. Ask how they
            wish to be addressed and what their preferred pronouns are and document those preferences in the record.

        · Stand at least an arm's length from the patient.
        · Observe how the person and family members communicate nonverbally, such as by eye contact, spacing,

            touch, and other behaviors, to determine the level of nonverbal communication to follow.
        · If English is not the patient's primary language, document their preferred language in the record and note if a

            medical interpreter is needed.
        · Politely ask questions about their culture and beliefs to minimize or avoid misunderstandings.
        · Ask if any limitations exist on who can care for a patient. For example, many patients who are Muslim will

            prefer a same-gender care provider (Attum et al., 2023).
        · Show respect for the patient's cultural beliefs and values. Integrate their cultural beliefs into nursing care as

            much as possible.
        · Reassure the patient that providing culturally competent care is a priority for all health-care workers.

    After establishing a culturally sensitive environment, nurses should incorporate a cultural assessment when caring
    for all patients. Many assessment guides used for patient interviews are adaptable to a variety of health-care
    settings and are designed to facilitate understanding and communication.

    The Four Cs of Culture model is an example of a quick cultural assessment tool that asks questions about what the
    patient Considers to be a problem, the Cause of the problem, how they are Coping with the problem, and how
    Concerned they are about the problem.

    1. What do you think is wrong? What is worrying you? (In other words, discover what the patient Considers to be the
    problem and what they call it.)

    2. What do you think Caused this problem? How did this happen?

    3. What are you doing to Cope with this problem? How are you taking care of yourself?

    4. How serious is this problem for you? How Concerned are you?

            CULTURAL CONTEXT

    Using "The Four Cs of Culture" to Perform a Cultural Assessment

    Scenario: The nurse enters the person's room to perform a cultural assessment. The person is from China but just
    moved to the area to live with family. Their preferred language is Mandarin. The nurse sets up the video translator to
    begin the conversation and allows the translator to introduce themselves to the patient.

    Dialogue:

    Nurse: Hi, I'm Travis, and I'm going to be your nurse today. Can you please tell me your name and date of birth?

    Patient: Mei Wang, January 2, 1947.

    Access for free at openstax.org
2.4 · Families at Higher Risk for Poor Health Outcomes                                                                  55

Nurse: What would you like me to call you?

Patient: Mrs. Wang is fine.

Nurse: Mrs. Wang, I'm here to do a cultural assessment, which involves asking you a few questions. It should take
less than 15 minutes. Is that okay?

Patient: Yes, that is fine.

Nurse: What do you think is wrong? What is worrying you?

Patient: The doctors are telling me that I need a hysterectomy because of fibroids. I know this happened because
my body is not in balance.

Nurse: What do you think caused this problem? How did this happen?

Patient: My husband died 4 months ago, and I left China to live with my son and his family here in the United States.
I miss my husband, and everything here is so different compared to what I'm used to.

Nurse: Have you been trying things at home to make yourself feel better? How have you been coping?

Patient: I've been making some special food. A lot of soup and other foods with ginger, onion, garlic to help with the
abdominal pain.

Nurse: How serious is this problem for you? How concerned are you?

Patient: I've never been in the hospital before, so I'm worried, but I think the doctors are good and will get me
home. I want to make sure that my family can bring me food from home, though. I don't like the hospital food. My
food from home is much better for me.

Nurse: I'll check with your doctor to see if your family can bring your food from home; I'll tell them how much better
you like it, okay? My assessment is done for now. Do you have any other questions for me?

Patient: Not right now. Thank you for talking to me.

2.4 Families at Higher Risk for Poor Health Outcomes

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Identify families in the community at higher risk for poor health outcomes and their experiences with the
        health-care system

    · List health risk factors affecting families who are at increased risk during pregnancy and birth
    · Identify and discuss social determinants of health in the childbearing population

Families can be at higher risk due to discrimination, poverty, injustice, or psychosocial issues. The nurse encounters
these families in health-care settings as well as in the community. The nurse should use culturally sensitive
approaches with these families and join community or professional groups to address health disparities in the
community. The United States used nonmedical factors that influence health outcomes to develop Healthy People
2030 objectives in an attempt to address these disparities.

Characteristics of Families at Higher Risk for Poor Health Outcomes

Racial, sexual, or gender minorities; children; older adults; and people who are underinsured, socioeconomically
disadvantaged, incarcerated, or disabled are at higher risk for poor health outcomes. Many low-income jobs do not
provide health insurance, which reduces access to health care. These families can be stigmatized and may refrain
from seeking health care due to fear of being marginalized. The nurse must be aware of different types of families at
higher risk and how to provide them with fair and safe care.

Black Families
Black Americans in the United States have experienced a long history of racism, and inequity has become part of the
infrastructure causing structural racism (Lloyd et al., 2021). Culturally, many Black Americans value marriage and
children; however, barriers such as low income have often prevented these family structures from occurring. A study
56  2 · Culturally Competent Nursing Care

    by Lloyd et al. (2021) found that having a low income led to increased issues with the criminal justice system,
    another influence on children and parents living together. They note that Black children lived in several different
    family structures. such as single-parent homes (some single persons live with an unmarried partner) and with
    extended families, grandparents, or kin. For pregnant Black people, prolonged stress has led to epigenetic changes
    causing higher incidences of preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and maternal mortality in their population (Riggan
    et al., 2021). The nurse must recognize examples of racism and discrimination in the health-care system and
    become a change agent to overcome health inequities.

    Immigrant and Migrant Families
    Health-care access is limited for immigrant and migrant families. HealthCare.gov (n.d.) states that "lawfully present
    immigrants" can apply for the Health Insurance Marketplace, but undocumented immigrants are not eligible.
    Further eligibilities include living in the United States and not being incarcerated. Undocumented immigrants can be
    eligible for "emergency Medicaid" for prenatal care, depending on state regulations (Alarcon, 2022). Federally
    qualified health centers (FQHC) have bridged the gap for some immigrant families; FQHC's mission is to serve those
    with limited access to health care and to improve the quality of life for millions, including immigrants (Alarcon,
    2022).

    Migrant families, like immigrant families, have limited access to health care. Many migrant families move from place
    to place for work. The frequent movement does not allow pregnant persons to receive consistent prenatal care,
    which can lead to poor outcomes for the person and their fetus. It is important for the nurse to determine all the
    previous providers for this pregnancy and request records to review all prenatal care.

    LGBTQIA+ Families
    LGBTQIA+ families are also at increased risk for domestic violence, discrimination, marginalization, and social
    exclusion. A study by Medina-Martínez et al. (2021) reveals that the LGBTQIA+ population has poorer physical and
    mental health and more depression, substance misuse, and suicide than the straight population. They also found
    higher incidences of colon, liver, breast, ovarian, and cervical cancers in lesbian and bisexual women. The study
    showed that many LGBTQIA+ people feel uncomfortable and unsafe in the health-care system because of
    discriminatory attitudes and practices. The health inequities/minority stress model proposes that adults from
    underrepresented groups who are socially stigmatized experience more stress and use maladaptive coping
    strategies, leading to rumination, substance misuse, and risky sexual behaviors (Medina-Martínez et al., 2021).
    Nurses can establish relationships with these patients by incorporating transcultural nursing interventions to help
    LGBTQIA+ families feel more included in and trusting of the health-care system.

    People Who Are Incarcerated
    In the United States, the rate of women who are incarcerated has dramatically increased to the second highest rate
    internationally, second only to Thailand (Friedman et al., 2023). The Friedman et al. (2023) study found that 75
    percent of women who are incarcerated had children under 18 years old, and less than 33 percent of these children
    lived with their father during the mothers' incarceration. They report that pregnant persons who are incarcerated
    have a higher risk of complications due to lack of prenatal care, trauma, poor nutrition, substance use, mental
    illness, chronic medical conditions, low socioeconomic status, and limited social support. Over the years,
    organizations such as ACOG, the Federal Bureau of Prisons, and the National Commission on Correctional Health
    Care have created standards for pregnant persons who are incarcerated, including the recommendation to allow
    patients to labor without restraints or shackles. Nurses caring for a laboring person who are incarcerated can
    provide nonjudgmental care and avoid discussing "taking the baby home." Nurses can help the person work through
    feelings of sadness and grief over being separated from their baby.

            LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

    Grandparents as Caretakers

    A grandparent can become the primary caregiver to a grandchild for different reasons, such as premature death of
    the child's parent or the parent's incarceration, mental health issues, or substance use disorder. According to the
    2017-2021 U.S. census, 7.1 million grandparents are living with and caring for grandchildren under the age of 18
    (U.S. Census Bureau, n.d.). Of these grandparents rearing grandchildren, approximately 2.5 million of them may

    Access for free at openstax.org
2.4 · Families at Higher Risk for Poor Health Outcomes                                                                     57

need to return to the workforce to provide for the grandchild (Saxena, 2021). Other challenges grandparents face
include changes in family dynamics because the grandparent is now the disciplinarian; psychosocial impact because
the grandparents and children are in different social groups with peers; lack of resources due to low income related
to retirement or disability; and challenges of parenting later in life, such as not having the energy to raise small
children or discipline teens (Martin et al., 2020). Grandparents and grandchildren should receive resources for
counseling for potential depression and financial resources.

Families with Lower Incomes
According to the National Health Council (Witting, 2023), 37.2 million Americans were living in poverty in 2020.
Poverty causes poor health outcomes due to lack of available and quality health care for those who cannot afford
reliable care. The National Health Council also noted that people living in poverty have more chronic diseases, such
as heart, liver, and kidney disease. When people living in poverty could schedule health-care appointments, many
times they did not have reliable transportation to get to the office (Witting, 2023). Pregnant persons living in poverty
also have higher risk for poor outcomes owing to lack of prenatal care, poor nutrition, and stress (Witting, 2023).
Nurses can provide supportive care while suggesting resources for the family to help with financial assistance.

Families Living in Rural Areas
Families living in rural areas in the United States face more health disparities than families living in urban areas. The
CDC (2023) states that 46 million people in the United States live in a rural area. Areas without obstetric hospitals,
birth centers, or obstetric providers are called maternity deserts (Treisman, 2022). These areas are mostly rural and
have higher rates of maternal and newborn mortality than urban areas (Treisman, 2022). Statistics show that
members of families living in rural areas have a higher risk of dying from heart disease, cancer, unintentional injury,
chronic respiratory disease, and stroke than members of families living in urban areas (CDC, 2023). Children in rural
areas are at risk for mental, behavioral, and developmental disorders. Some reasons for rural families' increased
risk of death from these diseases include long travel distance and time, higher rates of cigarette smoking, high blood
pressure, obesity, higher rates of poverty, less access to health care, and more uninsured people (CDC, 2023).
Nurses can address some of these issues when families who live in rural areas are present in the office or hospital.
The nurse can educate the family on smoking cessation, weight loss, and increased physical activity, and can
conduct recommended screenings for cancer. Some community-based mobile clinics can provide nursing care to
these rural areas as well.

Social Determinants of Health of the Birthing Person and Newborn

The nonmedical factors that influence health outcomes, including conditions in which people are born, grow, work,
live, and age, and the wider sets of forces and systems shaping the conditions of daily life are called the social
determinants of health. Health outcomes impacted by social determinants of health are referred to as health
disparities or health inequalities.

Various factors contribute to health inequalities among different cultural groups. Socioeconomic status, race,
educational level, and physical proximity to health-care facilities are all causes of health inequalities. For example,
Black and Native American populations have higher rates of obesity, diabetes, hypertension, and heart disease
when compared to White populations (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2017). The
history of racism and discrimination in the medical system has resulted in widespread distrust, especially for Black,
Indigenous, and Latinx populations. This distrust manifests in less seeking of care and a general skepticism of the
care rendered. Nurses can perpetuate this distrust, or they can begin to heal these relationships by considering the
patient's background. If they practice trauma-informed care, they acknowledge all past and present parts of a
person's life situation, including any trauma they have endured (Center for Health Care Strategies, 2021) in an effort
to provide treatment that supports the patient's autonomy, strength, and control over making health-care decisions.

Several social determinants of health causing disparities in the care of the birthing person include financial barriers
to health care, shortage of obstetric providers, prevalence of unhealthy behaviors (illicit drug and alcohol use;
consumption of cheap, less nutritious foods), lack of equal education causing financial inequality, and racially
segregated communities (Crear-Perry et al., 2021).

The Five Domains
The five domains of the social determinants of health include economic stability, education access and quality,
58  2 · Culturally Competent Nursing Care

    health-care access and quality, neighborhood and built environment, and social and community context (Figure 2.4).

    FIGURE 2.4 Social Determinants of Health's Five Domains Healthy People 2030 uses the five domains to create objectives for improving
    health. (credit: "Healthy People 2030 SDOH" by U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention and Health
    Promotion, Public Domain)

    These five domains are the foundation of addressing inequities in education, economics, health care, communities,
    and neighborhoods.

    Healthy People 2030
    Healthy People 2030 is an initiative of the Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion of the U.S.
    Department of Health and Human Services. From its initial report in 1979 and its subsequent new iterations, it
    consists of national objectives aimed at improving health and well-being over the preceding decade. Social
    determinates of health are keys to creating the Healthy People objectives. Several objectives for pregnancy and
    childbirth include reducing preterm births, increasing the proportion of people who receive early and adequate
    prenatal care, increasing abstinence from alcohol during pregnancy, reducing pregnancy in adolescents, and
    reducing maternal deaths (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, n.d.-b). (See Chapter 3 Health
    Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care for more discussion of Healthy People 2030.) The
    nurse can become active in professional organizations to help fulfill these objectives.

            LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

    Caring for Patients Who Cannot Afford Their Necessary Health-Care/Prescriptions

    The nurse is giving discharge instructions to a pregnant woman, describing how to take the prescribed medication.
    The woman quietly asks if it will hurt her baby if she does not take the medication. The nurse realizes the woman
    cannot afford the necessary medication. What can the nurse do?

    When this situation occurs, the nurse can feel helpless and hopeless. The following suggestions can sometimes help
    in this situation.

    Access for free at openstax.org
2.4 · Families at Higher Risk for Poor Health Outcomes                                                          59

1. Ask the health-care provider if there is a less expensive medication that can be prescribed.
2. Discuss drug assistance programs provided by many pharmaceutical companies, state programs, and

     nonprofit organizations.
3. Contact the social services department to determine if the person qualifies for pregnancy Medicaid or other

     state and financial assistance.
4. Recommend prescription assistance programs or websites such as GoodRx to find the lowest price for the

     medication.
60 2 · Summary

Summary

2.1 Person- and Family-Centered Care

A family consists of people who share a kinship and is defined by the people who make up that kinship. The nurse
cares for the family by using inclusive language and respecting all cultures and disabilities. Knowing how people
would like to be addressed, knowing when to ask questions at a time family is present, using a professional
interpreter, and ordering special equipment for people with disabilities allow patients to feel included in their health
care. The nurse can advocate for updated educational brochures, inclusive photos of different types of families,
updated EHRs, and general acknowledgement that not all families look the same. Nurses play an important role in
caring for families and ensuring all people are respected and heard.

2.2 Family Health and Cultural Factors

Family, religion, and culture make up a person's belief system. Family roles are often defined by these influences. To
help care for a person physically, mentally, and emotionally, the nurse takes a thorough family history, noting risk
factors for disease and identifying traditions and roles that are important to the person.

The importance of community health and health care in certain cultures and families determines how the nurse
approaches education and explanations of procedures and treatments. Many cultures or religions rely on traditional
medicine healers. Traditions and ceremonies surround childbirth and childbearing. The nurse asks about any
traditions or ceremonies during pregnancy to ensure they are safe for pregnancy and during labor or postpartum and
to help the patient prepare items to bring to the birthing facility. The nurse is aware that respecting the culture and
tradition of people helps them feel cared for and empowered.

2.3 Culturally Competent Care

People bring their cultural expectations and beliefs into all health-care encounters. The nurse must determine what
interventions can be altered to respect those beliefs. Performing a cultural assessment is a way for the nurse to
determine the person's expectations. Health-care workers should not assume the person's values or beliefs without
asking the person. Using culturally sensitive techniques to enter the room and interact with the person and family
shows respect and a desire to understand the person.

2.4 Families at Higher Risk for Poor Health Outcomes

Families at risk for health issues caused by health inequities are at even higher risk during the childbearing years.
The nurse does not only provide health care for these families but also connects them with resources for the social,
financial, and mental issues that are more common in these families. The nurse needs to be aware of social
programs and free medical services available to these families and may need to engage the hospital case manager,
social worker, or health department in offering assistance to these families. Social determinants of health guide the
Healthy People 2030 objectives in hopes of addressing these health inequalities.

Key Terms

blended family parents and children who are not biologically related to the other parent, usually created after a
    death or divorce but also include those who have never married; also called a binuclear or stepfamily

collectivism culture in which people believe in interconnectedness with others and respect relationships
cultural competence lifelong process of applying evidence-based nursing in agreement with the cultural values,

    beliefs, worldview, and practices of patients to produce improved patient outcomes
culturally responsive care occurs when a person's cultural beliefs are integrated into their health care; culturally

    responsive care is required for a trusting, effective relationship with the patient and their family
culture set of beliefs, attitudes, and practices shared by a group of people or community that is accepted,

    followed, and passed down to other members of the group
Culture Care Theory states that health care cannot be effectively provided without considering the person's

    cultural background
diversity differences in social and ethnic backgrounds, gender, and sexual orientation within a community
dual-career family household in which both parents work
extended family grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             2 · Assessments 61

Four Cs of Culture model example of a quick cultural assessment tool that asks questions about what the patient
    Considers to be a problem, the Cause of the problem, how they are Coping with the problem, and how Concerned
    they are about the problem

gender-affirming language language that describes one's gender identity
Healthy People 2030 national objectives aimed at improving health and well-being over the next 10 years
historical trauma cumulative trauma associated with a specific cultural, racial, marginalized, or ethnic group
individualism culture in which people respect independence and view themselves as separate from others, with

    personal ideals and goals
single-career family household in which one parent works and the other stays home
social determinants of health nonmedical factors that influence health outcomes, including conditions in which

    people are born, grow, work, live, and age, and the wider sets of forces and systems shaping the conditions of
    daily life
traditional healing various medicines and healing practices around the world that differ from the modern, Western
    health-care system
transcultural nursing incorporates cultural beliefs and practices of people to help them maintain and regain
    health or to face death in a meaningful way
trauma-informed care care that acknowledges all past and present parts of a person's life situation, including any
    trauma they have endured (Center for Health Care Strategies, 2021) in an effort to provide treatment that
    supports the patient's autonomy, strength, and control over making health-care decisions

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. A nurse is caring for a person who is blind. What intervention could the nurse implement to deliver culturally
        responsive care?
           a. Ask family members to leave the room for the discussion of care.
           b. Be aware of how the person is addressed.
           c. Introduce herself with her name and credentials upon entering the room.
           d. Leave education material in Braille on the table across the room from the bed.

    2. People in extended families can live together for many reasons. What can the nurse do to provide the best
        care for a person living with an extended family?
           a. Assume the family is poor and needs information on financial assistance.
           b. Ask the person if they would like the family members to remain in the room during the exam.
           c. Set a limit on who is allowed in the room with the person regardless of the circumstances.
           d. Address the family first then the patient.

    3. A family member stands at the nurse station and requests help for their partner. What response should the
        nurse give to the family member?
           a. "Are you the husband?"
           b. "Who is your wife?"
           c. "What can I do to help you and your partner?"
           d. "Are you part of the trans couple in room 214?"

    4. What does the nurse know about the definition of a family?
           a. Families are made up of couples with biological children.
           b. Families are created through marriage or birth.
           c. Families can be blended but are not called families.
           d. Families are made of kinships defined by the family.

    5. A couple who has stated that they are LGBTQIA+ during prior visits arrives at the clinic for prenatal care. What
        can the nurse say in the waiting area to help them feel welcome and safe?
           a. "You can take this tablet to an area in the waiting room and check in. Then bring the tablet back to me
62 2 · Assessments

                when you are done."
           b. "Are you pregnant? Your paperwork says your name is Tom."
           c. "You can have a seat, and a person from the LGBTQIA+ office will come to assist you."
           d. "Here is our paperwork. It doesn't have a box for your sex, but you can write it next to the gender box."

    6. Family roles are often defined by culture and religion. What does the nurse know about collectivism?
           a. Collectivist cultures place an emphasis on individuality.
           b. Decisions are made for the benefit of the individual person, then the family.
           c. A person from a collectivist culture might leave treatment decisions to their family.
           d. These cultures believe that it is best for society when everyone decides on their own health care.

    7. What question during a family assessment could the nurse ask to determine if the family has necessary
        resources?
           a. "Do you enjoy spending time with your family?"
           b. "Do you have a group of friends, neighbors, or a church that helps you when you are ill?"
           c. "How often do you go to the store by yourself?"
           d. "Do your family members get along well?"

    8. A person is admitted to the antepartum floor for hypertension. The person is Hispanic and speaks fluent
        English. They tell the nurse they have been seeing a curandero, or traditional healer, for the past several
        years. What is the best initial response from the nurse?
           a. Ask the patient for a list of all herbs, plants, and special diets they are currently taking.
           b. Educate the person on why adherence to a Western medical treatment plan is better for their health.
           c. Inform the person that the treatment they have been receiving from the curandero is not evidence
                based.
           d. Tell the person that they are not considering the health of their baby by using these traditions.

    9. What is the term for integrating a person's cultural beliefs into their health care?
           a. cultural integrity
           b. culturally responsive care
           c. holistic care
           d. integrative care

  10. The nurse enters the person's room for the first time. What can the nurse do to show cultural sensitivity?
           a. Come in and sit on the bed with the person.
           b. Address the person by their first name.
           c. Make and hold eye contact.
           d. Document their preferred language in their chart.

  11. What is an example of a nurse's question that is part of the Four Cs?
           a. What did you do to cause your injury?
           b. What are you concerned about today?
           c. What kind of problems will your traditions cause for other patients?
           d. When will your family move you in to stay with them?

  12. What is the term for nonmedical factors that influence health outcomes, including conditions in which people
        are born, grow, work, live, and age, and the wider sets of forces and systems shaping the conditions of daily
        life?
           a. environmental influences
           b. life circumstances
           c. situational occurrences
           d. social determinants of health

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             2 · Assessments 63

  13. Pregnant Black people have more complications resulting from epigenetic changes caused by prolonged
        stress due to racism and discrimination. What complication could arise because of this history?
           a. postterm pregnancy
           b. preeclampsia
           c. liver disease
           d. cholestasis of pregnancy

  14. LGBTQIA+ families are at higher risk for certain issues more than straight, cisgender parents. What is an
        example of a vulnerability experienced by LGBTQIA+ families?
           a. increased cases of social exclusion
           b. fewer cases of intimate partner violence
           c. fewer incidents of family trauma
           d. increased cases of social acceptance

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. What characteristics make up a blended family?

    2. The nurse uses a medical interpreter to speak to a person whose first language is Spanish. What guidelines
        should the nurse and medical interpreter follow?

    3. What can the nurse do to decrease barriers for people with physical disabilities?

    4. Describe the steps in performing a family assessment.

    5. List at least three different types of alternative and complementary therapies.

    6. Describe some steps to begin a culturally sensitive nursing assessment.

    7. List the five domains of the social determinants of health.

Reflection Questions

    1. Describe the strengths and challenges of a dual-career family and a single-parent family.

    2. Describe how the nurse can create a welcoming environment in the office or hospital where LGBTQIA+
        persons feel safe and included.

    3. Describe how spirituality and religion affect reproductive health decisions.

    4. Discuss the components of the Transcultural Assessment Model.

    5. Explain the issues surrounding access to health care pertaining to immigrant and migrant families.

What Should the Nurse Do?

Gabriela, a 32-year-old female, presents to the community health clinic with her partner for a routine prenatal
checkup. Gabriela, who identifies as a lesbian, is in her 24th week of pregnancy and is excited about expanding her
family. She reports mild nausea and occasional headaches but otherwise feels well. Her partner, Caitlin, actively
participates in the visit, expressing their joint commitment to a healthy pregnancy. Gabriela has a history of
hypothyroidism, controlled with medication, and has undergone fertility treatments to achieve this pregnancy. She is
eager to discuss any potential challenges that may arise due to her Hispanic background and is curious about how
the health-care team will address the specific needs of their LGBTQIA+ family.

    1. How can the nurse involve both Gabriela and Caitlin in prenatal care to ensure a family-centered approach?
    2. What potential challenges might arise in delivering culturally competent care to Gabriela's family, and how

        can these challenges be mitigated?
    3. How might historical trauma impact the health-care-seeking behavior of LGBTQIA+ persons, and what steps

        can nurses take to mitigate the effects of such trauma?

Anh, a 28-year-old female, arrives at the urgent care clinic, seeking assistance for recurring abdominal pain. Anh, of
Vietnamese descent, recently immigrated to the United States. She reports symptoms of bloating, discomfort, and
64 2 · Assessments

occasional diarrhea. Her medical history indicates a previously undiagnosed lactose intolerance. While her physical
symptoms are addressed through dietary adjustments, it becomes apparent during the conversation that Anh is
experiencing cultural challenges in navigating the U.S. health-care system. She expresses hesitancy in sharing
personal information and discussing her health openly due to cultural differences in communication norms. Vital
signs are stable, and the psychiatric history is unremarkable.

    4. How can the nurse apply the Cultural Care Theory in providing care for Anh, considering her Vietnamese
        background and the challenges she faces in navigating the U.S. health-care system?

    5. Using the Transcultural Assessment Model, identify two aspects (other than communication) that the nurse
        should consider when assessing Anh's cultural needs to ensure culturally competent care.

    6. How might the nurse address Anh's hesitancy in sharing personal information and discussing her health
        openly, considering the principles of transcultural nursing and culturally competent care?

    7. How can the Four Cs of Culture model be applied in assessing Anh's health concerns. Why is it important for
        the nurse to explore what Anh considers to be the problem and how she is coping with it?

Camila, a 22-year-old pregnant female, seeks care at the community health clinic for her first prenatal visit. Camila,
of Guatemalan descent, is facing various challenges as a person who is under served within the community. She
reports symptoms of fatigue, inadequate nutrition, and concerns about the impact of her unstable living situation on
her pregnancy. Camila has a limited support system because her husband is frequently absent due to work
commitments. She also lacks familial assistance. Her medical history reveals a lack of consistent health-care access
and limited prenatal care during previous pregnancies. Vital signs are within normal limits, and the psychiatric
history indicates heightened stress and anxiety related to her living circumstances.

    8. In Camila's case, how might her limited support system and unstable living situation contribute to her
        vulnerability as a person seeking prenatal care, and what steps can the nurse take to address these
        challenges?

    9. Considering Camila's situation, identify two specific health risk factors that may impact her pregnancy and
        discuss potential interventions to mitigate these risks.

  10. How do social determinants of health such as economic stability and health-care access contribute to health
        disparities in certain populations like Camila's, and how can nurses address these determinants in their care?

  11. Discuss how racial disparities, as highlighted in the example of Black Americans, can impact the experiences
        of families who are under served within the health-care system and describe what actions nurses can take to
        address these disparities.

  12. In the case of LGBTQIA+ families, what unique health risk factors during pregnancy and birth might be
        present, and how can nurses provide supportive care that addresses these factors?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. As a nurse providing family-centered care to a cisgender woman, how would you integrate an understanding
        of different family structures, such as single-parent, dual-career, and extended families, into your nursing
        interventions?

    2. Discuss two challenges nurses might face in delivering optimal care for patients and families from diverse
        cultural backgrounds and religious beliefs and propose strategies to address these challenges.

    3. Identify two barriers to care for LGBTQIA+ persons and families and discuss nursing strategies to mitigate
        these barriers and provide culturally competent care.

    4. How can cultural factors influence family development stages?

    5. What are three essential components of a family assessment?

    6. How do cultural influences and individualism/collectivism shape health beliefs?

    7. What is transcultural nursing, and why is it essential for culturally competent care?

    8. What is the Four Cs of Culture model, and why is it valuable for nursing practice?

    9. Who are considered populations at increased risk for poor health outcomes, and how might their experiences
        with the health-care system be influenced by discrimination, poverty, or other factors?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                2 · References 65

  10. What health risk factors affect families at increased risk for poor health outcomes, such as Black Americans
        or immigrant families, during pregnancy and childbirth?

  11. What are social determinants of health (SDOH), and how do they contribute to health disparities in the
        childbearing population?

References

Alarcon F. J. (2022). The migrant crisis and access to health care. Delaware Journal of Public Health, 8(4), 20-25.
    https://djph.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/djph-84-006.pdf

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2016, reaffirmed in 2019). Committee opinion Number 644:
   Refusal of medically recommended treatment during pregnancy. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/
    committee-opinion/articles/2016/06/refusal-of-medically-recommended-treatment-during-pregnancy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022, September). Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and
   queer (LGBTQ) teens. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/lgbtq-teens

American Psychological Association. (n.d.). Child-rearing practice. APA Dictionary of Psychology.
    https://dictionary.apa.org/child-rearing-practice

Amoadu, M., Ansah, E., Assopiah, P., Acquah, P., Ansah, J. E., Berchie, E., Hagan, D., & Amoah, E. (2022). Socio-
   cultural factors influencing adolescent pregnancy in Ghana: A scoping review. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth, 22.
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-022-05172-2

Applebury, G. (2020, August 20). Common family roles and their evolution over time. https://www.lovetoknow.com/
    life/relationships/common-family-roles-how-theyve-changed

Attum, B., Hafiz, S., Malik, A., & Shamoon, Z. (2023, July 3). Cultural competence in the care of Muslim patients and
   their families. StatPearls [Internet]. National Institutes of Health: National Library of Medicine.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK499933/

Boggan, L. (2015, September 16). Birth traditions around the world. AWHONN. https://awhonnconnections.org/
    2015/09/16/birth-traditions-around-the-world/

Booysen, F., Botha, F., & Wouters, E. (2021). Conceptual causal models of socioeconomic status, family structure,
   family functioning and their role in public health. BMC Public Health, 12, 191. https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s12889-021-10214-z

Center for Equity, Gender, & Leadership (EGAL). (2020). Supporting dual career couples: An equity fluid leadership
   playbook (pp. 1-64). Berkeley Haas. https://haas.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/0_EFL-
    Playbook_Supporting-Dual-Career-Couples.pdf

Center for Health Care Strategies. (2021). What is trauma-informed care?
    https://www.traumainformedcare.chcs.org/what-is-trauma-informed-care/

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022). Births: Final data for 2020. National Vital Statistics Reports,
   70(17). https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr70/nvsr70-17.pdf

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023, May 9). Rural health. https://www.cdc.gov/ruralhealth/
    about.html

Chinese medicine. Chinese Medicine | Johns Hopkins Medicine. (2019, December 2).
    https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/wellness-and-prevention/chinese-medicine

Colangelo, M. (2020). Child rearing and cultural diversity. Contributions of anthropology to pediatric practice.
   Archivos Argentinos de Pediatria, 188(4), e379-e383. https://www.sap.org.ar/docs/publicaciones/archivosarg/
    2020/v118n4a12e.pdf

Collectivist countries 2024. (2024.). World Population Review. https://worldpopulationreview.com/country-
    rankings/collectivist-countries

Crear-Perry, J., Correa-de-Araujo, R., Lewis Johnson, T., McLemore, M. R., Neilson, E., & Wallace, M. (2021). Social
66 2 · References

   and structural determinants of health inequities in maternal health. Journal of Women's Health, 30(2), 230-235.
    https://doi.org/10.1089/jwh.2020.8882

Cruz, M. L., Christie, S., Allen, E., Meza, E., Nápoles, A. M., & Mehta, K. M. (2022). Traditional healers as healthcare
   providers for the Latin community in the United States, a systematic review. Health Equity, 6(1), 412-426.
    https://doi.org/10.1089/heq.2021.0099

Culturally and linguistically appropriate services. (2023, July). Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality,
    Rockville, MD. https://www.ahrq.gov/sdoh/clas/index.html

Dawson, R., & Leong, T. (2020). Not up for debate: LGBTQ people need and deserve tailored sexual and reproductive
   health care. LGBTQ: Sexual and Reproductive Health Care. Guttmacher Institute. https://www.guttmacher.org/
    article/2020/11/not-debate-lgbtq-people-need-and-deserve-tailored-sexual-and-reproductive-health

DeLoughery, T. G. (2020). Transfusion replacement strategies in Jehovah's Witnesses and others who decline blood
   products. Clinical Advances in Hematology & Oncology, 18(12). https://www.hematologyandoncology.net/
    archives/december-2020/transfusion-replacement-strategies-in-jehovahs-witnesses-and-others-who-decline-
    blood-products/

Deutsch, M. B., & Buchholz, D. (2015). Electronic medical records and the transgender patient: Practical
   recommendations for the collection of gender identity data. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 30(6),
    843-847. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-014-3148-7

Dydyk, A.M., & Grandhe, S. (2023, January 29). Pain assessment. StatPearls [Internet]. National Institutes of
    Health: National Library of Medicine. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK556098/

Echezona-Johnson, C. (n.d.). Pregnancy in African cultures. RN-Journal.com. https://rn-journal.com/journal-of-
    nursing/pregnancy-in-african-cultures

Family development theory. (2023, July). International Encyclopedia of Marriage and Family.
    https://www.encyclopedia.com/reference/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/family-development-
    theory

Family education. (2022). Medical consent for your stepchild: Learn about policies that allow stepparents to gain
   authority to care for their stepchildren. Sandbox Learning. https://www.familyeducation.com/family-life/
    relationships/blended-families/medical-consent-your-stepchild

Fatehi, K., Priestley, J. L., & Taasoobshirazi, G. (2020). The expanded view of individualism and collectivism: One,
   two, or four dimensions? International Journal of Cross Cultural Management, 20(1), 7-24. https://doi.org/
    10.1177/1470595820913077

Firth, H., & Firth, F. (2014). Families and their relatives. International Library of Sociology. Routledge.

Friedman, S. H., Kaempf, A., & Kauffman, S. (2023). The realities of pregnancy and mothering while incarcerated.
   Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law Online, 51(2). https://jaapl.org/content/early/2020/
    05/13/JAAPL.003924-20

Fry, R. (2023, August 3). Almost 1 in 5 stay-at-home parents in the U.S. are dads. Pew Research Center.
    https://www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2023/08/03/almost-1-in-5-stay-at-home-parents-in-the-us-are-
    dads/

Gatrad, A. R., & Sheikh, A. (2001). Muslim birth customs. Archives of Disease in Childhood--Fetal and Neonatal
   Edition, 84, F6-F8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/fn.84.1.F

Gay & Lesbian Medical Association. (2014). Guidelines for care of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender patients.
    https://npin.cdc.gov/publication/guidelines-care-lesbian-gay-bisexual-and-transgender-patients.

Giger, J. N., & Davidhizar R. (2002). The Giger and Davidhizar Transcultural Assessment Model. Journal of
   Transcultural Nursing, 13(3), p. 185-188. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/10459602013003004

Givler, A., & Bhatt, H. (2022, May 23). The importance of cultural competence in pain and palliative care. StatPearls
    [Internet]. https://www.statpearls.com/ArticleLibrary/viewarticle/41271

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                2 · References 67

Hall, E. T. (1966). The Hidden Dimension. Anchor Books.

Hampton, R. S., & Varnum, M. E. (2020). Individualism-collectivism. In V. Zeigler-Hill & T. K. Shackelford (Eds.).
   Encyclopedia of personality and individual differences. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    978-3-319-24612-3_2023

He, H., Usami, S., Rikimaru, Y., & Jiang, L. (2021). Cultural roots of parenting: Mothers' parental social cognitions
   and practices from Western US and Shanghai/China. Frontiers in Psychology, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/
    fpsyg.2021.565040

HealthCare.gov (n.d.). Health coverage for immigrants. https://www.healthcare.gov/immigrants/

How a Native American coming-of-age ritual is making a comeback. (2020, February, 10). The Conversation.
    https://theconversation.com/how-a-native-american-coming-of-age-ritual-is-making-a-comeback-130524

Human Rights Campaign. (2018). Healthcare Quality Index 2018: Rising to the new standard of promoting equitable
   and inclusive care for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender, and queer patients and their families.
    https://assets2.hrc.org/files/assets/resources/HEI-2018-FinalReport.pdf

Human Rights Campaign. (2022). Understanding intimate partner violence in the LGBTQ+ community.
    https://www.hrc.org/resources/understanding-intimate-partner-violence-in-the-lgbtq-community

Jillings, B. (2017). Nurse tips for working with patients with disabilities. AMN Healthcare: Nurse Choice.
    https://www.nursechoice.com/blog/profiles-and-features/nurse-tips-for-working-with-patients-with-
    disabilities/

Joint Commission. (2021, November). Language access and interpreter services: Understanding the requirements.
    https://www.jointcommission.org/standards/standard-faqs/behavioral-health/rights-and-responsibilities-of-the-
    individual-ri/000002120/

Jones, R. K., Witwer, E., & Jerman, J. (2020). Transgender abortion patients and the provision of transgender-
   specific care at non-hospital facilities that provide abortions. Contraception: X, 2, 1-2.

Lang, D. (2020). Parenting and family diversity issues: Family development theory. https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/
    parentingfamilydiversity/chapter/the-family-life-cycle-theory/

Law Offices of Hector A. Montoya. (2021). Do step-parents have any legal rights over their step-kids?
    https://www.thetucsonlawyer.com/blog/2021/07/do-step-parents-have-any-legal-rights-over-their-step-kids/

Leininger, M. (1988). Leininger's theory of nursing: Cultural care diversity and universality. Nursing Science
   Quarterly, 152-160. https://doi.org/10.1177/089431848800100408

Lloyd, C. M., Alvira-Hammond, M., Carlson, J., & Logan, D. (2021, March). Family, economic, and geographical
   characteristics of Black families with children. Black children & families. Child Trends.
    https://www.childtrends.org/publications/family-economic-and-geographic-characteristics-of-black-families-
    with-children

Martin, A., Albrechtsons, D., MacDonald, N., Aumeerally, N., & Wong, T. (2020). Becoming parents again: Challenges
   affecting grandparent primary caregivers raising their grandchildren. Paediatrics & Child Health, 26(4),
    e166-e171. https://doi.org/10.1093/pch/pxaa052

Medina-Martínez, J., Saus-Ortega, C., Sánchez-Lorente, M. M., Sosa-Palanca, E. M., García-Martínez, P., & Mármol-
    López, M. I. (2021). Health inequities in LGBT people and nursing interventions to reduce them: A systematic
   review. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 18(22), 11801. https://doi.org/
    10.3390/ijerph182211801

Mirza, S. A., & Roney, C. (2018). Discrimination prevents LGBTQ people from accessing health care. Center for
    American Progress. https://www.americanprogress.org/article/discrimination-prevents-lgbtq-people-accessing-
    health-care/

Mitra, M., McKee, M. M., Akobirshoev, I., Valentine, A., Ritter, G., Zhang, J., McKee, K., & Iezzoni, L. I. (2020).
   Pregnancy, birth, and infant outcomes among women who are deaf or hard of hearing. American Journal of
68 2 · References

   Preventive Medicine, 58(3), 418-426.

Mokgobi, M. G. (2014, September). Understanding traditional African healing. African Journal for Physical Health
   Education, Recreation, and Dance. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4651463/

Movement Advancement Project. (2024). LGBT populations: LGBT people raising children.
    https://www.lgbtmap.org/equality_maps/lgbt_populations/raising

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2017). Communities in action: Pathways to health
   equity. https://doi.org/10.17226/24624.

Onieva-Zafra, M. D., Fernández-Martínez, E., Abreu-Sánchez, A., Iglesias-López, M. T., García-Padilla, F. M.,
    Pedregal-González, M., & Parra-Fernández, M. L. (2020). Relationship between diet, menstrual pain and other
   menstrual characteristics among Spanish students. Nutrients, 12(6), 1759. https://doi.org/10.3390/
    nu12061759

Ramulondi, M., de Wet, H., & Ntuli, N. R. (2021). Traditional food taboos and practices during pregnancy, postpartum
   recovery, and infant care of Zulu women in northern KwaZulu-Natal. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine,
   17(15). https://ethnobiomed.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13002-021-00451-

Ratini, M. (1996-2023). What are the advantages of a single-parent family? MedicineNet Inc.
    https://www.medicinenet.com/what_are_the_advantages_of_a_single-parent_family/article.htm

Riggan, K. A., Gilbert, A., & Allyse, M. A. (2021). Acknowledging and addressing allostatic load in pregnancy care.
   Journal of Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities, 8, 69-79. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40615-020-00757-z

Sahithya, B. R., Manohari, S. M., & Vijaya, R. (2019). Parenting styles and its impact on children: A cross-cultural
   review with a focus on India. Mental Health, Religion & Culture, 22(4), 357-383. https://doi.org/10.1080/
    13674676.2019.1594178

Saxena, D. (2021). When grandparents become parents to their grandchildren. North Dakota State University.
    https://www.ndsu.edu/agriculture/extension/publications/when-grandparents-become-parents-their-
    grandchildren

Schnaith, A., Schifsky, J., Schifsky, T., & Pitt, M. B. (2021). Communication strategies for patients who are nonverbal.
   Pediatrics, 148(3). 1-5. https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/148/3/e2021051867/181049/
    Communication-Strategies-for-Patients-Who-Are?autologincheck=redirected

Servaes, S., Choudhury, P., & Parikh, A. K. (2022). What is diversity? Pediatric radiology, 52(9), 1708-1710.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s00247-022-05356-0

Smith, T. J., Tan, X., Arnold, C. D., Sitthideth, D., Kounnavong, S., & Hess, S. Y. (2021). Traditional prenatal and
   postpartum food restrictions among women in northern Lao PDR. Maternal & Child Nutrition, 18, e13273.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/mcn.13273

Swihart, D. L., Yarrarapu, S. N. S., & Martin, R. L. (2022, November 14). Cultural religious competence in clinical
   practice. NCBI Bookshelf. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK493216/

Syed Abdullah, S. Z. (2022). Menstrual food restrictions and taboos: A qualitative study on rural, resettlement and
   urban indigenous Temiar of Malaysia. PloS One, 17(12), e0279629. https://doi.org/10.1371/
    journal.pone.0279629

Tesfamariam, T. (2020, November 18). 4 world cultures and religions that embrace plant-based eating. Greenpeace.
    https://www.greenpeace.org.uk/news/world-cultures-and-religions-plant-based-vegetarian-vegan-diet/

The Annie E. Casey Foundation. (2023, June 23). Child well-being in single-parent families. https://www.aecf.org/
    blog/child-well-being-in-single-parent-families

The Step Family Foundation. (n.d.). Stepfamily statistics. https://www.stepfamily.org/stepfamily-statistics.html

Tobing, V. Y., Afiyanti, Y., & Rachmawati, I. N. (2019). Following the cultural norms as an effort to protect the mother
   and baby during the perinatal period: An ethnographic study of women's food choices. The Second International

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                2 · References 69

   Nursing Scholar Congress of Faculty of Nursing, Universitas Indonesia, 29(S2), 831-836. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.enfcli.2019.04.125

Treisman, R. (2022, October 12). Millions of Americans are losing access to maternal care. Here's what can be done.
    NPR. https://www.npr.org/2022/10/12/1128335563/maternity-care-deserts-march-of-dimes-report

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2020). Comparing characteristic and selected expenditures of dual- and single-
   income households with children. https://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2020/article/pdf/comparing-characteristics-
    and-selected-expenditures-of-dual-and-single-income-households-with-children.pdf

U.S. Census Bureau. (n.d.). Why we ask questions about grandparents as caregivers. https://www.census.gov/acs/
    www/about/why-we-ask-each-question/grandparents/

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (n.d.-a). Office of population affairs: Trends in teen pregnancy and
   childbearing. https://opa.hhs.gov/adolescent-health/reproductive-health-and-teen-pregnancy/trends-teen-
    pregnancy-and-childbearing

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (n.d.-b). Healthy People 2030: Pregnancy and childbirth.
    https://health.gov/healthypeople/objectives-and-data/browse-objectives/pregnancy-and-childbirth

V, Jayaram. (n.d.). Children in Hinduism. Hinduwebsite.com. https://www.hinduwebsite.com/hinduism/
    h_children.asp

Vohra, R. (2021, April 24). Cultural differences in menopause. Menopause Charity.
    https://www.themenopausecharity.org/2021/04/24/cultural-differences-in-menopause/

What is cultural and linguistic competence? (2019, July). Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
    https://www.ahrq.gov/ncepcr/tools/cultural-competence/definition.html

Witting, L. (2023, January 23). Limited access: Poverty and barriers to accessible health care. National Health
    Council. https://nationalhealthcouncil.org/blog/limited-access-poverty-and-barriers-to-accessible-health-care/

World Health Organization. (2023, August 9). Traditional medicine. https://www.who.int/news-room/questions-and-
    answers/item/traditional-medicine
70 2 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 3

Health Promotion, Disease and Injury
Prevention, and Well-Person Care

FIGURE 3.1 Exercise in the Community Exercise is a very important part of health promotion. (credit: "Zumba classes add spice to aerobic
workouts" by Kemberly Groue, U.S. Air Force/Keesler Air Force Base, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
3.1 Factors Influencing the Health of Persons Assigned Female at Birth
3.2 Leading Causes of Death and Health Screenings
3.3 Health Promotion
3.4 Well-Person Care
3.5 Preconceptual Care
INTRODUCTION Health promotion, disease and injury prevention, and well-person care are essential components
of comprehensive health care for persons assigned female at birth (AFAB) and those identifying as female. These
persons experience unique and specific physical and mental health issues at various stages and events in their lives,
and promoting their well-being requires a comprehensive approach that includes health education, the promotion of
good nutrition and healthy self-care practices, annual checkups, preventive screenings and immunizations,
contraception counseling, preconception care, perinatal care, and menopause management. By prioritizing these
goals, health-care professionals and policymakers can improve overall health outcomes, reduce health disparities,
and empower these persons to take control of their health. This chapter aims to provide insights and strategies for
obstetric and gynecologic nurses in their critical role in promoting their patients' health and well-being throughout
the lifespan.
72  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

    3.1 Factors Influencing the Health of Persons Assigned Female at Birth

    LEARNING OBJECTIVES
    By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Explain factors affecting the health of persons assigned female at birth
        · Discuss social determinants of health affecting persons assigned female at birth

    The health and well-being of persons assigned female at birth (AFAB) is of immense importance in health care, as it
    encompasses not only their physical health but also their mental, emotional, and social well-being. Recognizing the
    unique factors that influence and shape the health outcomes of these persons is crucial for the nurse in developing
    comprehensive strategies that promote their overall wellness.

    Medical and Social Influences on Health

    Various factors influence the health of persons AFAB across different stages of life. By examining the intersections
    of biological, social, cultural, and environmental determinants, nurses can better understand the complexities of
    female health and develop targeted interventions that address their unique needs.

    Reproductive System
    In 2022 in the United States, approximately 35 million babies born were assigned female, and three out of every
    four persons of reproductive age received reproductive health (RH) services from a health-care provider that include
    contraceptive care and physical examinations (Annie E. Casey Foundation, 2023; Frost et al., 2021). The complete
    physical, mental, and social well-being in all matters related to the reproductive system and its functions is
    considered a person's reproductive health. It encompasses the ability to enjoy a satisfying and safe sex life, the
    capability to reproduce, and the freedom to make informed decisions regarding reproductive health. Reproductive
    health is influenced by factors such as age at first menstruation, age at menopause, nulliparity, multiple
    pregnancies, and breast-feeding. These reproductive factors can affect the risk of developing conditions like breast
    cancer, ovarian cancer, and osteoporosis. Nurses contribute significantly to patients' reproductive health by
    providing education, counseling, preventive care, and support throughout various stages of their lifespan.

    Healthy People 2030 for Persons AFAB
    Healthy People 2030 provides goals for Americans to increase the health of the population. Goals for persons AFAB
    focus on prevention of complications throughout the lifespan. These goals include providing therapy for those
    experiencing intimate partner violence (IPV); prevention of chronic conditions through postmenopausal hormone
    therapy; use of vitamin D, calcium, and weight-bearing exercise to prevent fractures due to osteoporosis; folic acid
    use to prevent neural tube defects; screening for ovarian cancer; and medication use to reduce the risk of breast
    cancer (Healthy People 2030, n.d.-b). Nurses can help provide information to patients on how these interventions
    can improve their health and prevent chronic diseases.

    Hormone Changes
    Hormonal fluctuations throughout a person's lifespan can contribute to various health risks. For example, the female
    reproductive hormones, including estrogen and progesterone, can impact mood changes throughout the menstrual
    cycle. These hormonal fluctuations affect neurotransmitters in the brain, contributing to shifts in mood and
    emotions. Individual factors such as genetics, self-care practices, and overall health can influence the impact of
    hormonal changes.

    Estrogen has been associated with positive mood effects. It can increase the production of serotonin, a
    neurotransmitter that plays a role in regulating mood. Estrogen also interacts with endorphins, chemicals in the
    brain that help relieve pain and induce feelings of well-being. On the other hand, progesterone can have more
    complex effects on mood. Progesterone can have calming and sedating properties. Fluctuations in these hormones
    contribute to symptoms like irritability, mood swings, and anxiety.

    During the childbearing years when hormone levels typically change cyclically, some people may experience
    monthly premenstrual syndrome (PMS) or premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). These conditions involve a
    range of physical and emotional symptoms, including uterine cramping, nausea, mood swings, irritability, sadness,
    anxiety, and fatigue. The exact causes of PMS and PMDD are not fully understood, but hormonal fluctuations are
    thought to play a role.

    Access for free at openstax.org
3.1 · Factors Influencing the Health of Persons Assigned Female at Birth                                                 73

Perimenopause is the time prior to cessation of menses when hormonal fluctuations are erratic and unpredictable.
Perimenopause can last between 2 and 10 years prior to menopause and can be a very challenging time as estrogen
levels fall. This hormonal transition can lead to symptoms such as hot flashes, vaginal dryness, and mood changes,
and it includes increased risk of osteoporosis and heart disease. During this time, estrogen and progesterone
production significantly decline.

A person who has not had a menstrual cycle for 12 months is then considered menopausal. According to the Mayo
Clinic (2023), the average age of menopause in the United States is 51 years of age. Patients who have had total
hysterectomies with oophorectomies can expect to enter menopause shortly after surgery. Postmenopause is the
time following menopause.

Age
Different age groups face unique health risks. Adolescents may be at an increased risk for unintended pregnancies.
In 2021, persons aged 15 to 19 accounted for 13.9 births per 1,000 in the United States, representing a 78 percent
decline in teen birth rates since 1991; however, the United States still ranks highest in teen births among developed
countries (Martin et al., 2023). Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are also a significant concern among young
people, particularly those aged 15 to 24. This age group is at a higher risk for acquiring STIs due to limited sexual
experience, multiple sexual partners, inconsistent condom use, fear of seeking contraception or inability to obtain
contraception, and lack of comprehensive sexual education (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC],
2023f). This age group also participates in more risky behaviors. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) (2021c) estimates that half of new sexually transmitted infections in the United States occurred in people
between the ages of 15 and 24, representing 26 percent of the $16 billion of total health-care costs in 2018.

Middle-aged and older persons face increased risk of developing chronic conditions such as diabetes, hypertension,
arthritis, Alzheimer's disease, osteoporosis, and genitourinary syndrome of menopause (Peacock & Ketvertis, 2022).
In addition, the risk of some cancers, specifically breast, ovarian, uterine, and cervical cancers, increases with age,
particularly after menopause.

After menopause, an increased risk of cardiovascular disease is noted. The decline in estrogen levels is thought to
play a role in this increased risk (Peacock & Ketvertis, 2022). Maintaining healthy self-care practices, including
regular exercise and a balanced diet, and managing other risk factors such as high blood pressure, high cholesterol,
and diabetes is crucial for cardiovascular health. Decreased estrogen levels during menopause lead to bone loss and
an increased risk of osteoporosis (Peacock & Ketvertis, 2022). This condition makes bones more prone to fractures.
Adequate calcium and vitamin D intake and regular weight-bearing exercise can help reduce the risk of
osteoporosis, and measures to prevent falls can reduce the risk for fractures.

Menopausal hormone therapy, small doses of estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone, is controversial. The North
American Menopause Society released a position statement in 2022 noting that hormone replacement therapy for
persons under the age of 60 or less than 10 years from menopause onset is beneficial for prevention of osteoporosis
and treatment for vasomotor and genitourinary symptoms of menopause; however, they noted a less favorable
benefit-risk ratio after the age of 60 or greater than 10 years after menopause onset. The position statement notes
an increased risk of heart disease, dementia, thromboembolism, and stroke in this population. However, other
studies have shown that low doses of estradiol and micronized progesterone, different from the estrogen and
progesterone used in birth control preparations and routine hormone replacement therapy in the United States,
actually decreased mortality and stroke with no increase in thromboembolic events, cancer, or stroke (Akter &
Shirin, 2018; Genazzani et al., 2021). All research surrounding hormone replacement favors the individualization of
treatment.

Nurses are essential in providing education on self-care practices and education on prescribed treatments. Nurses
should encourage persons to discuss their sexual and reproductive health. Sexual and reproductive health includes
practicing safe sex, using contraception effectively, receiving regular sexual health checkups, seeking
comprehensive sexual education, and addressing concerns with health-care providers.

Mental Health
Approximately one in five Americans experienced a mental health condition in 2020, and persons AFAB experienced
specific mental health conditions, such as depression, anxiety disorders, eating disorders, and postpartum
depression (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2022). Mental health risks can vary
74  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

    across different stages of life due to various factors, including hormonal changes, societal expectations,
    reproductive experiences, and life transitions.

    Mental health risks related to hormonal changes can occur. During the reproductive years, persons can experience
    perinatal depression and anxiety. Hormonal fluctuations, sleep deprivation, and adjustment to their new role can
    contribute to these mental health challenges during menarche, pregnancy, the postpartum period, perimenopause,
    menopause, and the postmenopause period. These hormonal changes and physical symptoms contribute to the
    vulnerability of these chapters of life. Mood swings, irritability, anxiety, and depression are common during these
    transitional periods. Persons in midlife may face feelings of loss, identity changes, and increased stress related to
    empty-nest syndrome when their children leave home. Additionally, midlife can be a time of career transitions,
    relationship changes, or caring for aging parents, possibly causing symptoms of depression or anxiety. In older
    persons, mental health concerns can occur as a result of chronic health conditions, loss of loved ones, social
    isolation, and changes in physical functioning.

    Mental health risks can vary among people, and not all persons AFAB will experience these challenges. Social
    support, access to healthy nutrition, access to health care, coping skills, and resilience can influence mental health
    outcomes. Nurses are crucial for addressing mental health concerns at any stage of life. Early intervention, self-care
    practices, and destigmatizing conversations about mental health can promote mental well-being across the
    lifespan.

    Violence
    Violence against women includes cisgender women (persons AFAB who identify as women) and transgender women
    (persons AMAB who identify as women) and refers to violence that results in physical, sexual, or psychologic harm
    or suffering. It is a violation of human rights and encompasses various forms. Violence or abuse within an intimate
    relationship, such as physical assault, sexual violence, emotional or psychologic abuse, controlling behaviors, and
    economic abuse, is considered intimate partner violence. Any nonconsensual sexual act or behavior, including
    rape, sexual assault, sexual harassment, and coerced or forced sexual acts is considered sexual violence. It can
    occur within intimate relationships and in other contexts such as workplaces, educational institutions, or public
    spaces. Recruiting, transporting, transferring, harboring, or receipt of persons through force, fraud, or coercion for
    exploitation is called human trafficking. Persons AFAB and young persons are disproportionately affected, with
    trafficking for sexual exploitation being a significant concern. Nurses are often the first health-care professionals to
    encounter persons who have experienced violence and should be vigilant in recognizing signs of abuse or violence,
    including physical injuries, emotional distress, or inconsistent explanations for injuries. It is important for nurses to
    screen every patient and never assume by a person's appearance who is or is not experiencing violence. See
    Chapter 9 Violence Against Women for further discussion.

    Social Determinants of Health Affecting Persons Assigned Female at Birth

    The conditions in which people are born, live, learn, work, play, worship, and age that affect a wide range of health,
    functioning, and quality-of-life outcomes and risks are social determinants of health (SDOH) (Healthy People 2030,
    n.d.-a). These factors can affect nutrition, housing conditions, environmental risks, and overall well-being,
    increasing the risk of chronic diseases, poor mental health, and limited health-care access (Healthy People 2030,
    n.d.-a). Nurses can help improve outcomes and reduce health disparities by identifying and addressing SDOH.
    Resources should be identified to provide help to those who need assistance. Table 3.1 lists ways nurses contribute
    to identifying social determinants of health, and Table 3.2 lists SDOH screening tools.

    Steps to Identifying Social      Necessary Screening Characteristics
    Determinants of Health

    Assessing history                Social and economic circumstances, housing stability, employment status,
                                     income level, education, and access to social support systems

    Conducting health screenings     Assess food insecurity, substance misuse, domestic violence, or housing
                                     conditions

    TABLE 3.1 Identifying Social Determinants of Health

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     3.1 · Factors Influencing the Health of Persons Assigned Female at Birth  75

Steps to Identifying Social   Necessary Screening Characteristics
Determinants of Health

Engaging in patient interviews Open and nonjudgmental conversations, establishing rapport and trust

Collaborating with            Social workers, case managers, community health workers, and other health-
interdisciplinary teams       care professionals

Conducting home visits        Gain firsthand knowledge of living environment

Using screening tools         Validated screening tools designed to assess specific social determinants of
                              health

Providing health education    Resources and programs available in the community to address social needs

Advocating for policy change  Join professional organizations, participate in community initiatives, and
                              engage in policy discussions

TABLE 3.1 Identifying Social Determinants of Health

Tool                                                                     Description

National Association of Community Health Centers' Protocol for           15 core and 5 supplemental questions
Responding to and Assessing Patients' Assets, Risks, and Experiences
tool (PRAPARE) (https://openstax.org/r/77PRAPARE)

The EveryONE Project (https://openstax.org/r/77EveryONEProj)             From the American Academy of Family
                                                                         Physicians and available in short and
                                                                         long form in English and Spanish

Accountable Health Communities' 10-question Health-Related Social        From the Centers for Medicare and
Needs Screening Tool (AHC-HRSN) (https://openstax.org/r/                 Medicaid Services
77AHCHRSNtool)

TABLE 3.2 Screening Tools for Identifying Social Determinants of Health

Access to Care
Sexual and reproductive health care is necessary, and access to these services is often limited by lack of health-care
insurance and affordability. National and state policies may limit access to care and availability of health-care
providers. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) improved access to sexual and reproductive health care by expanding
Medicaid eligibility and offering private insurance to more people (Rapfogel et al, 2020). The ACA also required
private health insurance to cover preventive services, such as screening for sexually transmitted infections and
providing affordable contraception.

Limited access to contraception and family planning services can have social and economic consequences for
individuals and families, as unplanned pregnancies may disrupt educational and career aspirations, strain financial
resources, and contribute to poverty. Furthermore, access to reproductive health care often includes preventive
measures such as STI testing, counseling, and treatment. Preventive measures can be as simple as offering
education. When individuals lack access to these services, STIs can increase, leading to long-term health
complications and a higher risk of transmission within communities.

Access to legal abortion services is controlled by national and state laws. These services can be restricted or
inaccessible to some persons. Lack of access to reproductive health care can undermine individuals' ability to make
informed decisions about their reproductive health and to exercise reproductive autonomy. Access to
comprehensive sexual education counseling services allows persons to make choices that align with their
76  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

    circumstances and preferences.

    Limited access disproportionately affects marginalized populations, including people with lower incomes, people of
    color, rural communities, and those with limited education or health-care resources. These disparities can
    exacerbate existing social and health inequalities and contribute to disparities in maternal and child health
    outcomes.

    Efforts to ensure comprehensive and accessible reproductive health care can help mitigate these consequences,
    promote public health, and empower persons to make informed decisions about their reproductive and sexual
    health. Nurses often serve as the first point of contact when people seek care in various health-care settings. They
    are crucial in assessing needs and initiating appropriate care.

            LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

    Title X and Access to Care

    Title X is a program funded by the government that provides access to family planning care to women who cannot
    afford care. Title X clinics provide birth control and STI testing. Title X clinics also provide preventive health care,
    such as HPV vaccines, HIV prophylaxis (PrEP), Papanicolaou (Pap) smears, breast cancer screening, substance use
    counseling, mental health services, and services for survivors of intimate partner violence. The U.S. Department of
    Health and Human Services provides a resource for finding the closest clinic (https://openstax.org/r/77cliniclist) to
    the person.

    Access to Nutritious Foods
    Inability to pay for nutritious food due to its increased cost is a recognized social determinant of health that can
    significantly impact individuals and communities. In 2021, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
    reported that 13.5 million households were food insecure, and 5.1 million households had deficient food security.
    Limited access to healthy food options, such as fresh fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and lean proteins, can lead to
    poor nutrition; increase the risk of diet-related diseases such as obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and
    certain types of cancer; and negatively impact overall growth, development, and immune function.

    Limited access to healthy food is often associated with food insecurity, the lack of consistent access to enough
    nutritious food for an active and healthy life. Food insecurity can lead to hunger and malnutrition, compromising
    physical and mental well-being. It can also increase the risk of chronic diseases and exacerbate existing health
    conditions. Individuals in disadvantaged communities may face barriers, as these communities have food deserts
    where grocery stores are not available. Access to grocery stores can also be limited due to lack of transportation.

    Inadequate nutrition can negatively impact cognitive development, particularly in children and adolescents.
    Malnutrition and deficiencies in essential nutrients can impair learning abilities, concentration, and academic
    performance and have long-term consequences for educational attainment and future opportunities.

    Limited access to healthy food can also affect mental health through nutritional deficiencies and inadequate diets,
    which have been linked to depression, anxiety, and mood disorders (Selhub, 2022). Additionally, the stress and
    anxiety associated with the inability to provide nutritious meals for oneself or one's family can further contribute to
    mental health challenges.

    By addressing the issue of limited access to healthy food and providing resources such as food assistance programs,
    community food banks, or local social services, nurses can contribute to improving the overall health and well-being
    of people facing food insecurity. Nurses can also collaborate with interdisciplinary teams, social workers, and
    community organizations to connect people with resources that address food insecurity. Nurses can provide
    individualized nutritional counseling, considering patients' dietary needs, cultural preferences, and budgetary
    constraints. Most importantly, nurses can help patients develop self-care management strategies that prioritize
    nutrition.

    Opportunities for Physical Activity
    Not everyone has equal access to exercise opportunities, despite the numerous health benefits it provides. Several
    factors contribute to this disparity, including socioeconomic status, neighborhood characteristics, systemic

    Access for free at openstax.org
3.1 · Factors Influencing the Health of Persons Assigned Female at Birth                                                  77

inequities, and personal circumstances. Persons with lower incomes may face financial constraints that limit their
ability to access exercise facilities, fitness programs, or equipment. Gym memberships, fitness classes, or personal
trainers can be costly, making them less accessible for those with limited financial resources.

Neighborhoods with limited access to safe parks, sidewalks, bike lanes, or recreational facilities can impede
opportunities for exercise. Limited public transportation options or a lack of personal vehicles can hinder access to
recreational areas outside of a person's neighborhood. Safety concerns related to crime, violence, or poorly lit areas
may discourage people from exercising outdoors, particularly in specific neighborhoods or communities.

Cultural differences in perceptions of exercise, gender norms, and societal pressures can impact engagement in
physical activity, particularly for specific populations. Addressing the disparities in access to exercise opportunities
requires a multifaceted team approach.

Housing, Transportation, and Neighborhoods
Housing, transportation, and neighborhoods are significant social determinants of health that profoundly impact
individuals and communities (Healthy People 2030, n.d.-a).

Access to safe, affordable, and stable housing is crucial for overall health and well-being. Inadequate housing
conditions, such as overcrowding, poor sanitation, mold, or inadequate heating/cooling, can contribute to physical
health issues and increase the risk of respiratory diseases, allergies, injuries, and mental health problems (Healthy
People 2030, n.d.-a).

Frequent moves, eviction, or homelessness can disrupt continuity of care, create stress, and impact mental health.
Stable housing is associated with better health outcomes, improved access to health-care services, and higher
educational achievement.

Reliable and affordable transportation options are essential for accessing health-care services, employment
opportunities, healthy food options, and recreational activities. Lack of transportation can limit people's ability to
reach necessary resources, leading to barriers to receiving timely and appropriate health care (Healthy People 2030,
n.d.-a).

The physical design of neighborhoods, including access to parks, green spaces, sidewalks, and recreational
facilities, can influence physical activity levels, social interactions, and mental well-being. Walkable neighborhoods
with amenities that promote active living are associated with better health outcomes. Neighborhood characteristics,
including social cohesion, crime rates, violence, and access to community resources, can influence social support
networks, mental health, and overall well-being. Strong social connections and community engagement can
enhance resilience and promote health.

Addressing housing, transportation, and neighborhood-related disparities requires comprehensive approaches
involving collaboration among health-care systems, urban planners, policymakers, community organizations, and
residents. Strategies may include affordable housing initiatives, improved public transportation systems, equitable
urban planning, neighborhood revitalization efforts, and community engagement to create healthier and more
equitable environments that promote positive health outcomes for all people (Healthy People 2030, n.d.-a).

Polluted Air and Water
Access to clean and safe drinking water is essential for good health. Polluted water sources can spread waterborne
diseases such as cholera, typhoid, and hepatitis. Contaminants like bacteria, viruses, parasites, and chemicals in
water can cause gastrointestinal illnesses, infections, and long-term health issues, particularly in communities
without adequate water treatment and sanitation systems (Lee et al., 2023).

Poor air quality due to pollution can result in respiratory problems such as asthma, bronchitis, and other chronic
respiratory conditions. Inhalation of particulate matter, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, and ozone can irritate the
respiratory system, trigger inflammation, and worsen existing respiratory conditions (Healthy People 2030, n.d.-a).
Long-term exposure to air pollution is also associated with an increased risk of lung cancer and cardiovascular
diseases. Particulate matter and other pollutants can enter the bloodstream, leading to systemic inflammation,
oxidative stress, and damage to blood vessels.

Exposure to polluted air and water can have detrimental effects on child development. Children are particularly
affected by the impacts of pollution, which can affect their cognitive development, respiratory health, and overall
78  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

    growth (Shah et al., 2020). Pollutants can also cross the placenta, potentially causing infant prenatal complications
    and developmental issues.

    Certain pollutants in water and air, such as heavy metals, volatile organic compounds, and carcinogenic substances,
    are associated with an increased risk of cancer (Lee et al., 2023). Long-term exposure to these contaminants can
    lead to the development of various cancers, including lung, bladder, liver, and kidney cancer.

    Polluted water and air often disproportionately affect marginalized communities and low-income populations
    (Ferguson et al., 2020). These communities may face higher pollution exposure due to proximity to industrial areas,
    lack of environmental regulations, and limited access to clean water sources. This exacerbates existing health
    disparities and contributes to inequalities in health outcomes.

    Racism and Discrimination
    Racism, discrimination, and violence significantly impact health-care outcomes, contributing to health disparities
    and inequities among different racial and ethnic groups. Racism can affect physical well-being, leading to higher
    incidence of diabetes, poor sleep, obesity, hypertension, and heart disease and resulting in a lower life expectancy
    (CDC, 2023b; Nong et al., 2020). Racism and discrimination also affect mental health. Research shows that Black
    and Hispanic populations receive less mental health care than other ethnicities due to problems with lack of
    culturally sensitive care, stigma, and lack of health insurance (Feldman et al., 2022). In 2021, approximately 31
    percent of Hispanic adults and 15 percent of Black adults under 65 years of age were without health insurance,
    while only 9 percent of White adults were uninsured (Feldman et al., 2022). Also, most mental health care providers
    are White and may not understand the effect structural racism has on them and their communities (Feldmanet al.,
    2022).

    In a 2022 study, 70 percent of Hispanic and Black respondents felt they had received care that was unequal due to
    their race (Feldman et al., 2022). Discrimination can impact the quality of care received by racial and ethnic
    minorities. This study noted that 33 percent of Black patients surveyed felt they received a lower quality of care
    (Feldman et al., 2022). These disparities can result in higher rates of complications, extended hospital stays, and
    increased mortality among people from underrepresented groups (Tong & Artiga, 2021). See Chapter 2 Culturally
    Competent Nursing Care for a discussion of this topic.

    People discriminated against in the health-care system have decreased trust, health-seeking behaviors, and
    communication with health-care providers (Nong et al., 2020). Discrimination can deter people from seeking health
    care, resulting in delayed diagnoses and poorer health outcomes. Research shows that the five most common types
    of discrimination in the health-care system are race and ethnicity, weight, education and income, age, and sex (Nong
    et al., 2020).

    Addressing racism and discrimination in health care requires a comprehensive approach that includes integrating
    equity in gender, cultures, and human rights into public policies, and supporting measures that decrease
    discrimination and allow for comprehensive, quality health care (World Health Organization [WHO], n.d.-a). Efforts to
    eliminate racism and discrimination are essential for improving health-care outcomes and achieving health equity
    for everyone.

    Crime
    Violent crime is a significant social determinant of health, as it plays a crucial role in shaping individual and
    community well-being. Violence is caused by many factors. Violence, considered an adverse childhood experience,
    leads to depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, cardiovascular disease, anxiety, substance misuse, aggression,
    risky behavior, and premature death (Rivara et al., 2019). Suicide, homicide, and unintentional injury are the top
    three causes of death in Americans 15 to 34 years of age (Freire-Vargas, 2018). Communities experiencing high
    levels of crime hold families hostage, making them live in fear, and interrupting their feelings of security
    (Understanding community violence, n.d.). Violence in the community prevents people from using parks, walking,
    riding bikes, and using recreational areas (CDC, 2022a). This contributes to chronic diseases and poorer health
    outcomes.

    Communities of color experience more crime than White communities (CDC, 2022a). Crime has economic
    implications that can impact health outcomes. It can disrupt local economies, limit job opportunities, strain
    education systems, and increase poverty rates in affected communities (CDC, 2022a). Economic hardship, in turn,

    Access for free at openstax.org
3.1 · Factors Influencing the Health of Persons Assigned Female at Birth                                               79

affects access to health care, housing, education, and other determinants of health, perpetuating health disparities.
Research suggests that violence can be preventable, noting that education at an early age on conflict resolution and
life skills along with supportive relationships can stop the cycle of violence in communities (Freire-Vargas, 2018).

Language and Literacy Skills
Language is considered a social determinant of health because it influences people's access to health care, health
information, and health-care outcomes. Limited English proficiency or lack of proficiency in the dominant language
spoken in a particular health-care setting can hinder effective communication with health-care providers, making it
challenging to express symptoms, understand medical instructions, or provide informed consent. Language barriers
can also limit people's ability to navigate health-care systems, schedule appointments, and understand health
insurance options. Health education materials, websites, and public health campaigns are often produced in a
specific region or country's dominant language leading to lack of understanding of vital health information.
Culturally and linguistically competent care involves providing interpreter services, ensuring translated materials,
and training health-care providers to navigate diverse linguistic and cultural contexts.

Literacy significantly impacts health-care outcomes. Personal health literacy refers to an individual's ability to
understand, seek, and use health information to make decisions about their health and health care (Health
Resources & Services Administration, 2022). Organizational health literacy refers to organizations' ability to
equitably understand, seek and use health information and services to allow for making informed decision and
actions; it is the responsibility of the organization to improve health literacy (Health Resources & Services
Administration, 2022). Health literacy increases preventive care use, improves management of chronic diseases,
and increases patient satisfaction (Health Resources & Services Administration, 2022). People with low health
literacy are more likely to have difficulty navigating the health-care system, understanding medical terminology, and
adhering to treatment plans, which can result in poorer health outcomes.

Nurses can help by using supplemental education tools that are visual or translated into the patient's native
language. Nurses can also encourage questions or teach-backs, making sure the patient understands and can
repeat the instruction back to them (Health Resources & Services Administration, 2022). Utilizing medical
interpreters is a legal requirement that provides great benefit to the patient and nurse when discussing important
health-care education (Health Resources & Services Administration, 2022).

Education, Job Opportunities, and Income
Education significantly impacts health-care outcomes and is said to be "the most important modifiable social
determinant of health" (The Lancet Public Health, 2020, para 6). Education plays a crucial role in life expectancy,
health behaviors, morbidity, employment, and income (The Lancet Public Health, 2020). Education has been
credited for reducing poverty and socioeconomic and political inequities. Those with higher levels of education tend
to have better reading comprehension, critical thinking abilities, and information-seeking behaviors. Education
enables people to understand health information, make informed decisions about their health, and effectively
navigate the health-care system.

Education is linked to increased health-care utilization. People with higher education levels are more likely to seek
preventive care, have regular checkups, and access timely medical interventions (The Lancet Public Health, 2020).
They are also more likely to understand the importance of early detection, screenings, and vaccinations, leading to
earlier diagnoses and better management of health conditions.

Employment is not always equitable. Employment can influence people's access to health-care services; exposure
to toxic substances and adverse working conditions; and housing, social status, and economic security (Steege et
al., 2023). Stable employment and adequate income can enable persons to afford health insurance coverage. They
also provide financial resources to access necessary medical treatments, medications, and preventive care services
(Steege et al., 2023). In contrast, persons without job opportunities or with low income may face challenges in
obtaining health insurance coverage, leading to delayed or limited access to care (Steege et al., 2023).

Job opportunities and higher income levels can enable access to safe housing, nutritious food, and a supportive
social environment, all of which contribute to better overall health and well-being. Certain jobs impact occupational
health and safety conditions. Work environments that prioritize safety and provide adequate resources for injury
prevention and occupational health can reduce the risk of work-related illnesses and injuries. Access to job
opportunities that offer fair working conditions, including reasonable hours, paid leave, and work-life balance, also
80  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

    contribute to overall well-being (Steege et al., 2023).

    3.2 Leading Causes of Death and Health Screenings

    LEARNING OBJECTIVES
    By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Discuss the leading causes of death of persons assigned female at birth worldwide
        · Discuss the leading causes of death of persons assigned female at birth in the United States
        · Explain the importance of health screenings and describe the screening tools used to assess for specific

            health concerns

    Understanding the leading causes of death among persons AFAB is crucial for addressing public health concerns
    and implementing effective health-care strategies. This discussion will explore the leading causes of death globally
    and nationally. Additionally, this section will delve into the significance of health screenings and examine the
    screening tools used to assess specific health concerns.

    Leading Causes of Morbidity and Mortality Worldwide

    Being ill from a particular condition is called morbidity; death from a particular condition is mortality (Hernandez &
    Kim, 2022). On a global level, the leading causes of morbidity and mortality for persons AFAB vary across regions
    and countries due to variations in health-care systems, socioeconomic factors, and cultural practices. However,
    several common causes of morbidity and mortality can be observed globally, such as maternal complications,
    noncommunicable diseases, infectious diseases, and Alzheimer's and other dementias, among others.

    Maternal Complications
    According to the World Health Organization (2023a), the high number of maternal deaths in some areas reflects
    inequalities in access to quality health services and highlights the gap between rich and underserved. Maternal
    morbidity and mortality are caused by complications occurring during pregnancy and/or postpartum. In 2020, rates
    in low-income countries were 430 deaths per 100,000 live births versus 12 per 100,000 live births in high-income
    countries (WHO, 2023a). Most of these pregnancy complications are preventable or treatable. Preexisting conditions
    can worsen during pregnancy. The WHO (2023a) reports that the major complications that account for nearly 75
    percent of all maternal deaths are severe bleeding (mostly bleeding after childbirth), infections (usually after
    childbirth), high blood pressure during pregnancy (pre-eclampsia and eclampsia), complications from delivery, and
    unsafe abortion. The WHO (2023a) states that to reduce maternal deaths unintended pregnancies must be
    prevented. All people need access to contraception, safe abortion services, qualified health-care professionals, and
    quality care during pregnancy and after childbirth.

    Noncommunicable Diseases
    Noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) pose a substantial and growing health challenge worldwide, with persons AFAB
    being particularly affected. These diseases, including cardiovascular diseases, cancer, diabetes, and chronic
    respiratory conditions, are responsible for significant morbidity and mortality among persons across different age
    groups and regions.

    The CDC (2022c) reports the top three causes of death for persons AFAB are heart disease, cancer, and stroke. In
    this population, heart disease accounts for 21 percent of deaths, with 80 percent of persons AFAB between the ages
    of 40 and 60 having one or more risk factors (CDC, 2022c; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute [NHLBI], 2023).
    Diseases affecting the heart and blood vessels include coronary artery disease, heart attacks, heart failure, and
    strokes (WHO, 2023a). Risk factors for CVD include smoking, which increases the risk of atherosclerosis, and limited
    physical activity, which contributes to poor cardiovascular health and obesity (NHLBI, 2023). Additionally, a diet
    high in saturated and trans fats, salt, and sugar can lead to high blood pressure and dyslipidemia, both risk factors
    for cardiovascular diseases. Risk factors for heart disease specific for persons AFAB include anemia, early
    menopause, history of preeclampsia/eclampsia, hormonal birth control, endometriosis, and autoimmune disease
    (NHLBI, 2023).

    Cancer is the second leading cause of death among persons AFAB worldwide, and 20 percent of persons AFAB in
    the United States die from cancer (CDC, 2022c; WHO, 2023a). Various types of cancer, such as breast, cervical,
    ovarian, skin, colorectal, lung, and endometrial cancer, significantly impact persons AFAB (American Cancer Society,

    Access for free at openstax.org
3.2 · Leading Causes of Death and Health Screenings                                                                     81

2023a). Smoking remains a significant risk factor for multiple cancers, including lung and cervical cancer. Physical
inactivity and obesity are linked to an increased likelihood of developing breast, uterine, and colorectal cancer
(American Cancer Society, 2023a).

Diabetes affects millions of people globally and has a significant impact on their health and well-being (WHO,
2023a). Risk factors for diabetes include history of gestational diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, polycystic
ovarian syndrome, being overweight, and having a family member with diabetes (ACOG, 2021b). Consuming
excessive sugary and high-calorie foods can lead to weight gain and insulin resistance, increasing the risk of
diabetes. However, engaging in regular physical activity helps maintain a healthy weight and improves insulin
sensitivity.

The two most common respiratory diseases worldwide are chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and
asthma (WHO, 2023a). Smoking is a significant risk factor for COPD, and those AFAB are twice as likely to develop
chronic bronchitis than persons AMAB (WHO, 2023a). Exposure to indoor and outdoor air pollution can also
exacerbate respiratory conditions. Additionally, physical inactivity can negatively impact respiratory health, as
regular exercise helps strengthen respiratory muscles and improves lung function.

To decrease the incidence of morbidity and mortality due to NCDs, public health policies should promote healthy
self-care, such as smoking cessation, regular physical activity, and balanced and nutritious diets. Providing
accessible and affordable health-care services that include preventive screenings and early detection can aid in
identifying NCDs early and improving health outcomes.

Infectious Diseases
Communicable diseases can disproportionately affect persons AFAB due to the biological vulnerability of having
vaginal or anal mucosal exposure to semen (National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, n.d.). Research
shows that more than 9 million individuals AFAB contract an STI in the United States annually (Office on Women's
Health, 2022). Untreated STIs can cause long-term problems in those AFAB, especially chlamydia and gonorrhea,
which can lead to ectopic pregnancy, chronic pelvic pain, and infertility (Office on Women's Health, 2022).

Persons having receptive intercourse are at higher risk of contracting human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection; therefore, persons AFAB can contract HIV by having intercourse (anal and/or vaginal) with a partner who
is HIV positive (HIV and specific populations, 2021). HIV can also be contracted through blood, such as those
sharing needles. If not treated during pregnancy, HIV can be passed to the fetus via the placenta or at birth;
however, pregnant persons taking antiretroviral medications greatly decrease the chance of perinatal transmission
(HIV and specific populations, 2021).

COVID-19, caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, has significantly impacted populations worldwide and was the
third leading causes of death in 2021 (Xu et al., 2022). While the virus does not discriminate based on gender,
various social, economic, and health-related factors have led to a unique burden on persons AFAB during the
pandemic. Due to closures of reproductive clinics during the pandemic and people being restricted to their homes,
many e went without birth control and unintended pregnancies greatly increased (Cousins, 2020). Those pregnant
during the pandemic had higher incidences of preterm birth and stillbirth, and increased rates of ventilatory support;
neonatal infection was uncommon (Mullins et al., 2022). Higher incidences of hypertension were also noted in
pregnant women with COVID-19 infection (Sertel & Demir, 2023).

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

Safety and Infection

Sinks, drains, toilets, and hoppers have been found to be contaminated with multidrug-resistant organisms. Nurses
should follow the following steps to reduce risk of infection for patients and health-care workers:

  1. Clean drains, faucet handles, and surrounding counters.
  2. Do not place personal or patient's items close to sinks.
  3. Do not prepare medications near the sink.
  4. Avoid splashing water from the sink.
82  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

      5. Use a hopper and toilet covers.
      6. Toilet covers are used and closed prior to flushing.
      7. Do not pour patient waste in sinks.

    (CDC, 2019b)

    Alzheimer's and Other Dementias
    The WHO (2023) reports that more than 55 million people have dementia worldwide. Sixty percent of these people
    live in low- and middle-income countries. Dementia results from diseases and injuries that affect the brain.
    Alzheimer's disease, the most common type of dementia, is the cause of 60 percent to 70 percent of dementia
    cases (WHO, 2023b). Dementia, the seventh leading cause of death, is a major cause of disability among older
    people, causing dependency on family or the health-care community (Taudorf et al., 2021). Persons AFAB are
    affected by dementia more than persons AMAB, with 66 percent of persons with Alzheimer's disease AFAB
    (Mosconi et al, 2021).

    Accidents and Injuries
    The leading causes of accidents and injuries in persons AFAB vary depending on age, with teens being the highest
    risk group; geographic location; and self-care practices (WHO, 2021b). The WHO (2021b) reports that falls are a
    leading cause of injuries, especially among older persons AFAB globally. In people older than 65, mortality is three
    to four times higher at 1 year after hip fracture with a mortality rate of 15 percent to 36 percent (Morri et al., 2019).
    Falls can occur due to various factors, including tripping hazards, balance issues, and environmental conditions.
    People may be exposed to workplace hazards that can lead to injuries such as accidents, repetitive strain, and
    exposure to harmful substances, with 5,190 work-related fatalities in 2021 (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2022).
    Domestic and intimate partner violence can lead to severe injuries and death. One in seven persons AFAB have been
    injured by a partner, and intimate partner violence accounts for 15 percent of violent crimes in the United States
    (National Coalition Against Domestic Violence [NCADV], 2020). Intimate partner violence is responsible for 50
    percent of murders of persons AFAB (NCADV, 2020).

    Prevention of accidents and injuries requires education, awareness, and policy interventions. Promoting safe driving
    practices, providing workplace safety training, implementing measures to prevent intimate partner violence, and
    promoting home safety are essential steps in reducing the incidence of accidents and injuries. Factors to decrease
    teen violence include consistent presence of parents, teens involved in social activities, religious beliefs, and youths'
    commitment to school (CDC, 2020a). Research suggests the following interventions to prevent intimate partner
    violence: teach healthy relationship skills, encourage protective environments, provide support to survivors, and
    provide treatment for at-risk families (CDC, 2017).

    Mental Health Conditions
    The global mental health burden in individuals AFAB is a significant public health issue. Mental health disorders are
    more prevalent in individuals AFAB than in individuals AMAB. Persons AFAB are twice as likely to be diagnosed with
    anxiety as persons AMAB, and one in five AFAB persons has a mental disorder compared to one in eight persons
    AMAB (Health Assured, 2023). Approximately one in three persons AFAB will experience a mental health problem in
    their lifetime (Lan et al., 2022). Approximately 53 percent of persons AFAB who suffer from a mental health issue
    have also been abused, increasing their risk for suicide and self-harm (Health Assured, 2023).

    Suicide
    Suicide rates among adolescents AFAB have been on the rise in recent years. Suicide is most frequent during the
    ages of 45 to 64 and lowest during the ages of 10 to 14 and over 70; and in 2019, 6 deaths per 100,000 persons
    AFAB were due to suicide (Statista, 2023). According to the WHO (2023c), 75 percent of suicides occurring
    nationally were committed in low- to middle-income countries, and suicide is the fourth leading cause of mortality in
    persons aged 15 to 29 years. Risk factors for suicide include violence, abuse, isolation, disaster, conflict, and
    discrimination (WHO, 2023c). Hormonal changes and social pressures of adolescence can exacerbate these issues.
    Adolescents may experience bullying or cyberbullying, which can significantly impact their mental well-being and
    increase suicide risk. In addition, issues with friends or romantic partners can be emotionally challenging and
    contribute to feelings of hopelessness. Academic stress and the desire to fit in with peer groups can create immense
    pressure, leading to emotional distress. Adolescents who are exposed to self-harm or suicide behaviors in their

    Access for free at openstax.org
3.2 · Leading Causes of Death and Health Screenings                                                                        83

social circle may be at higher risk themselves.

Members of the LGBTQIA+ community are also at an elevated risk of suicidal thoughts and attempts due to
persistent societal discrimination, stigma, and prejudice. Many LGBTQIA+ persons face rejection from family,
friends, or religious communities, leading to feelings of isolation and lack of support. LGBTQIA+ youth may
experience bullying and harassment at school or in their communities, contributing to mental health struggles.

Nurses play a crucial role in suicide risk identification and prevention within the health-care system. As frontline
health-care providers, they often have frequent and direct contact with patients, making them well positioned to
assess and intervene in cases of suicide risk and mental illness. Here are some key aspects of nursing roles in
suicide identification and prevention:

    · Screening and Assessment: Nurses are responsible for conducting initial screenings and comprehensive
        assessments of patients' mental health status, including assessing for suicide risk factors and warning signs.
        Using validated tools, they can identify at-risk patients and initiate appropriate interventions.

    · Communication and Observation: Nurses must establish effective communication with patients to understand
        their emotional state and any suicidal ideation. They also play a critical role in observing changes in behavior,
        mood, and signs of distress that could indicate heightened suicide risk.

    · Creating a Safe Environment: Nurses contribute to creating a safe and supportive health-care environment
        that promotes open discussions about mental health. By reducing stigma and fostering trust, patients may
        feel more comfortable disclosing suicidal thoughts.

    · Risk Management and Safety Planning: When a patient is identified as being at risk for suicide, nurses
        collaborate with the health-care team to develop safety plans that outline strategies to keep the patient safe
        during crisis periods.

    · Education and Support: Nurses educate patients, families, and caregivers about suicide risk factors, warning
        signs, and available resources. They also offer emotional support and coping strategies to patients in distress.

    · Postdischarge Follow-up: Following discharge from a health-care facility, nurses may conduct postdischarge
        follow-up calls or visits to assess patients' ongoing well-being and ensure continuity of care.

    · Documentation and Reporting: Accurate and thorough documentation of suicide risk assessments,
        interventions, and care plans is essential for maintaining patient safety and coordinating care.

    · Self-Care and Support: Caring for patients at risk of suicide can be emotionally demanding for nurses.
        Practicing self-care and seeking support from colleagues and mental health professionals is crucial to
        maintaining their well-being.

The nurse's role in suicide identification and prevention is integral to a comprehensive health-care approach to
address this serious public health issue. By working collaboratively with other health-care professionals and
organizations, nurses can help reduce suicide rates and support those in need.

Leading Causes of Death in the United States

In the United States, the morbidity and mortality of persons AFAB are similar to the global statistics. Table 3.3
provides insights into the primary causes of mortality among persons AFAB across different age brackets. Overall,
the table highlights the various health challenges and external factors that impact the mortality of people in
different age groups.
84  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

    Age                              Causes of Death

    Adults                           Diseases of the heart
                                     Malignant neoplasm
                                     Cerebrovascular disease
                                     Alzheimer's disease
                                     Chronic lower respiratory disease
                                     Accidents (Unintentional injuries)
                                     Diabetes mellitus
                                     Influenza and pneumonia
                                     Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, and nephrosis
                                     Essential hypertension and hypertensive renal disease

    15-24 years                      Accidents (unintentional injuries)
                                     Intentional self-harm (suicide)
                                     Assault (homicide)

    10-14 years                      Accidents (unintentional injuries)
                                     Intentional self-harm (suicide)
                                     Malignant neoplasms
                                     Congenital abnormalities
                                     Assault (homicide)

    TABLE 3.3 Leading Causes of Death in Persons Assigned Female at Birth in the
    United States by Age (Heron, 2021)

    Screening for Cardiovascular Risk Factors or Disease
    The American College of Cardiology (ACC) and the American Heart Association (AHA) jointly released guidelines in
    2019 on the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD). These guidelines recommend various aspects of
    CVD risk assessment, self-care practices, and medication use for those without known cardiovascular disease but at
    risk of developing it. Key screening recommendations are as follows (Arnett et al., 2019):

    · Assessment of Cardiovascular Risk. The ACC/AHA guidelines recommend using a risk calculator, such as the
       ASCVD (Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease) Risk Estimator Plus, to assess a person's 10-year risk of
       developing a first cardiovascular event (e.g., heart attack or stroke).

    · Self-care Practices. Self-care practices include promoting a heart-healthy diet, regular physical activity,
       smoking cessation, and weight management.

    · Blood Pressure Screening. Blood pressure should be measured at least once every 2 years in adults with
       normal blood pressure (systolic <120 mm Hg and diastolic <80 mm Hg) and more frequently for persons with
       higher blood pressure.

    · Cholesterol Screening. A lipid profile should be obtained in adults aged 20 years and older at least once every
       five years.

    · Diabetes Screening. Screening for diabetes is recommended in adults with risk factors, such as overweight or
       obesity, sedentary lifestyle, family history of diabetes, or other risk factors for diabetes.

    · Aspirin Use for Primary Prevention. Aspirin therapy is generally not recommended in persons at low risk of
       CVD.

    The ACC/AHA guidelines on the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease are comprehensive and cover
    additional topics beyond screening recommendations, including treatment thresholds for cholesterol-lowering
    medications and blood pressure-lowering medications (Arnett et al., 2019).

    Cancer is the second leading cause of mortality. Everyone is at risk of developing cancer, although the likelihood
    increases greatly with age; 80 percent of people diagnosed with cancer in the United States are 55 years of age or
    older, and 57 percent are 65 or older (American Cancer Society, 2022). The most commonly occurring cancer in
    persons AFAB is breast cancer; however, lung cancer is the leading cause of death by cancer in this population

    Access for free at openstax.org
                            3.2 · Leading Causes of Death and Health Screenings                                         85

(American Cancer Society, 2022). A further breakdown of cancer prevalence is shown in Table 3.4. Modifiable risk
factors include smoking, having excess body weight, drinking alcohol, and eating an unhealthy diet.

Rank Most Common Cancers Leading Causes of Cancer Deaths

1  Breast       Lung

2  Colorectal   Breast

3  Endometrial  Colorectal

4  Lung         Pancreatic

5  Cervical     Ovarian

6  Skin         Leukemia

7  Ovarian      Endometrial

TABLE 3.4 Leading Causes of Cancer Deaths in Persons Assigned Female at Birth
(American Cancer Society, 2022)

Mental health is also a major health concern in the United States. The CDC (2023c) estimates that 1 in 10 persons
AFAB in the United States reported symptoms that suggest they experienced an episode of major depression in the
past year. Suicide is a leading cause of death, especially among young persons AFAB. The National Institute of
Mental Health (n.d.) recommends health-care providers use the Ask Suicide-Screening Toolkit, a four-question
screening tool that can be completed in 20 seconds, for all people; the tool has adult and youth versions. Early
detection for suicidal thoughts is crucial for preventing suicide. Links to this source and other screening tools
include the following:

· Ask Suicide-Screening Questions (ASQ) (https://openstax.org/r/77suicidescreen)
· Suicide Behavior Questionnaire-Revised (SBQ-R) (https://openstax.org/r/77suicidebehav)
· Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS)-Triage Version (https://openstax.org/r/77columbiascale)
· Patient Health Questionnaire-9 Adolescent Version (PHQ-9A) (https://openstax.org/r/77adolescscreen)
· Patient Health Questionnaire 9 (PHQ-9) (https://openstax.org/r/77healthquestin)
· Patient Safety Screener-3 (PSS-3) (https://openstax.org/r/77patientsafety)

Screenings for Specific Health Concerns for Persons Assigned Female at Birth

Wellness screenings are essential preventive health-care measures that aim to detect potential health issues early,
allowing for timely intervention and treatment. These screening tools are tailored specifically to the unique health
needs of persons AFAB and are used in health-care settings to identify potential health issues, risk factors, or early
symptoms, before a formal diagnosis. The screenings recommended vary based on age, risk factors, and individual
health history.

Screening for Breast Cancer--Persons of Average Risk
Breast cancer is the most diagnosed cancer in individuals AFAB in the United States and the second leading cause of
cancer death (American Cancer Society, 2023b). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG,
2017) recommends that mammography screening between the ages of 40 and 49 should be a shared decision-
making discussion between the person and the health-care provider to consider the potential benefits and harms of
screening at this age. ACOG recommends that persons between ages 50 and 74 of average risk (see Table 3.5) have
a screening mammogram every 1 to 2 years. ACOG does not recommend routine clinical breast exams for breast
cancer screening in the average-risk individual. In addition, ACOG does not recommend breast self-exam (BSE) for
breast cancer screening, as there is insufficient evidence to support its effectiveness in reducing mortality from
breast cancer.
86  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

            LINK TO LEARNING

    The Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool (BCRAT), or The Gail Model, allows health professionals to estimate a
    person's risk of developing invasive breast cancer (https://openstax.org/r/77BCRAT) over the next 5 years and up to
    age 90 (lifetime risk).

                      Ages 40-49                                               Ages 50-74

    Mammography       Individualized with shared decision making               Every 1 to 2 years

    Clinical breast   Not recommended for breast cancer screening in average-risk persons
    exams

    Breast self-exam  Not recommended; insufficient evidence to support its effectiveness in reducing
                      mortality

    TABLE 3.5 ACOG Recommendations for Breast Cancer Screening in Average-Risk Persons (ACOG, 2017)

    It is important to note that the ACOG recommendations are specifically for average-risk persons AFAB. Breast
    cancer is a complex disease influenced by genetic, environmental, and self-care practices. Having one or more risk
    factors can increase the likelihood of developing the disease. Some common risk factors for breast cancer include
    the following:

     1. Being a person AFAB is the most significant risk factor for breast cancer. Although breast cancer can occur in
           persons AMAB, it is much more common in those assigned female.

     2. The risk of breast cancer increases with age. Most breast cancers occur in persons over the age of 50.
     3. Having a first-degree relative (parent, sibling, or child) with breast cancer increases the risk.
     4. Carrying mutations in specific genes, such as BRCA1 and BRCA2, is associated with a higher risk of breast

           cancer.
     5. Those with breast cancer in one breast are at an increased risk of developing it in the other breast.
     6. Some noncancerous breast conditions, such as atypical hyperplasia, also raise the risk.
     7. In addition to BRCA1 and BRCA2, other gene mutations, such as TP53, PTEN, and PALB2, can increase the

           risk of breast cancer.
     8. Previous radiation therapy to the chest, especially during adolescence or early adulthood, increases the risk of

           developing breast cancer later in life.
     9. Early onset of menstruation (before age 12) and late menopause (after age 55) are associated with an

           increased risk.
    10. Having the first child after age 30 or never having children can increase the risk.
    11. Persons AFAB with dense breasts on mammograms have a higher risk of breast cancer.
    12. Self-care factors that increase or may increase the risk of developing breast cancer are

            a. excessive alcohol consumption;
            b. obesity, especially after menopause; and
            c. lack of physical activity.
    13. White people have a slightly higher risk of breast cancer than Black, Hispanic, and Asian people. However,
           African American persons are more likely to be diagnosed at a younger age and have more aggressive breast
           cancer types.

    (CDC, 2023c)

    Breast Cancer in Transgender Persons
    Breast cancer screening is a vital component of preventive health care for all individuals, including transgender
    people. However, transgender persons may face unique challenges and considerations related to breast cancer
    screening. For nurses, completing a thorough history of the person's transition is extremely important. Referring the
    patient to a health-care provider who is sensitive to the needs of transgender persons is essential.

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             3.2 · Leading Causes of Death and Health Screenings      87

The American College of Radiology (ACR) has breast cancer screening guidelines tailored for a person's sex assigned
at birth, age, personal risk of breast cancer, breast development, breast surgery for transgender men, and whether a
person has used gender-affirming hormone treatment (and for how long) for transgender women (Brown et al.,
2021).

The ACR breast cancer considerations for transgender people at average risk of breast cancer are as follows:

· Transgender Men
    1. If transgender persons have had a bilateral mastectomy, the risk of breast cancer is low. Although
         bilateral mastectomy does not entirely protect against breast cancer, even in people at high risk of breast
         cancer, it lowers the risk of breast cancer by at least 90 percent.
    2. If transgender persons have not had a bilateral mastectomy, their breast cancer risk is similar to that of
         cisgender persons AFAB.
    3. For transgender persons at average risk of breast cancer, it is recommended to follow screening
         recommendations for cisgender persons AFAB at average risk of breast cancer (Table 3.6).

Age, Surgery, and Breast Cancer Risk                              Mammography  Breast MRI or
                                                                               Breast Ultrasound

Any age with bilateral mastectomy and any level of breast         Not          Not recommended
cancer risk                                                       recommended

Ages 40 and older with breast reduction or no chest surgery       Usually,     Not recommended
and at average risk of breast cancer*                             appropriate

Ages 30 and older with breast reduction or no chest surgery       Usually,     Breast MRI may be
and a personal history of breast cancer, lobular carcinoma in     appropriate  appropriate.Breast
situ (LCIS), atypical hyperplasia, or a 15%-20% lifetime risk of               ultrasound may be
breast cancer                                                                  appropriate.

Ages 25-30 with breast reduction or no chest surgery and a        Usually,     Breast MRI may be
BRCA1 or BRCA2 inherited gene mutation                            appropriate  appropriate.Breast
                                                                               ultrasound may be
                                                                               appropriate.

*Less than a 15% lifetime risk of breast cancer.

TABLE 3.6 ACR Breast Cancer Screening Recommendations for Transgender Men (Lockhart & Kamaya, 2022)

· Transgender Women
    1. If transgender women are at average risk of breast cancer, breast cancer screening recommendations
         depend on hormone replacement treatments (Table 3.7).

Age, Use of Gender-Affirming Hormone Treatment and                Mammography  Breast MRI or
Breast Cancer Risk                                                             Breast Ultrasound

Ages 40 and older, with past or current hormone use for 5 years   May be       Not recommended
or more and at average risk of breast cancer                      appropriate

Any age, with no hormone use or less than 5 years of hormone      Not          Not recommended
use and at average risk of breast cancer                          recommended

TABLE 3.7 ACR Breast Cancer Screening Recommendations for Transgender Women (Lockhart & Kamaya, 2022)
88  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

    Age, Use of Gender-Affirming Hormone Treatment and                         Mammography  Breast MRI or
    Breast Cancer Risk                                                                      Breast Ultrasound

    Ages 25-30, with past or current hormone use for 5 years or                Usually,     Not recommended
    more and at higher risk of breast cancer                                   appropriate

    Ages 25-30 with no hormone use or less than 5 years of                     May be       Not recommended
    hormone use and at higher risk of breast cancer                            appropriate

    TABLE 3.7 ACR Breast Cancer Screening Recommendations for Transgender Women (Lockhart & Kamaya, 2022)

    Nurses should receive training on providing culturally competent care to transgender patients. Culturally competent
    care includes understanding gender identity, respecting chosen names and pronouns, and creating a safe and
    nonjudgmental environment for open communication. Nurses should recognize that breast cancer risk can vary
    among transgender persons based on their assigned sex at birth, hormone use, and surgical history.

    Screening for Cervical Cancer
    Cervical cancer screening is an important health-care practice aimed at the early detection of cervical cancer and its
    precursors. Cervical cancer is a significant global health concern. The CDC reports that each year in the United
    States approximately 11,500 new cases of cervical cancer are diagnosed, and about 4,000 people AFAB die
    annually (Cervical Cancer Statistics, 2019). Cervical cancer screening has been proven to reduce the incidence of
    cervical cancer and related deaths significantly (Cervical Cancer Statistics, 2019).

    The most common screening methods for cervical cancer include the Pap smear (Figure 3.2) and human
    papillomavirus (HPV) testing. The Pap smear involves collecting cells from the cervix and having a pathologist
    examine them under a microscope to identify abnormal cell changes. The HPV test identifies the presence of high-
    risk HPV strains responsible for causing most cases of cervical cancer (ACOG, 2021a).

    FIGURE 3.2 Pap Smear Cervical cells are obtained using a broom or brush that is placed in a liquid medium for testing. (attribution:
    Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

    Early detection is crucial because cervical cancer found in the early stages is easier to treat (National Cancer
    Institute, 2023a). By detecting abnormal changes or HPV infections early, health-care providers can offer
    appropriate treatments, including procedures to remove precancerous lesions, reducing the risk of developing
    invasive cancer. Furthermore, HPV vaccination, often administered to young people before they become sexually
    active, complements screening efforts by preventing HPV infections and reducing the risk of developing cervical

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 3.2 · Leading Causes of Death and Health Screenings   89

cancer later in life (ACOG, 2021a).

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021a) and other leading gynecologic organizations endorse
the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) cervical cancer screening recommendations for people with
average-risk. These recommendations apply to people with a cervix who do not have any signs or symptoms of
cervical cancer, regardless of their sexual history or HPV vaccination status (Table 3.8).

Population                 Recommendations

Age less than 21 years     No screening

Age 21-29 years            Cytology alone every 3 years

Age 30-65 years            Any one of the following:
                               · cytology alone every 3 years
                               · FDA-approved primary high-risk HPV testing alone every 5 years
                               · co-testing (high-risk HPV testing and cytology) every 5 years

Age greater than 65 years No screening after adequate negative prior screening results*

Hysterectomy with removal  No screening in individuals who do not have a history of high-grade cervical
of the cervix              precancerous lesions or cervical cancer

*Adequate negative prior screening test results are defined as three consecutive negative cytology results, two
consecutive negative contesting results, or two consecutive negative high-risk HPV test results within 10 years
before stopping screening, with the most recent test occurring within the recommended screening interval for the
test used.

TABLE 3.8 Pap and HPV Screening Recommendations (USPSTF, 2018a)

Screening for HPV and Cervical Cancer in Transgender Persons
Transgender men with an intact cervix and uterus should continue to have cervical cancer screenings. Timing of
cervical cancer screening and cervical cancer risk is the same as for cisgender persons AFAB (Dhillon et al., 2020).
However, pelvic exams can cause distress to a transgender man and can trigger gender dysphoria (Dhillon et al.,
2020). Due to this emotional and psychologic distress, many transgender men avoid cervical cancer screening.
Nurses can play an important role in supporting the person through the exam by giving anticipatory guidance and
being aware of culturally competent care (Dhillon et al., 2020).

Most anal cancers, 89 percent to 100 percent, are caused by HPV with approximately 8,300 new cases annually in
the United States (Wieland & Kreuter, 2019). Risk factors for anal cancer include persons AMAB having intercourse
with other persons AMAB, persons who are HIV positive, persons with a history of cervical cancer, and transplant
recipients (Wieland & Kreuter, 2019). Research has shown that cervical cancer caused by HPV16 is strongly related
to anal cancer caused by HPV16 (Wieland & Kreuter, 2019). Anal screening for HPV is only recommended in high-
risk persons; however, it is suggested that anal screening should occur if any abnormal cervical cells are identified
(Wieland & Kreuter, 2019).

Screening for Other Reproductive Cancers
Additional screenings should be offered for persons AFAB. Screenings should include ovarian, colon, endometrial,
and skin cancer. In persons who smoke, lung cancer screening should also be offered.

Ovarian Cancer
Ovarian cancer screening is a challenging topic, as there is currently no reliable and widely accepted screening test
proven to reduce ovarian cancer mortality. Ovarian cancer tends to present with vague symptoms in its early stages,
making early detection challenging; only approximately 20 percent of ovarian cancers are detected in the early
stages (American Cancer Society, 2020a). Additionally, the symptoms of ovarian cancer, such as bloating, abdominal
discomfort, changes in bowel habits, and frequent urination, are often nonspecific and can be attributed to other
90  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

    less serious conditions (American Cancer Society, 2020a).

    Given the limitations of current screening methods, most major health organizations, including the American Cancer
    Society and the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, do not recommend routine ovarian cancer screening for
    average-risk individuals AFAB. Instead, they emphasize the importance of recognizing and promptly reporting any
    persistent and unexplained symptoms, which may lead to early detection and diagnosis.

    Personalized screening and preventive strategies may be considered for persons AFAB at high risk of ovarian cancer
    due to strong family history or genetic predisposition (e.g., BRCA gene mutations) (American Cancer Society,
    2020a). A transvaginal ultrasound, an ultrasound probe inserted into the vagina to examine the ovaries, may be
    performed but may not reliably distinguish between benign and malignant tumors. The CA-125 test, a test to detect
    a protein that can be elevated in the blood of some people with ovarian cancer, may be performed but is not
    considered a reliable stand-alone screening tool for ovarian cancer (American Cancer Society, 2020a). In some
    cases, treatment might involve more frequent monitoring, genetic counseling, and discussions about risk-reducing
    surgeries (e.g., prophylactic oophorectomy) to remove the ovaries and fallopian tubes.

    Endometrial Cancer
    Endometrial cancer screening is not recommended for persons AFAB with no symptoms or risk factors. Routine
    screening in asymptomatic individuals has not been shown to be effective in reducing the mortality associated with
    endometrial cancer. Screening for endometrial cancer is typically recommended for persons who are experiencing
    abnormal uterine bleeding, particularly postmenopausal bleeding, or irregular bleeding in premenopausal persons
    (National Cancer Institute, 2023b). Persons AFAB with obesity, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), or a history of
    unopposed estrogen therapy may have an increased risk of endometrial cancer (National Cancer Institute, 2023b).
    Unexplained bleeding or bleeding that occurs after menopause can be a warning sign of endometrial cancer, and an
    endometrial biopsy should be performed.

    Prostate and Testicular Cancer in Transgender Women
    Reproductive cancer screening for transgender women is an important aspect of health care that should be
    addressed with sensitivity and consideration for the person's gender identity and medical history. Transgender
    women are persons AMAB but who identify and live as women. While they do not have a cervix, they may have other
    reproductive organs that require appropriate reproductive cancer screening. Transgender women who have not
    undergone gender-affirming surgery to their reproductive organs may still have a prostate. The risk of prostate
    cancer is generally lower in transgender women than in cisgender men, but it is still appropriate to discuss prostate
    cancer screening (Bertoncelli et al., 2021). In addition, transgender women with intact testes should be aware of
    the signs and symptoms of testicular cancer and perform regular testicular self-exams. The United States Preventive
    Services Task Force (USPSTF, 2018c) recommends that for persons with a prostate who are aged 55 to 69 years, the
    decision to undergo periodic prostate-specific antigen (PSA)-based screening for prostate cancer should be an
    individual one based on the benefits and harms of screening based on family history, race/ethnicity, comorbid
    medical conditions, patient values about the benefits and harms of screening and treatment-specific outcomes, and
    other health needs.

    Nurses play a vital role in identifying signs and symptoms of gynecologic cancers in their patients. Early detection of
    gynecologic cancers is crucial for timely diagnosis and treatment, leading to better outcomes and improved patient
    survival rates. Table 3.9 lists common gynecologic cancers and the signs and symptoms nurses can discuss with
    patients.

    Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  3.2 · Leading Causes of Death and Health Screenings                    91

Cancer       Symptoms
Cervical
                 · abnormal vaginal bleeding, especially between periods, after intercourse, or after
                     menopause

                 · unusual vaginal discharge that may be watery, bloody, or foul-smelling
                 · pelvic pain or pain during sexual intercourse
                 · changes in bowel or bladder habits

Endometrial  · abnormal or postmenopausal bleeding, including heavy or prolonged menstrual bleeding
             · pelvic pain or discomfort
             · painful urination
             · unexplained weight loss

Ovarian      · abdominal bloating or swelling
             · pelvic pain or pressure
             · feeling full quickly while eating
             · frequent or urgent urination
             · changes in bowel habits
             · unexplained weight loss or gain

Vulvar       · itching, burning, or tenderness in the vulvar area
             · changes in the color or texture of the vulvar skin
             · pain, bleeding, or ulceration on the vulva

Vaginal      · abnormal vaginal bleeding, such as postmenopausal bleeding or bleeding after intercourse
             · watery vaginal discharge
             · pelvic pain or discomfort
             · a lump or mass in the vagina

TABLE 3.9 Common Gynecologic Cancers (CDC, 2020b)

As part of their role, nurses should conduct comprehensive assessments and communicate effectively with patients
to elicit any symptoms related to gynecologic cancers. They should also maintain a high index of suspicion,
especially for patients with risk factors, family history, or a history of certain gynecologic conditions (e.g., HPV
infection).

In addition to identifying symptoms, nurses should educate their patients about the importance of routine
gynecologic checkups and cancer screenings, such as Pap smears and HPV tests. Early detection can significantly
improve treatment outcomes and quality of life for persons with gynecologic cancers. Nurses can also provide
emotional support and patient education about the disease, treatment options, and coping mechanisms.
Collaborating with other health-care professionals, nurses are crucial in facilitating timely diagnosis, treatment, and
ongoing care for patients with gynecologic cancers.

Colorectal Cancer Screening
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) concludes that screening for colorectal cancer in average-risk
adults aged 50 to 75 years has a substantial net benefit, while screening for colorectal cancer in adults aged 45 to
49 years has a moderate net benefit. In addition, screening for colorectal cancer in adults aged 76 to 85 years who
have been previously screened has small net benefit (USPSTF, 2021a).

Colorectal cancer screening recommendations are listed in Table 3.10.
92  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

    Type of Screening Recommendations

    Stool-based tests  · high-sensitivity fecal occult blood test (FOBT) or fecal immunochemical test (FIT)
                          annually

                       · multitarget stool DNA test (MT-sDNA) every 3 years

    Visual             · flexible sigmoidoscopy every 10 years
    examinations       · colonoscopy every 10 years
                       · CT colonography (virtual colonoscopy) every 5 years

    Combination        · FIT-DNA every 1 to 3 years
    testing

    TABLE 3.10 Colorectal Cancer Screening Recommendations (American Cancer Society, 2020b)

    Skin Cancer Screening
    Currently, there are no specific guidelines for routine skin cancer screening. The USPSTF does not find sufficient
    evidence to support routine population-wide skin cancer screening for asymptomatic people (United States
    Preventive Services Taskforce, 2023b). Instead, the USPSTF focuses on other preventive measures, such as
    promoting sun protection behaviors and educating the public about the warning signs of skin cancer. These
    preventive measures aim to reduce the risk of developing skin cancer and encourage people to seek medical
    evaluation for suspicious skin lesions.

    Lung Cancer Screening
    The USPSTF recommends annual lung cancer screening with low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) for adults
    aged 50 to 80 years who have a 20-pack-year smoking history and currently smoke or have quit within the past 15
    years (United States Preventive Services Taskforce, 2021b). To determine the pack-years, multiply number of
    cigarettes smoked per day with the number of years smoked, then divide by 20 (United States Preventive Services
    Taskforce, 2021b).

    Screening for Intimate Partner Violence
    Nurses are crucial in addressing violence against persons AFAB and supporting survivors. Nurses can conduct
    assessments using standardized protocols to identify violence and assess safety and well-being. Nurses can
    collaborate with patients to develop safety plans that address their immediate safety needs.

            LINK TO LEARNING

    The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force publishes recommendations for screening in a variety of factors that
    influence health. Their recommendations and evidence for screening for intimate partner violence, elder abuse, and
    abuse of vulnerable adults (https://openstax.org/r/77AFPabusetool) are available from American Family Physician.

    Screening for Depression and Anxiety
    Patients 18 years or older should be screened for depression at all primary care visits (Siniscalchi et al., 2020).
    Untreated depression can cause lost wages, emotional suffering, impaired relationships, and increased morbidity
    and mortality (Siniscalchi et al., 2020). Nurses can help recognize signs of depression in patients and possibly
    provide early intervention. Screening for anxiety should also be performed at each primary care visit. Primary care
    providers can determine if the anxiety is from a situation or indicative of psychiatric disorder (Centre for Addiction
    and Mental Health [CAMH], n.d.).

    Several screening tools can be used for both depression and anxiety. The Patient Health Questionaire-9 (PHQ-9) is a
    nine-question tool in which the patient ranks how they have been feeling for the past 2 weeks and screens for both
    anxiety and depression (Siniscalchi et al., 2020). The PHQ-2 is a tool asking two questions regarding frequency of
    depressed mood; if positive, the PHQ-9 is then performed (Siniscalchi et al., 2020). The General Anxiety Disorder-7

    Access for free at openstax.org
3.3 · Health Promotion                                                                                                                   93

is a tool specifically to screen for anxiety with seven questions determining how often the patient has felt anxious for
the past 2 weeks (CAMH, n.d.). The Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale is the most commonly used screen during
the peripartum period.

3.3 Health Promotion

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Discuss the reproductive system structures and functions of those assigned female at birth across the
        lifespan

    · Describe patient education on the various self-care measures important to promote expected growth and
        development from puberty onward in those assigned female at birth

Understanding the reproductive system is crucial to a person's health promotion and disease prevention. By
comprehending the intricate structures and functions of the reproductive system, nurses and health-care providers
can develop effective strategies for promoting overall well-being, preventing diseases, and addressing specific
reproductive health concerns. The nurse can explore the complexities of fertility, menstrual health, contraception,
pregnancy, and menopause and provide the necessary information to support and empower persons AFAB.

Structures of the Reproductive System

The reproductive system plays a central role in reproduction and the production of sex hormones. Learning the
anatomy is essential for understanding the physiologic processes involved in the reproductive health of persons
assigned female at birth.

External Genitalia
The external genitalia, known as the vulva, of the person AFAB includes several structures that play a crucial role in
sexual function, reproduction, and protection (Figure 3.3).

FIGURE 3.3 External Female Genitalia The external genitalia protect the urethra and vaginal opening. (modification of work from Anatomy
and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The mons pubis is a rounded mound of fatty tissue located above the pubic bone. It becomes covered with pubic
hair during puberty. The labia majora are the outer, more prominent skin folds and fatty tissue surrounding and
protecting the vaginal opening. The labia majora are often covered with pubic hair. The labia minora are the inner,
smaller folds of skin located within the labia majora. They lie closer to the vaginal opening and do not have pubic
hair. The labia minora can vary in size, shape, and color among people. They contain numerous sweat and oil glands.

The clitoris is responsible for most sexual arousal and orgasm and is composed of erectile tissue containing many
nerves. The glans of the clitoris is positioned where the labia minora meet at the hood. The clitoris has an internal
94  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

    and external body. The glans lies under the hood, external to the vulva, while the corpus, suspensory ligament, root,
    and vestibular bulbs are on the interior of the vulva. The clitoris makes an upside-down V-shape and is attached to
    the pubic symphysis (Figure 3.4).

    FIGURE 3.4 Anatomy of the Clitoris The clitoris is an internal and external organ. (modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e.
    attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

    The urethral opening is located just below the clitoral hood and above the vaginal opening. The vaginal opening is
    also known as the introitus.
    Internal Genitalia
    The internal genitalia consist of the vagina, cervix, body of the uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries. These structures
    each have specific functions pertaining to sexual function and childbirth. Figure 3.5 illustrates the internal genitalia.

    FIGURE 3.5 Internal Genitalia The internal genitalia play a role in sexual and reproductive function. (modification of work from Anatomy
    and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

    Vagina
    The vagina is a muscular, flexible tube-like structure that varies in length and width among people. It extends from
    the external opening, known as the vaginal orifice, to the cervix of the uterus. Its walls comprise layers of smooth
    muscle, connective tissue, and stratified squamous epithelium lining. The inner lining of the vagina contains folds or
    ridges called rugae. Hormonal fluctuations, particularly fluctuations in estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone,
    influence the physiology of the vagina. Estrogen promotes the development and maintenance of the vaginal lining
    and the production of vaginal lubrication.

    Access for free at openstax.org
3.3 · Health Promotion                                                                                                                   95

The vagina has a unique microbial environment, known as the vaginal flora, consisting of a diverse population of
microorganisms, primarily Lactobacillus species, which help maintain a healthy vaginal pH and protect against
infections. The vaginal pH is normally acidic, ranging between 3.8 and 4.5.

Cervix
The cervix is the lower, narrow portion of the uterus that connects the uterus to the vagina. It is a gateway between
these two structures and plays a crucial role in reproductive physiology. The cervix is the mouth to the uterus.
During labor, the cervix thins and opens, becoming an extension of the lower uterine segment. In the nonpregnant
person, the cervix is firm and closed and prevents infections from bacteria ascending into the uterus. During
nonfertile times, cervical mucus is thick and inhibits the transit of sperm into the uterus. During fertile times,
cervical mucus is thin and slippery, facilitating the passage of sperm.

Uterus
The uterus is a hollow, muscular organ that plays a crucial role in supporting pregnancy and menstruation. The
innermost layer of the uterus is called the endometrium. The endometrium is the layer that thickens and prepares
for embryo implantation. The middle layer of the uterus is the myometrium, composed of smooth muscle tissue. The
myometrium is responsible for strong contractions during labor and childbirth. It undergoes significant changes
during pregnancy to accommodate the growing fetus and facilitate labor. The outer layer of the uterus is the
perimetrium, consisting of a serous membrane that covers the uterus.

Ovaries
The ovaries are the organs that produce and release the egg and the hormones estrogen and progesterone. They are
almond-shaped reproductive organs, each measuring approximately 3 to 5 centimeters (cm) in length and 1.5 to 3
centimeters (cm) in width. They are situated on either side of the uterus, near the lateral pelvic wall, within the
ovarian fossa (a depression in the posterior pelvic wall). They have a smooth, shiny, and slightly uneven outer
surface of epithelial cells; an inner, softer tissue called the ovarian medulla; and a denser region called the ovarian
cortex.

Fallopian Tubes
The fallopian tubes, also called the uterine tube or oviducts, are a pair of slender, hollow tubes that extend from the
uterus out toward the ovaries. The fallopian tubes play a vital role in fertilization and early embryonic development.

The infundibulum is the funnel-shaped fallopian tube opening that surrounds the ovary. At the outer end of each
fallopian tube are finger-like projections called fimbriae. The fimbriae create a sweeping motion that helps capture
the released egg from the ovary and guide it into the tube. The ampulla is the widest and longest part of the
Fallopian tube. The isthmus is the narrowest and shortest fallopian tube segment, connecting the ampulla to the
uterine cavity. It contains fewer cilia compared to the ampulla (Figure 3.6).

FIGURE 3.6 Fallopian Tube The fallopian tubes play a large role in fertilization. (modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e.
attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Pelvic Floor Muscles
The muscles of the pelvic floor support the pelvic and abdominal organs; control urinary and bowel continence,
urination, and defecation; and assist in the expulsion of the fetus during childbirth (Figure 3.7). Pelvic floor muscles
can be damaged by pregnancy, birth, constipation, obesity, and prolonged strain or stretching. When these muscles
96  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

    are damaged, the pelvic organs are no longer supported, and urinary incontinence can occur. In persons with pelvic
    floor damage, nurses can encourage exercise of the pelvic muscles by performing Kegels (the contraction and
    release of the pelvic muscles). The nurse can also explain that there are health-care providers who specialize in
    pelvic floor physical therapy.

    FIGURE 3.7 Pelvic Floor The pelvic floor muscles support the abdominal and pelvic organs. (modification of work from Anatomy and
    Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

    Functions of the Reproductive System

    The reproductive system includes internal and external structures. The reproductive system controls sexual function
    and reproduction. The nurse performs an assessment and gets a thorough history to identify reproductive needs or
    variances in function.

    External Genitalia
    The external genitalia are involved in sexual arousal, lubrication, protection of internal structures, the passage of
    urine and menstrual flow, and childbirth. Each structure within the vulva has unique functions and contributes to
    overall reproductive health and sexual well-being.

    The mons pubis and labia majora provide cushioning and protection. The urethra allows the passage of urine, while
    the vaginal opening allows passage of menstrual flow and a fetus in childbirth. The clitoris contains a high
    concentration of nerve endings and is central to sexual arousal and orgasm. Bartholin's glands located on either side
    of the vaginal opening secrete mucus-like fluid that helps lubricate the vagina during sexual arousal.

    Internal Genitalia
    The vagina essentially connects the uterus to the external environment. The rugae lining the vagina allow it to
    stretch to accommodate various activities, such as sexual intercourse and childbirth. The vagina also produces
    natural lubrication to reduce friction during sexual intercourse. The lubrication is primarily the result of increased
    blood flow to the vaginal walls and mucus secretion from the cervix and vaginal walls. Lubrication can also vary
    depending on arousal level and hormonal changes.

    The cervix undergoes dynamic changes during different menstrual cycle phases, sexual arousal, pregnancy, and
    labor and is influenced by hormones such as estrogen, progesterone, and oxytocin. Estrogen plays a vital role in

    Access for free at openstax.org
3.3 · Health Promotion                                                                                                                    97

cervical mucus changes and softening, while progesterone maintains the cervix's integrity during pregnancy.
Oxytocin stimulates uterine contractions during labor, leading to cervical dilation.

The cervix contains numerous glands that produce mucus, which, under the influence of hormones, changes in
consistency throughout the menstrual cycle. As estrogen levels rise in the cycle, the cervix becomes softer and
opens slightly. The cervical mucus becomes abundant, slippery, and stretchy, resembling raw egg whites, to
facilitate the passage of sperm through the cervix and into the uterus during ovulation. During sexual arousal, the
cervix becomes engorged with blood, and the external os may dilate slightly, allowing easier penetration during
intercourse.

The physiology of the uterus is tightly regulated by hormones, including estrogen, progesterone, follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and oxytocin. These hormones orchestrate the cyclical changes that
prepare the uterus for pregnancy and regulate uterine contractions during labor.

The ovaries undergo cyclical changes during the menstrual cycle with the goal of oogenesis. The egg cell
development and maturation process within the reproductive system that occurs during the follicular phase of the
menstrual cycle is called oogenesis (Figure 3.8). Oogenesis is initiated by follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
released by the anterior pituitary gland. FSH prompts the development of an ovarian follicle, and as it grows, it
produces estrogen.

FIGURE 3.8 Human Oogenesis The ovarian cycle is responsible for maturing and releasing an egg for potential fertilization. (modification
of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Typically, only one follicle becomes dominant while the others regress. The dominant follicle continues to mature,
releasing increasing amounts of estrogen as it approaches ovulation. The surge in estrogen triggers the release of
luteinizing hormone (LH) from the anterior pituitary gland. This LH surge causes the dominant follicle to rupture,
releasing a mature egg from the ovary, a process known as ovulation.

The physiology of the fallopian tubes is regulated by hormonal and neural control. Hormones such as estrogen and
progesterone influence the motility and secretory activity of the tubal epithelium, while neural signals help
98  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

    coordinate muscular contractions for egg and embryo transport.

    The ampulla of the fallopian tube is the usual site of fertilization, where the sperm and egg meet. The walls of the
    ampulla are lined with ciliated epithelial cells that help propel the egg and sperm through the tube toward the body
    of the uterus. After fertilization, the newly formed embryo begins to divide and undergoes early development. Ciliary
    movements, muscular contractions, and fluid currents in the fallopian tube help transport the developing embryo
    toward the uterus for implantation.

    Stages of Sexual Development

    The stages of sexual development in persons AFAB typically follow a predictable path from puberty to reproductive
    age to menopause to postmenopause. Each individual progresses through these stages at slightly different times.
    The stages of sexual development can be influenced by multiple factors, both modifiable and non-modifiable.

    Menarche
    The onset of menstruation, marking the beginning of reproductive capacity, is menarche. It is a significant milestone
    in physiologic and psychologic development. Menarche typically occurs during adolescence, between the ages of 10
    and 16 with the average age being 12.4, although the exact timing can vary widely among people (Lacroix et al.,
    2023). Young persons AFAB may experience emotional and psychologic changes as they adapt to the physical
    changes associated with menarche.

    Hormonal changes leading to the development of secondary sexual characteristics, such as the growth of breasts
    and the widening of hips, occur prior to the first menstrual cycle. The Tanner Scale (Figure 3.9) is often used to
    assess a person's development of these characteristics.

    Access for free at openstax.org
3.3 · Health Promotion                                                                                                            99

FIGURE 3.9 The Tanner Stages in a Person Assigned Female at Birth Tanner stages can be used to identify the process of puberty a
person is experiencing. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

During menarche, hormonal changes occur in the body, primarily involving the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis.
The hypothalamus releases gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which stimulates the pituitary gland to
release follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). FSH and LH then act on the ovaries to
initiate the maturation of ovarian follicles and the release of an egg (ovulation).

The first menstrual period typically consists of relatively small amounts of blood, referred to as menarcheal
bleeding. A regular menstrual cycle may take several months or even years to establish as hormonal regulation
becomes more consistent. Menstrual cycles typically range from 21 to 45 days with the average being 32.2 days,
with menstrual bleeding lasting around 3 to 7 days (Lacroix et al., 2023). Menarche is considered a rite of passage in
many societies, and individuals may receive education and support regarding menstrual hygiene, reproductive
health, and sexual education. However, cultural norms and practices can also contribute to stigma, taboos, and
limited access to menstrual hygiene products and health-care services, negatively impacting individuals' well-being
and empowerment. Transgender men can be traumatized by menarche and may experience significant dysphoria.
100  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Transgender Men and Menstrual Cycles

     Menstruation is a rite of passage for girls, a sign of womanhood; however, for transgender men, it is an indication
     that their body is not functioning correctly. This can cause gender dysphoria, depression, anxiety, and suicidal
     ideation. These persons should be seen by health-care providers who are sensitive to these feelings and who can
     offer solutions to menstruation, such as menstrual suppression and psychologic help (Weiselberg, 2022).

     Menstrual Cycle
     The menstrual cycle is characterized by a series of hormonal and physical changes that prepare the body for the
     possibility of pregnancy. The menstrual cycle typically lasts an average of 28 to 31 days but can vary from person to
     person. The cycle is counted from the first day of menstrual bleeding to the first day of the next period. The cycle is
     controlled by the interaction between the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and ovaries, collectively known as the
     hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian (HPO) axis.

     The menstrual cycle actually encompasses two cycles, the ovarian cycle and the uterine cycle. They occur
     simultaneously. The ovarian cycle involves the changes that occur in the ovaries during the cycle, including the
     follicular phase (days 1 to 14) and luteal phase (days 15 to 28). The follicular phase begins with menstruation as day
     1. During this phase, the pituitary gland releases follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), which stimulates oogenesis.
     Ovulation occurs approximately midway through the menstrual cycle, usually around day 14, when one mature
     follicle releases an egg from the ovary, triggered by a luteinizing hormone (LH) surge from the pituitary gland. After
     ovulation, the ruptured follicle in the ovary forms the corpus luteum. This begins the luteal phase of the ovarian
     cycle. The corpus luteum produces progesterone, which prepares the uterus for implantation of a fertilized egg. If
     fertilization does not occur, the corpus luteum regresses, decreasing estrogen and progesterone levels and initiating
     menstruation.

     The uterine proliferative phase also begins at menstruation, day 1, and ends at ovulation. During the proliferative
     phase, the endometrium prepares for implantation by thickening. After ovulation, the secretory phase begins, and
     the endometrium becomes a favorable surface for implantation. If fertilization does not occur, the uterus sheds its
     endometrium, blood, and tissue. This results in menstrual bleeding, typically lasting 3 to 7 days. The average blood
     loss during menstruation is approximately 30 to 40 milliliters (mL) over a menstrual period. This information is
     summarized in Figure 3.10.

     Access for free at openstax.org
3.3 · Health Promotion                                                                                                              101

FIGURE 3.10 The Menstrual Cycle The menstrual cycle includes both the ovarian and the uterine cycles. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Various factors influence the menstrual cycle, including a person's age, overall health, stress levels, and hormonal
imbalances. The cycle can vary in length and regularity, and changes in the menstrual cycle can indicate underlying
health issues or pregnancy.

Nurses are critical in educating patients about the menstrual cycle and promoting menstrual health. Nurses can
educate about what is considered a regular menstrual cycle, including the typical duration, frequency, and amount
of menstrual flow. They also discuss what might be considered abnormal, such as irregular cycles or unusually
heavy or painful periods. Nurses can offer guidance on proper menstrual hygiene practices, including how to use and
dispose of menstrual products (such as pads, tampons, or menstrual cups) safely and hygienically. Nurses can
introduce the concept of fertility awareness, which involves tracking and understanding the menstrual cycle,
observing cervical mucus, and identifying fertile days to conceive or to prevent pregnancy.

Perimenopause and Menopause
Perimenopause and menopause are two distinct but interconnected stages of reproductive aging. The transitional
period leading up to menopause, during which a person's body undergoes hormonal fluctuations and reproductive
changes, is perimenopause. It is characterized by irregular menstrual cycles and a decline in ovarian function
leading to decreased estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone. Perimenopause usually begins 4 to 9 years prior to
menopause and affects most persons AFAB in their mid-40s (Leistikow & Smith, 2022).

During perimenopause, hormones fluctuate significantly. These hormonal shifts can lead to various symptoms,
including irregular periods, hot flashes, night sweats, mood swings, fatigue, sleep disturbances, vaginal dryness,
changes in libido, and cognitive changes. Perimenopause has been compared to the peripartum period, in which risk
102  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

     of depression and mental illness is greatly increased; health-care providers and nurses must screen for
     perimenopausal depression as they do during the postpartum period (Leistikow & Smith, 2022). In one study,
     perimenopausal people had a 9 percent to 15 percent increase in dysmorphic mood and were two to four times
     more prone to major depressive episodes than premenopausal people (Leistikow & Smith, 2022).

     The permanent cessation of ovarian function, signaling the end of reproductive capability, is menopause. It is a
     natural physiologic process that occurs due to the depletion of ovarian follicles and the subsequent decline in
     estrogen and progesterone production.

     Following menopause, people may continue to experience a range of physical and emotional changes. Common
     symptoms include hot flashes, night sweats, vaginal dryness, mood swings, sleep disturbances, urinary changes,
     changes in sexual function, and changes in bone density (Leistikow & Smith, 2022).

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Nurses can encourage patients to explore resources on hot flashes, hormone therapy, vaginal dryness, and sleep
     problems (https://openstax.org/r/77menopausehelp) from menopause.org.

     Individual experiences through perimenopause and menopause differ, with some experiencing minimal symptoms
     and others requiring medical interventions to manage symptoms and prevent or treat adverse health conditions.
     Managing perimenopause and menopause involves a multidimensional approach, including self-care practices,
     menopausal hormone therapy (MHT), nonhormonal medications, and complementary therapies. MHT can begin
     during perimenopause and is the gold standard for treatment, reducing morbidity and mortality in women. Nurses
     and health-care providers play a crucial role in assessing symptoms, addressing concerns, providing guidance, and
     tailoring treatment plans to support overall health and well-being during this transitional phase. Nurses can
     encourage patients to see a Menopause Society Certified Practitioner for specialized menopausal care.

     Sexual Response
     The sexual response is a complex physiologic and psychologic process encompassing several stages. The most
     recognized model of sexual response is the four-stage model proposed by Masters and Johnson in the 1960s. This
     model consists of four phases: excitement, plateau, orgasm, and resolution (Masters & Johnson, 1966). However, it
     is important to note that individual experiences of sexual response can vary.

     In the excitement phase, sexual desire and arousal begin in response to sexual stimuli, such as physical touch,
     erotic thoughts, or visual cues. Physiologic changes occur, including increased blood flow to the genital area, vaginal
     lubrication, and swelling of the clitoris and labia. Breathing and heart rate may increase, and nipples can become
     erect.

     During the plateau phase, a heightened state of arousal and sexual tension continues to build. The body prepares
     for a potential orgasm, with increased muscle tension and blood flow to the genital area. Vaginal lubrication
     increases further, and the clitoris becomes more sensitive.

     The peak of sexual pleasure and release of accumulated sexual tension is the orgasmic phase. Rhythmic
     contractions occur in the pelvic muscles, including the uterus, vagina, and anal sphincter. Intense pleasure and
     release of endorphins are experienced. The resolution phase refers to the return to baseline where muscles are
     relaxed and pulse, blood pressure, and respirations return to normal.

     It is essential to recognize that sexual response is a diverse and individual experience. Some individuals may
     experience variations in the stages or have different patterns of sexual response. In addition to providing
     information about the sexual response, nurses are prepared to discuss the importance of open communication,
     consent, and the person's desires and boundaries in sexual experiences. Nurses should also encourage patients to
     discuss problems with sexual response, such as difficulty in achieving orgasm. When nurses ask questions about
     difficulty with the sexual response, patients are more at ease and open to discuss sexual issues.

     Persons AFAB may experience sexual dysfunction, such as low libido (hypoactive sexual desire disorder), difficulty
     in reaching orgasm (anorgasmia), or arousal difficulties. Conditions such as dyspareunia (pain during sexual

     Access for free at openstax.org
3.3 · Health Promotion                                                                                                    103

intercourse) and vaginismus (involuntary muscle contractions that make penetration difficult or impossible) can
significantly impact a person's sexual health and relationships. Assessing the underlying causes, providing
education, and referring to appropriate specialists, such as gynecologists or sex therapists, may be necessary.

Self-Care Practices and Supportive Nursing Actions

Self-care is an essential aspect of maintaining optimal health and well-being throughout life. It involves deliberate
practices and behaviors supporting physical, mental, and emotional well-being. By prioritizing self-care, people can
promote expected growth and development and prevent or delay the onset of various diseases and health
complications. They can empower themselves with the tools to prevent diseases and maintain their overall well-
being proactively.

Nurses play an important role in self-care counseling and education, as they are often at the forefront of patient care
and frequently interact with people across various health-care settings. Nurses assess patients' self-care behaviors,
such as diet, physical activity, sleep patterns, stress levels, and substance use. This information helps identify areas
where self-care modifications may be beneficial and form the basis for personalized counseling and education.

Nutrition
Throughout the lifespan, good nutrition is crucial to health, vitality, and overall well-being. From childhood to the
later stages of life, adequate and balanced nutrition is essential for optimal growth, development, disease
prevention, and maintaining a healthy body.

As persons AFAB enter their reproductive years, nutrition plays a critical role. For those planning to conceive, proper
nutrition supports fertility and reproductive health. A well-balanced diet, including various nutrients, vitamins, and
minerals, ensures optimal hormone regulation and menstrual regularity. Reproductive persons AFAB should be
encouraged to take a folic acid supplement because of its importance in preventing neural tube defects. During
pregnancy, adequate nutrition becomes paramount to support the growing fetus. It provides the essential nutrients
needed for fetal development, reduces the risk of birth complications, and promotes the health of the pregnant
person and fetus. Proper nutrition also plays a crucial role during lactation, providing the necessary nutrients for
breast-feeding and supporting the birthing person's and infant's health.

As individuals transition into perimenopause and menopause, nutrition remains of utmost importance. The risk of
osteoporosis increases during this stage, making adequate calcium and vitamin D intake crucial for maintaining
bone health and reducing fractures. A heart-healthy diet low in saturated fats and high in fruits, vegetables, whole
grains, fiber, and healthy fats helps reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases that can become more prevalent
during this time. Adequate nutrient intake is essential for maintaining energy levels, cognitive function, and a strong
immune system. Nutrient-dense foods provide the necessary vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants to support
cellular health and combat age-related oxidative stress.

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Calcium

Calcium is an essential mineral that is vital in maintaining strong bones and teeth and supporting various bodily
functions. It is advisable to obtain calcium from a variety of food sources rather than relying solely on supplements.
Good dietary sources of calcium include dairy products (milk, yogurt, cheese), fortified plant-based milk alternatives
(soy, almond), green leafy vegetables (broccoli, kale, spinach), canned fish with bones (such as salmon or sardines),
tofu, and calcium-fortified foods (cereals, bread, orange juice).

    · Generic Name: calcium carbonate, calcium gluconate, calcium citrate, calcium acetate
    · Trade Name: TUMS, Eliphos, PhosLo
    · Class/Action: mineral, antacid
    · Route/Dosage: oral

The recommended daily calcium intake varies based on age, sex, and life stage. The following are general guidelines
for calcium intake:
104  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

             Adolescents (9 to 18 years): 1,300 mg per day
             Adults (19 to 50 years): 1,000 mg per day
             Persons AFAB (51 to 70 years): 1,200 mg per day
             Older adults (71 years and older): 1,200 mg per day

     It is important to note that during pregnancy and breast-feeding, calcium requirements increase to support the
     growing fetus's development. The recommended daily intake for pregnant and breast-feeding people is
     1,000-1,300 mg per day, depending on age.

         · High Alert/Black Box Warning: none
         · Indications: dyspepsia, osteoporosis prevention, hypocalcemia
         · Mechanism of Action: neutralizes esophageal or gastric acidity; essential component in physiologic systems

             and reactions
         · Contraindications: hypersensitivity to calcium, hypercalcemia, dehydration, renal impairment,

             gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, hyperparathyroidism
         · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: hypercalcemia, nephrolithiasis, milk-alkali syndrome, constipation, nausea,

             hypomagnesemia
         · Nursing Implications: Encourage dose for age and stage of reproductive life.
         · Parent/Family Education: The nurse will provide education to avoid foods high in iron when taking calcium;

             avoid taking calcium when taking a multivitamin; coffee and cigarettes should be avoided, as they impede
             absorption; take calcium in the morning 1 hour after breakfast with plenty of water.

     (Mayo Clinic, 2022)

     The most recent dietary guidelines available are the Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2020-2025, published jointly
     by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) (2020).
     These guidelines provide evidence-based recommendations for healthy eating patterns to promote overall health
     and prevent chronic diseases.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     The full Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2020-2025 (https://openstax.org/r/77dietaryguides) provide detailed
     recommendations and specific guidance for different age groups, including children, adolescents, adults, and older
     adults.

     In addition to educating patients about good nutrition habits, it is important to understand common unhealthy
     nutrition practices. Unhealthy nutrition practices refer to behaviors and dietary habits that negatively affect a
     person's health and well-being. Unhealthy nutrition practices can have both immediate and long-term
     consequences for health. They can contribute to obesity, diabetes, heart disease, hypertension, certain cancers, and
     other chronic health conditions. Additionally, poor nutrition can lead to fatigue, weakened immune function, and
     impaired cognitive abilities.

     Disordered Eating
     The term disordered eating is commonly used to describe maladaptive nutritional practices that are not severe
     enough to meet the diagnostic criteria for a specific eating disorder but still involve problematic attitudes and
     behaviors toward food and eating. Disordered eating can encompass a range of unhealthy eating patterns, including
     restrictive eating, binge eating, compulsive overeating, emotional overeating, yo-yo dieting, and chronic dieting.

     Overeating and Obesity
     Obesity in persons AFAB is a significant public health concern with far-reaching consequences for physical and
     mental well-being. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2019) defines an adult as obese if they have a
     body mass index (BMI) of 30 or higher (Table 3.11). BMI can be a helpful tool but does not consider body
     composition and is not always an accurate determination of overweight or obesity.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                            3.3 · Health Promotion                                                                          105

BMI         Weight Status

Below 18.5  Underweight

18.5-24.9   Healthy weight

25.0-29.9   Overweight

                                                       30.0 and above Obese

                                                                TABLE 3.11 BMI Interpretation for Weight
                                                                Status (CDC, 2023a)

Obesity is a major risk factor for chronic conditions such as cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, hypertension,
dyslipidemia, certain types of cancer (including breast and uterine), and respiratory disorders. These conditions can
profoundly affect the health and quality of life of persons and their offspring. Several factors contribute to obesity,
including genetics, hormonal factors, sedentary lifestyle, unhealthy dietary habits, socioeconomic status, and
psychosocial factors (CDC, 2022b). Nurses should be able to approach obesity from a holistic perspective, focusing
on a comprehensive approach to prevention and management.

Obesity can have significant impacts on reproductive health. It increases the risk of infertility, polycystic ovary
syndrome (PCOS), irregular menstrual cycles, and complications during pregnancy, including gestational diabetes,
preeclampsia, and cesarean delivery (Silvestris et al., 2018). Obesity can also affect fetal health and increase the
risk of birth defects. Nurses play a role in educating the patient on the potential consequences of obesity as well as
measures to prevent obesity or to return to a healthy weight.

Obesity can limit physical mobility and decrease overall quality of life due to reduced fitness levels, decreased
energy, joint pain, and limitations in activities of daily living. Obesity also places a significant burden on health-care
systems because of the increased risk of chronic diseases and related health-care utilization. This burden includes
costs associated with medical visits, hospitalizations, medications, and management of comorbid conditions.

Eating Disorders
An eating disorder, unlike disordered eating, is a serious mental health condition characterized by abnormal eating
patterns, attitudes, and behaviors toward food and weight. Eating disorders often involve a preoccupation with food,
weight, body shape, and a distorted perception of one's body image. They can have severe physical, psychologic,
and social consequences. There are several types of eating disorders, including:

  1. Anorexia nervosa: Anorexia is characterized by extreme restriction of food intake, an intense fear of gaining
        weight or becoming fat, and a distorted body image. Persons with anorexia may have significantly low body
        weight and engage in behaviors to control their weight, such as excessive exercise, strict dieting, or purging.

  2. Bulimia nervosa: Bulimia involves recurrent episodes of binge eating, followed by compensatory behaviors to
        prevent weight gain, such as self-induced vomiting, excessive exercise, or the misuse of laxatives or diuretics.
        People with bulimia may have normal body weight or fluctuating weight.

  3. Binge eating disorder (BED): BED is characterized by recurrent episodes of uncontrollable binge eating, often
        accompanied by feelings of guilt, shame, and distress. Unlike those with bulimia, persons with BED do not
        engage in compensatory behaviors to counteract the binge episodes, which can lead to weight gain and
        obesity.

  4. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID): ARFID is characterized by the avoidance or restriction of
        food due to sensory sensitivity, fear of negative consequences (e.g., choking), or an apparent lack of interest in
        eating. This disorder can lead to significant nutritional deficiencies and impaired growth and development.

  5. Other specified feeding or eating disorders (OSFED): OSFED, previously known as Eating Disorder Not
        Otherwise Specified (EDNOS), encompasses a range of eating disorders that do not meet the full diagnostic
        criteria for anorexia, bulimia, or BED. These disorders include atypical anorexia, purging disorder, and night
        eating syndrome.

(Mayo Clinic, 2023)
106  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

     Eating disorders require professional diagnosis and treatment, often involving a multidisciplinary approach that
     includes medical, nutritional, and psychologic interventions. Nurses should be prepared to screen for and recognize
     eating disorders. In addition, the nurse provides intervention and support, which are crucial for persons struggling
     with eating disorders.

     Exercise
     A sedentary lifestyle, characterized by little to no physical activity and prolonged periods of sitting or lying down, can
     have numerous negative consequences on physical and mental health. Consequences of a sedentary lifestyle
     include obesity and weight gain, increased risk of heart disease, reduced bone density, insulin resistance, increased
     risk of some cancers, and reduced overall well-being. Physical activity plays a crucial role in promoting overall well-
     being especially for persons AFAB. Regular aerobic exercise, such as brisk walking, jogging, cycling, or swimming,
     helps strengthen the heart and improve cardiovascular health (Figure 3.11).

     FIGURE 3.11 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans The Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans provide evidence-based
     guidance to help Americans maintain or improve their health through physical activity. (credit: modification of "Physical Activity
     Recommendations for Different Age Groups" by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity, and
     Obesity/ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Public Domain)

     Physical activity supports weight management and helps prevent weight gain. Regular exercise, combined with a
     balanced diet, assists in maintaining healthy body weight and reducing the risk of obesity. Weight-bearing exercises
     like walking, jogging, dancing, or weightlifting also help build and maintain bone density, reducing the risk of
     osteoporosis and fractures.

     Exercise improves mental health and well-being by stimulating the release of endorphins, neurotransmitters that
     promote positive mood and reduce stress and anxiety. Exercise can positively impact hormonal balance to regulate
     menstrual cycles, reduce premenstrual syndrome (PMS) symptoms, and improve symptoms associated with
     menopause (Basile, 2020). Nurses are well trained to provide education, encouragement, and support of physical
     activity for all ages.

     Access for free at openstax.org
3.3 · Health Promotion                                                                                                  107

Sleep and Rest
Rest is of utmost importance for overall health and well-being. It is an essential physiologic and psychologic process
that allows the body and mind to recover, rejuvenate, and perform optimally. Establishing healthy sleep patterns is
important for overall well-being and especially important during hormonal changes, pregnancy, menopause, and
certain health conditions.

Hormonal fluctuations during pregnancy, perimenopause, and menopause can disrupt sleep. Pregnant people often
experience sleep disruptions due to physical discomfort, frequent urination, hormonal changes, and fetal
movement. As pregnancy progresses, finding a comfortable sleep position can become challenging. Sleep
disturbances increase as people age, and 50 percent of persons over age 65 have issues with sleep (Haufe &
Leeners, 2023). Perimenopause and menopause can cause hot flashes and night sweats, leading to night
awakenings and difficulty in falling back to asleep. Hormonal changes can also contribute to insomnia, mood
changes, and sleep-disordered breathing.

Certain sleep disorders are more prevalent in persons AFAB, for example, insomnia, restless legs syndrome (RLS),
and sleep apnea. Chronic diseases such as diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disease, and depression can be caused
or exacerbated by insufficient sleep (CDC, 2022b). Persons AFAB often juggle multiple roles and responsibilities,
contributing to sleep disturbances. Stress, caregiving duties, work-life balance challenges, and demands of family
life can affect sleep patterns.

Nurses are well trained to evaluate sleeping patterns and to intervene with sleep hygiene counseling. The following
is a key point to recommend for good sleep hygiene:

Establish a consistent sleep schedule by going to bed and waking up at the same time every day, including
weekends. An established sleep cycle helps regulate the body's internal clock and improves sleep quality.

Sexuality
Sexuality is a fundamental aspect of a person's overall well-being, and it is essential that providers of health care
address the various issues that can arise. Due to time constraints and discomfort, discussions about sexual health
are often neglected, and health-care providers may shy away from initiating conversations about sexual concerns,
leaving patients to struggle in silence. Nurses must create a safe, nonjudgmental environment that encourages open
dialogue about sexual health.

Many people AFAB receive inadequate or limited sexual education, leaving them uninformed about contraception,
STIs, consent, and sexual pleasure. This knowledge gap can lead to misinformation, fear, and risky sexual behaviors.
Providers of health care and nurses play a key role in discussing contraception options, including hormonal methods
(e.g., oral contraceptives, contraceptive injections, patches, implant), intrauterine devices (IUDs), barrier methods
(e.g., condoms), and fertility awareness-based methods. Counseling should involve a discussion of effectiveness,
side effects, potential interactions with other medications, and considerations based on individual needs and
preferences.

Health-care providers can address issues related to menstruation, such as irregular periods, heavy bleeding
(menorrhagia), painful periods (dysmenorrhea), or premenstrual syndrome (PMS). Assessing and managing these
concerns can improve a person's quality of life and overall sexual well-being.

Providing a safe and inclusive environment for LGBTQIA+ persons is essential. Health-care providers should know
the unique health-care needs of lesbian, bisexual, and transgender persons and offer nonjudgmental support,
appropriate screenings, and referrals as needed. A more detailed discussion of this topic is found in Chapter 2
Culturally Competent Nursing Care.

Immunizations
Immunizations are essential tools in public health that play a crucial role in preventing and controlling infectious
diseases. Immunizations have significantly impacted global health and saved millions of lives. The timing of
immunizations throughout the lifespan varies depending on the person's age, health status, and specific risk factors.
The CDC publishes a recommended immunization schedule (https://openstax.org/r/77immunization) on their
website.

The CDC (2023h) recommends that all adults receive the COVID-19 and influenza vaccine yearly. They
108  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

     recommended that adults ensure they are up to date on the Tdap or Td vaccines as well. Table 3.12 presents
     recommendations for adult vaccines.

     Age      Recommended vaccine
     (years)

     19-26    Chickenpox, COVID-19, influenza, hepatitis B, HPV, measles-mumps-rubella (MMR), and tetanus-
              diphtheria-whooping cough (Tdap), meningococcal

     27-49 COVID-19, influenza, hepatitis B, MMR, Tdap, chickenpox, HPV

     50-64 COVID-19, influenza, shingles, Tdap, hepatitis B, MMR, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)

     65 and   COVID-19, influenza, pneumococcal, shingles, Tdap, RSV
     older

     TABLE 3.12 CDC Recommendations for Vaccinations (CDC, 2023h)

     The CDC also recommends immunizations for patients with certain health conditions, such as diabetes,
     cardiovascular disease, HIV, lung disease, renal disease, and weakened immune systems (2023h).

     General Hygiene
     General hygiene is an important aspect of education when caring for persons AFAB. Good hygiene practices can help
     prevent infections, maintain overall health, and promote well-being.

     1. Encourage people to maintain good personal hygiene habits, including regular bathing or showering, washing
          hands thoroughly with soap and water, and brushing their teeth at least twice daily. Emphasize the importance
          of proper hand hygiene to prevent spreading infections, especially before meals and after using the restroom.

     2. Provide education on proper menstrual hygiene practices. Menstrual hygiene includes using clean and
          appropriate menstrual hygiene products (such as sanitary pads, tampons, or menstrual cups) and changing
          them regularly to prevent bacterial growth and reduce the risk of infections. Encourage persons to maintain
          cleanliness during menstruation and properly dispose of used menstrual products.

     3. Educate persons AFAB on maintaining good vulvar hygiene. Emphasize the importance of gentle cleaning with
          warm water and mild, fragrance-free cleansers. Avoid harsh soaps or douches, as they can disrupt the natural
          balance of vaginal flora and increase the risk of infections. Encourage wearing clean cotton underwear and
          changing them regularly and as soon as possible after exercising.

     4. Encourage the use of sunscreen to protect against harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays.
     5. Discuss the importance of proper wound care and cleanliness to prevent infections.
     6. Discuss hygiene practices related to sexual activity, such as washing before and after intercourse, using

          condoms or other barrier methods to prevent STIs, and properly cleaning sex toys to avoid bacterial growth.
          Voiding after sexual intercourse is commonly recommended to reduce the risk of urinary tract infections
          (UTIs) in persons AFAB. While empirical evidence specific to this practice is limited, several mechanisms and
          observations support its potential effectiveness.

     Nurses should ask about the patient's access to showers, soap, and hygiene products prior to teaching about
     hygiene. Some patients may lack running water, soap, or money. Nurses can help patients find resources for hygiene.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Mikveh Bath

     The Jewish faith requires a mikveh (a ritual bath) during the process of conversion to Judaism, before getting
     married, and niddah (menstrual purity after the menstrual period or childbirth). The mikveh is a Jewish rite of
     purification that must be performed after menstruation and childbirth in order to be made pure before sexual
     activity can resume. Prior to going into the mikveh, Jewish law states that a person must thoroughly cleanse their

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 3.3 · Health Promotion                                                  109

body, usually by taking a shower, brushing teeth, and clipping nails. A blessing is recited either before or during the
immersion (Wenger, 2021).

Self-Esteem and Empowerment
The subjective evaluation of one's worth and capabilities is one's self-esteem. It is the degree to which a person
believes in their value, abilities, and self-worth. Various factors, including personal achievements, social
interactions, upbringing, and external validation, can influence self-esteem. There are key aspects of self-esteem
that are important to recognize (Table 3.13).

Key Element                             Meaning

Self-worth                Feeling worthy of respect and love, irrespective of achievements or failures

Self-confidence Having faith in one's abilities and feeling capable of handling life's challenges

Self-acceptance Embracing oneself, including strengths and weaknesses, without harsh self-judgment

Self-respect              Treating oneself with kindness and not tolerating self-destructive behaviors

TABLE 3.13 Key Elements of Self-Esteem

Having a healthy level of self-esteem is essential for several aspects of life. Self-esteem contributes to lower levels
of anxiety, depression, and stress. Healthy self-esteem enables more positive and fulfilling relationships with others.
Those with higher self-esteem are more likely to set and pursue ambitious goals. Healthy self-esteem fosters the
ability to bounce back from setbacks and learn from failures.

Having a healthy level of empowerment is essential for several aspects of life, and as with self-esteem, there are key
elements of empowerment (Table 3.14). Empowerment fosters personal development and self-awareness.
Empowered people can be catalysts for positive social change and collective empowerment. In addition,
empowering communities can lead to greater resilience and problem-solving abilities.

Key Element               Meaning

Knowledge and             Access to education and information empowers individuals to make informed
Information               choices.

Autonomy and Agency       Feeling in control of one's life and having the power to make decisions.

Advocacy and Support      Encouraging and supporting individuals to stand up for their rights and interests.

Equality and Inclusivity  Empowerment promotes equal opportunities for all, regardless of gender, race, or
                          background.

TABLE 3.14 Key Elements of Empowerment

People with low self-esteem have negative self-perceptions and may feel unworthy or inadequate. Having low self-
esteem can lead to behaviors that are problematic, such as violence, and progress to mental health issues (Auttama
et al., 2021). Those with low self-esteem can experience depression, stress, and anxiety that can eventually lead to
suicide (Auttama et al., 2021). They are more likely to become targets for bullies, as bullies often prey on those they
perceive as vulnerable. Nurses need to be vigilant in recognizing signs of bullying, such as unexplained injuries,
changes in behavior, or emotional distress. Nurses can make sure that health-care settings are safe and non-
threatening by providing a private space for the patient to talk and ensuring confidentiality.

Nurses can help teach self-care and positive mental health behaviors that can lead to increased self-esteem.
Research has shown that self-care behaviors for mental health allow patients to deal with stress and anxiety,
making them more resilient in dealing with life's difficulties (Auttama et al., 2021). Empowered individuals can make
110  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

     positive changes. Promoting empowerment includes teaching assertiveness, building resilience, and encouraging a
     supportive network of friends and family.

     Mental Health Hygiene
     Addressing mental health hygiene when providing health care is crucial for promoting overall well-being. It is
     essential to approach mental health hygiene holistically and individually, considering each person's unique
     circumstances, cultural background, and specific mental health needs.

     Nurses can provide education about mental health and common mental health conditions such as anxiety,
     depression, and stress. Raising awareness reduces stigma and encourages people to seek support when needed.
     Encourage them to prioritize self-care activities that promote mental well-being. Self-care practices include
     engaging in regular physical exercise, practicing relaxation techniques (such as deep breathing, meditation, or
     mindfulness), maintaining a balanced diet, getting adequate sleep, and pursuing activities that bring joy and
     fulfillment.

     Substance Use
     Substance misuse in persons AFAB is a significant public health concern with unique considerations and
     consequences. The problematic use of alcohol or drugs that leads to adverse physical, psychologic, social, and
     functional outcomes is considered substance misuse. Substance misuse rates in persons AFAB have steadily risen
     in recent years, with an increasing number of persons engaging in harmful alcohol and drug use. While persons
     AMAB historically had higher rates of substance misuse, the gender gap has been narrowing (Fonseca et al., 2021).

     Persons AFAB experience the effects of substances differently due to brain structure, metabolism, and endocrine
     function (McHugh et al., 2019). Factors such as body size, composition, metabolism, and the menstrual cycle can
     influence how substances are processed and their impact on the body. Persons AFAB may face unique risk factors
     for substance misuse, including a history of trauma (such as physical or sexual abuse), co-occurring mental health
     disorders (like depression or anxiety), and social or cultural influences contributing to substance use. They may use
     substances to cope with stress, trauma, or mental health issues. Societal and cultural factors, including gender roles
     and expectations, can influence substance use patterns in people.

     Substance misuse can have specific health effects on persons AFAB. Persons AFAB metabolize alcohol differently
     than persons AMAB leading to higher blood alcohol levels in those AFAB (McHugh et al., 2019). Persons AFAB also
     have more side effects of chronic substance use as seen by changes in brain volume (McHugh et al., 2019). These
     patients also have higher impairment in functioning such as medical, social, family, employment, and psychiatric
     functions compared to those AMAB (McHugh et al., 2019). Substance misuse during pregnancy can lead to adverse
     outcomes for the pregnant person and fetus.

     Persons AFAB may also face unique barriers to seeking help for substance misuse, such as stigma, concerns about
     child custody, fear of judgment, or limited access to gender-specific treatment programs and resources. In addition,
     substance misuse often co-occurs with mental health disorders. Depression, anxiety, and posttraumatic stress
     disorder (PTSD) can contribute to developing or exacerbating substance misuse issues (McHugh et al., 2019).

     Addressing substance misuse in persons AFAB requires a comprehensive and gender-responsive approach. Nurses
     play a vital role in screening, prevention, early intervention, and referral to specialized treatment services. It is
     essential to provide tailored and culturally sensitive care that addresses the unique needs and experiences of those
     struggling with substance misuse.

             REAL RN STORIES

     Nurse: Alexis, RN
     Years in practice: 5+
     Clinical setting: rehabilitation facility
     Geographic location: Dallas, Texas

     I really love working with patients in rehab. I am able to provide education, empathy, and kindness to my patients. I
     am able to spend time with them and get to know them because they usually stay for 30 days. Depressed patients

     Access for free at openstax.org
3.4 · Well-Person Care                                                                                                   111

are sometimes hard to get to know, but when they let me in, it is really special. I would not want to work in any other
area besides psych.

Injury Prevention
Nurses play a vital role in injury prevention across various health-care settings. They are uniquely positioned to
identify risk factors, educate patients and communities, and implement interventions to reduce the incidence of
injuries. Nurses assess patients for individual risk factors that may increase their vulnerability to injuries.
Assessment includes evaluating age, mobility, cognitive status, and underlying health conditions. Falls are a
common cause of injury, especially among older adults. Nurses implement fall prevention strategies, such as
conducting fall risk assessments, ensuring a safe environment, and assisting patients with mobility when needed.

Occupational health nurses promote workplace safety by conducting safety training, advocating for safe working
conditions, and supporting injury prevention initiatives. Furthermore, nurses monitor and report data on injuries and
accidents, contributing to injury surveillance systems that help identify trends and prioritize prevention efforts.

Nurses often engage in community outreach programs to raise awareness about injury prevention and collaborate
with local organizations to implement safety initiatives. Nurses are trained to recognize signs of domestic violence
and abuse. They can intervene by providing support, resources, and referrals to help break the cycle of violence.

By focusing on injury prevention, nurses can significantly reduce the burden of injuries on individuals, families, and
communities. Their expertise and advocacy contribute to creating safer environments and promoting overall well-
being for patients and the general population.

3.4 Well-Person Care

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Identify the information needed for a comprehensive health history for persons AFAB
    · Discuss the components of a wellness exam for persons AFAB
    · Perform nursing actions to promote well care in specific populations of persons assigned female at birth

A wellness exam, also known as a preventive care visit or annual gynecologic exam, is essential to a person's health.
It involves comprehensively assessing a person's overall health and reproductive system. The wellness exam is an
excellent opportunity to engage in preventive health care, identify health issues early, and receive guidance on
maintaining optimal health throughout life. It is important to tailor the exam to each person's needs and to provide a
supportive and comfortable environment for discussing sensitive topics. This section will review a reproductive
wellness exam and address special populations. Trauma-informed care will also be discussed.

History and Physical Wellness Examination of Persons Assigned Female at Birth

A wellness exam for persons AFAB allows for health promotion and disease prevention. The exam, sometimes
called an annual exam or gynecologic exam, is performed by a health-care provider specialized in care of the person
AFAB or by a primary care provider. The components of the exam are dependent upon the person's age, sexual
activity, and medical history. The wellness exam is a time for open communication between the health-care
provider, nurse, and patient. It is an excellent opportunity for nurses to educate patients and encourage a healthy
lifestyle.

Health History
A comprehensive health history is a critical component of a wellness exam. It helps health-care providers gain
insights into the patient's overall health, identify risk factors, and tailor health-care recommendations. The
components of a health history for a wellness exam are described in Table 3.15.
112  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

     Component                        Specifics
     Personal information                 · name, age, date of birth, and contact information

     Chief complaint/Reason           · the specific reason for the person's visit, such as a routine checkup, a specific
     for visit                           concern, or follow-up on a previous health issue

     Medical history                  · past and current medical conditions, including chronic diseases, allergies,
                                         surgeries, and hospitalizations

                                      · history of any major illnesses or medical events in the family

     Gynecologic history              · menstrual history, including age of menarche, regularity of menstrual cycles,
                                         and any menstrual irregularities

                                      · history of pregnancies, deliveries, miscarriages, or abortions
                                      · Menopausal status and any related symptoms.

     Reproductive health              · sexual history, including sexual activity, use of contraception, and any history
                                         of sexually transmitted infections (STIs)

                                      · sexual orientation
                                      · plans for family planning, including desires for pregnancy or contraceptive

                                         needs

     Medications and                  · a list of all current medications, including prescription drugs, over-the-
     supplements                         counter medications, and dietary supplements

     Allergies                        · any known allergies to medications, foods, or environmental factors

     Immunization history             · record of vaccinations, including human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine and
                                         other routine immunizations

     Social history                   · self-care practices, such as diet, exercise habits, tobacco use, alcohol
                                         consumption, and recreational drug use

                                      · employment and living situation
                                      · support system and relationships

     Psychosocial history             · information on stressors, mental health concerns, and coping mechanisms
                                      · history of any traumatic experiences or significant life events

     Review of systems                · comprehensive assessment of various body systems to identify any potential
                                         health concerns

                                      · depression and anxiety screening

     TABLE 3.15 Components of a Health History for a Wellness Exam

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                           3.4 · Well-Person Care                                                   113

Component                Specifics

Preventive health            · history of previous preventive screenings, such as Pap smears,
measures                         mammograms, and other cancer screenings

                             · information on other preventive measures, such as blood pressure checks,
                                 cholesterol testing, and vaccinations

Occupational and         · any potential exposure to hazardous substances or environments in the
environmental exposures     workplace or home

Special considerations   · consideration of specific health needs or concerns based on the person's age,
                            cultural background, or specific health conditions

                         · financial concerns related to health care, housing, food, transportation
                         · health literacy

Safety considerations    · personal safety-bullying, intimate partner violence, trafficking, sexual abuse,
                            mental abuse

                         · use of smoke detectors in the home
                         · wearing the seat belt when driving
                         · firearm safety in the home

TABLE 3.15 Components of a Health History for a Wellness Exam

The health history provides a foundation for a well-person exam, helping the health-care provider to tailor the
examination, screening tests, and counseling to the individual's health needs and concerns. It is essential for
fostering a patient-provider partnership and ensuring a comprehensive approach to care.

Sexual History
The sexual history is an important part of a comprehensive health assessment, especially during discussions about
sexual health, reproductive health, and the risk of sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Nurses should approach
this topic sensitively, ensuring a nonjudgmental and confidential environment. The sexual history may include the
components outlined in Table 3.16.

Components Specifics

Sexual       Openly asking about a person's sexual orientation and gender identity helps create a supportive
orientation  and inclusive environment.
and gender
identity

Current      Inquire about the individual's current sexual activity, including vaginal, anal, and oral sex.
sexual
activity

Number of    Asking about the number of sexual partners helps assess the risk of STI transmission.
sexual
partners

Type of      Inquiring about the gender of sexual partners helps the nurse to understand the individual's risk
sexual       of specific STIs and pregnancy.
partners

TABLE 3.16 Components of a Sexual History
114  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

     Components Specifics

     Contraceptive   Discussing the use of contraception, including condoms, birth control pills, intrauterine devices
     or              (IUDs), or other methods, will help in assessing the risk of unintended pregnancies. Discuss the
     menopausal      use of menopausal hormone therapy to determine the improvement in perimenopausal or
     hormone use     menopausal symptoms.

     History of      Inquire about past or current STIs to assess the individual's risk and need for testing and
     STIs            partner notification.

     History of      Ask about previous HIV testing and the frequency of testing.
     HIV testing

     Use of barrier  Discuss the use of condoms or dental dams to prevent STI transmission.
     methods

     Exposure to     Discuss risky behaviors, such as unprotected sex, sharing needles, or sex under the influence of
     risky sexual    drugs or alcohol.
     behaviors

     History of      Inquire about any history of sexual assault or abuse to provide appropriate support and care.
     sexual
     assault or
     abuse

     Sexual          Ask about sexual satisfaction, concerns, or any issues affecting sexual health.
     satisfaction
     and concerns

     Reproductive    Inquire about plans for family planning, including desires for pregnancy or contraceptive needs.
     plans

     Education       Provide education on sexual health, STI prevention, and contraceptive options.
     and
     counseling

     Practicing      Encourage the practice of safer sex and discuss strategies to reduce the risk of STIs and
     safer sex       unintended pregnancies.

     Offering STI    Based on the individual's sexual history and risk factors, offer STI testing and vaccination, such
     testing and     as HPV vaccination.
     vaccination

     TABLE 3.16 Components of a Sexual History

     Just as the health-care provider uses the results of the health history to help focus the general health screenings,
     they will use the sexual history to determine the possibility of sexual health risks. Table 3.17 shows how
     components of the patient's sexual history suggest the possible need for screening or other tests.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               3.4 · Well-Person Care                 115

   History                                             Potential Health Risks
Component

Unprotected      Risk: Unprotected vaginal or anal intercourse without using condoms or other barrier methods
penetrative sex  can lead to the transmission of STIs, including HIV, chlamydia, gonorrhea, syphilis, and
                 herpes.
                 Prevention: Using condoms or dental dams can significantly reduce the risk of STI
                 transmission.

Multiple sexual  Risk: Having multiple sexual partners increases the likelihood of exposure to different STIs,
partners         and it can also complicate partner notification and treatment in case of infection.
                 Prevention: Practicing mutual monogamy or using condoms with each sexual encounter can
                 reduce the risk.

Oral sex         Risk: Engaging in oral sex without using barriers (e.g., condoms or dental dams) can lead to
                 the transmission of STIs, such as herpes, gonorrhea, syphilis, and HPV.
                 Prevention: Using condoms or dental dams during oral sex can reduce the risk of STI
                 transmission.

Anal sex         Risk: Unprotected anal intercourse can result in the transmission of STIs, including HIV,
                 gonorrhea, chlamydia, and hepatitis.
                 Prevention: Using condoms with plenty of water-based lubricants can reduce the risk of STI
                 transmission during anal sex.

Sharing sex      Risk: Sharing sex toys without proper cleaning or using condoms on them can lead to the
toys             transmission of STIs.
                 Prevention: Cleaning sex toys thoroughly between uses or using condoms on sex toys can
                 reduce the risk.

Substance use    Risk: Substance use, particularly alcohol and drugs, can impair judgment and increase the
during sex       likelihood of engaging in risky sexual behaviors, leading to unprotected sex and higher STI
                 transmission risk.
                 Prevention: Practicing safe sex and avoiding substance use during sexual encounters can
                 minimize risks.

Consent and      Risk: Engaging in sexual activities without clear and enthusiastic consent from all parties
communication    involved can lead to emotional and psychologic harm.
                 Prevention: Open and honest communication about boundaries, desires, and consent is
                 crucial for healthy sexual experiences.

TABLE 3.17 Linking the Sexual History to Risk Factors

Physical Examination
The annual physical examination is essential to preventive health care and involves a comprehensive assessment of
overall health and well-being. The specific components of the annual physical exam may vary based on the person's
age, medical history, and risk factors. The exam allows health-care providers to identify health issues early, offer
counseling, and promote overall wellness.

Trauma-Informed Physical Exam
A trauma-informed examination is a compassionate and sensitive approach to providing health care for those who
may have experienced trauma. It acknowledges the potential impact of trauma on a person's physical and
emotional health and aims to create a safe and supportive environment for the patient during the examination
(Gorfinkel et al., 2021). The fundamental principles and considerations for conducting a trauma-informed
gynecologic examination are listed in Table 3.18.
116  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

     Components     Explanation of the Components
     of Trauma-
     Informed Care

     Establishing   Prioritize creating a safe and comfortable environment for the patient. Begin the examination
     safety and     by explaining the process and obtaining informed consent. Ensure the patient knows they can
     trust          stop or pause the exam anytime if they feel uncomfortable or triggered.

     Respecting     Recognize that trauma survivors may have varying levels of comfort with medical procedures
     autonomy and   and intimate examinations. Always ask for permission before proceeding with any part of the
     empowerment    examination and offer options for the patient to feel more in control of the process.

     Trauma-        Use trauma-sensitive language and avoid using medical jargon that might be intimidating or
     sensitive      confusing to the patient. Communicate clearly and compassionately, and actively listen to the
     language and   patient's concerns and preferences.
     communication

     Providing      Give the patient clear explanations of each step of the examination. Let them know what to
     information    expect and why each procedure is important for their health. Providing information and
     and            explanation helps reduce anxiety and empowers patients to participate in their health care
     explanation    actively.

     Avoiding       Be mindful of potential triggers during the examination. Trauma survivors may have specific
     triggering     triggers related to touch, invasive procedures, or certain body positions. Respect their
     situations     boundaries and be flexible in modifying the examination to avoid retraumatization.

     Recognizing    Be attentive to nonverbal cues and signs of distress during the examination. If the patient
     signs of       appears uncomfortable or anxious, check in with them and offer support or a break if needed.
     distress

     Offering       Be prepared to provide information about trauma support resources, counseling services, or
     support and    support groups if the patient expresses a need for additional help in dealing with trauma-
     resources      related issues.

     Cultural       Be aware of cultural factors that may influence the patient's response to the examination.
     sensitivity    Cultural beliefs and practices may impact their comfort level and understanding of health-care
                    procedures.

     Collaborative  Involve the patient in decision making about their health care, including screening tests,
     decision       treatment options, and follow-up care. Collaborative decision making empowers patients to
     making         make choices aligned with their values and preferences.

     TABLE 3.18 Components of Conducting a Trauma-Informed Gynecologic Examination

     A trauma-informed gynecologic examination recognizes the importance of sensitivity and empathy in providing
     health care to people who have experienced trauma. By incorporating these principles into the examination, health-
     care providers can create a supportive and respectful environment that promotes the well-being of trauma survivors
     and enhances the overall patient experience (Gorfinkel et al., 2021).

     Pelvic Exam
     The gynecologic exam is a crucial part of preventive health care for persons AFAB and is performed to evaluate
     gynecologic health, identify any abnormalities or conditions, and assess for signs of potential reproductive issues. A
     gynecologic or pelvic exam (Table 3.19) is a comprehensive assessment of a person's reproductive and pelvic
     health. A chaperone, such as a nurse or medical assistant, will be in the room during this part of the exam to help

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   3.4 · Well-Person Care                           117

the patient feel comfortable and nonthreatened.

Components Examination

External         The provider visually inspects the external genitalia for any changes in appearance, such as
examination      rashes, lumps, or lesions.

Speculum         The provider inserts a speculum into the vagina to visualize the cervix and the walls of the
examination      vagina. This allows them to check for any abnormalities, such as inflammation, infections, or
                 cervical abnormalities.
                 During the speculum examination, the provider may collect cells from the cervix using a small
                 brush or spatula. These cells are then sent to a laboratory for analysis to screen for cervical
                 cancer or detect precancerous changes, and the presence of high-risk HPV.

Bimanual         The provider inserts one or two gloved fingers into the vagina while gently pressing on the lower
examination      abdomen with the other hand. This bimanual examination allows them to assess the uterus and
                 the ovaries' size, shape, and position. They also check for any tenderness or masses. The
                 provider assesses the pelvic floor muscles by asking the patient to squeeze the muscles around
                 the inserted fingers.

Rectovaginal     Sometimes, the provider may perform a rectovaginal examination by inserting one gloved finger
examination      into the vagina and another into the rectum. This examination allows them to assess the back of
(optional)       the uterus and check for any abnormalities in the rectovaginal septum.

TABLE 3.19 The Pelvic Examination

Physiologic Changes in the Reproductive Stages

As a person AFAB ages, many changes occur to their body. A person AFAB will begin to see changes to their body
during puberty. Their body also changes during pregnancy and postpartum. As a person progresses through
menopause, even more changes occur. Nurses can educate their patients on what to expect during these different
life stages.

Puberty and Menarche
Puberty is defined as "the process of physical maturation where an adolescent reaches sexual maturity and
becomes capable of reproduction" (Breehl & Caban, 2023, p. 1). Puberty is associated with breast growth,
development of pubic hair, menarche, and increase in height. The growth of breasts is called thelarche. The growth
of pubic hair is called pubarche. The first menstrual period is menarche. Table 3.20 describes the development of
the person AFAB during puberty.

Development        Description of Development

Thelarche (breast  Breast growth is the first sign of puberty; occurs at approximately age 9 to 10.
growth)

Pubarche (pubic    The growth of pubic hair occurs approximately 6 months after the start of thelarche;
hair growth)       begins with light, straight hair, then grows into coarse, dark hair.

Menarche (first    Menarche usually occurs 1-3 years after thelarche; average age is 12.8 years.
menstrual period)  First ovulation is normally 6-9 months after the first period.

Ovarian growth     Ovaries increase in size from 0.5 cm to 4.0 cm

TABLE 3.20 Development of Persons AFAB (Breehl & Caban, 2023)
118  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

     Development     Description of Development

     Uterine growth  Uterus grows in length and thickness.

     Labial growth   Both labia minora and majora increase in size.

     TABLE 3.20 Development of Persons AFAB (Breehl & Caban, 2023)

     Nurses provide anticipatory guidance to patients as they go through puberty. Nurses can help patients understand
     the changes they see occurring in their body.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     HealthyWomen provides health information for "women in the middle" (ages 35 to 64). Their video called Breast
     Changes across the Lifespan (https://openstax.org/r/77breastchanges) discusses and demonstrates the changes in
     breasts as they develop from prepuberty to menopause.

     Perimenopause and Menopause
     Physical changes occur during perimenopause and menopause due to the decrease in estrogen, progesterone, and
     testosterone. The walls of the arteries stiffen, muscles lose flexibility and strength, and cataracts grow on the lenses
     of the eyes. During this stage, the vaginal walls are thinner, drier, pale, have less elasticity, and can be irritated
     during sexual intercourse (Jacobson et al., 2022). These changes increase the risk for vaginal infections, such as
     candidal infections. Urinary changes are also seen, including urinary incontinence and increased urinary tract
     infections as the pelvic floor relaxes, causing prolapse of the uterus or bladder. A decrease in breast tissue is also
     noted. The skin loses elasticity and becomes more prone to injury and bruising. Wrinkles and small skin tags can be
     seen. Due to loss of bone mass, some menopausal persons will have a rounding of the upper back called kyphosis
     (Figure 3.12). Health-care providers will assess for these changes and discuss the extent to which these changes
     affect the patient's life.

     FIGURE 3.12 Kyphosis Kyphosis occurs due to the weakening of the spine as in osteoporosis. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
     OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     3.5 · Preconceptual Care           119

        LINK TO LEARNING

Let's Talk Menopause is a nonprofit organization (https://openstax.org/r/77menopausetalk) focused on education
and advocacy surrounding menopause.

Gerontologic
As people age, several gerontologic changes can affect the reproductive tract. These changes may require
modifications to the history and physical examination. For example, as a transgender woman ages, their body can
experience benign prostatic hyperplasia, and they will need a health-care provider to perform a digital rectal exam
to assess the prostate gland. Persons AFAB will need screening for osteoporosis after the age of 65 due to the loss
of bone during menopause. Table 3.21 lists examples of physiologic changes throughout the lifespan.

              Puberty                            Perimenopause                       Postmenopause

Age           Younger (8-16 years) for           Typically, age 40s but can begin    Average age of 51

              menarche transition                earlier or later                    but can begin earlier

                                                                                     or later

Hormones      Erratic fluctuations               Decline in the number of oocytes    Cessation of ovarian
              Follicles present in the ovaries,  Fluctuations in FSH                 follicular activity
              but regular ovulation may not      Fluctuations in estrogen,           Persistently elevated
              occur for a few years              progesterone, and LH                FSH
                                                                                     Decrease in estrogen
                                                                                     and progesterone

Menstruation  Begins approximately 2-2.5         Variability in the length of the    Menopause marked
              years after the person reaches     menstrual cycle                     by absence of
              Tanner Stage 2                                                         periods for 12
              May be irregular for a few years                                       months

Physical      Secondary sex characteristics      Hot flashes, sleep difficulties,    Perimenopausal
changes       Growth spurt                       fatigue, mood changes, depression,  symptoms and
                                                 vaginal dryness, dyspareunia        changes more
                                                 Decreased bone density, increased   persistent
                                                 urinary tract infections            Thinning of skin, loss
                                                                                     and or dryness of
                                                                                     hair
                                                                                     Loss of muscle mass

TABLE 3.21 Comparison of Puberty, Perimenopausal, and Postmenopausal Anatomic and Physiologic Changes (Knight & Nigam,
2017)

3.5 Preconceptual Care

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Analyze the risk factors for persons assigned female at birth who are planning to conceive
    · Explain the importance of the preconception visit in persons who are planning to conceive

Pregnancy planning involves discussing preconception care and fertility awareness methods for individuals
considering starting a family. Preconceptual counseling involves various components, including reproductive health
assessment, medical and genetic history, assessment of self-care practices, nutritional assessment, immunizations,
physical examination, medication review, nutrition counseling and education, psychologic support, and referrals for
follow-up. The goal is to optimize a person's health and readiness for pregnancy, mitigate risks, and provide
120  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

     necessary support and education for a healthy conception and pregnancy journey.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Fertility awareness requires keeping track of signs of fertility. Many people keep track on charts. This is a free app
     people can use to track temperature, mucus, and other symptoms (https://openstax.org/r/77fertilitytrak) to
     determine ovulation and which days they are most fertile.

     Preconception Risk Factors

     Factors or conditions that can increase the likelihood of complications during pregnancy or affect the fetus's health
     if a person becomes pregnant are called preconception risk factors. Identifying and addressing these risk factors
     before conception is essential for optimizing maternal and fetal health and assists in ensuring patients can make
     informed choices about their reproductive goals. Some common preconception risk factors include age,
     preconception medical conditions, substance use, nutrition, and genetic factors. These risk factors are discussed in
     Table 3.22. Addressing and managing these preconception risk factors through preconception counseling, self-care
     practices, proper medical management, and appropriate vaccinations can help optimize the health of both the
     pregnant person and the fetus during pregnancy. Persons who do not receive proper preconception counseling and
     care may be unaware of certain risk factors or necessary preparations for a healthy pregnancy.

     Preconception                          Description
      Risk Factors

     Age             Individuals 35 years or older at conception have an increased risk of certain pregnancy

                     complications, such as gestational diabetes, preeclampsia, and chromosomal abnormalities in

                     the fetus. Persons less than 18 years of age may have increased risks during pregnancy.

     Chronic health  Preexisting medical conditions like diabetes, hypertension, thyroid disorders, and autoimmune
     conditions      diseases can impact pregnancy outcomes.

     Medication use  Certain medications may be teratogenic or require adjustments during preconception and/or
                     pregnancy.

     Substance use   Smoking before or during pregnancy can lead to complications such as miscarriage, preterm
                     birth, low birth weight, and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).
                     Consuming alcohol or using illicit drugs before or during pregnancy can negatively affect
                     fertility and increase the risk of birth defects and developmental problems in the fetus.

     Nutrition and   Poor diet and nutritional deficiencies, particularly in folate and other essential nutrients, can
     diet            impact fertility and increase the risk of birth defects.

     Obesity and     Both extremes of weight can affect fertility and pregnancy outcomes. Being overweight or
     underweight     obese before pregnancy is associated with a higher risk of gestational diabetes, hypertension,
                     cesarean delivery, and neural tube defects in the fetus.
                     Individuals with a low body weight may face challenges with fertility and an increased risk of
                     delivering a baby preterm or with low birth weight.

     Reproductive    Conditions affecting the reproductive system, such as PCOS or endometriosis, may affect
     health          pregnancy.
     conditions

     TABLE 3.22 Preconception Risk Factors

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  3.5 · Preconceptual Care              121

Preconception                          Description
 Risk Factors

Mental health Unmanaged mental health issues may impact fertility and pregnancy.

Genetic and     A family history of genetic disorders or certain genetic conditions in the individual or the
family history  partner may warrant genetic counseling and testing before conception.

Infections and  Immunity to certain infections, such as rubella and varicella, and proper vaccinations are
immunizations   essential for pregnancy.
                Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) can affect fertility and pose risks to the developing fetus
                if present during pregnancy.

Environmental   Environmental and/or occupational hazards or exposure to certain toxins, radiation, or
exposures       chemicals can impact fertility and pose risks during pregnancy.

Socioeconomic   Socioeconomic status can influence access to health care and prenatal care.
factors

Emotional and   Stress and relationship dynamics may impact fertility and emotional well-being.
relationship
status

Previous        Past pregnancy complications or previous birth outcomes may affect future pregnancies.
pregnancy
history

TABLE 3.22 Preconception Risk Factors

Pregnancy Planning
Discussing pregnancy planning, preconception care, and fertility awareness methods is important for those
considering starting a family. The recommended spacing of pregnancies, also known as interpregnancy interval,
refers to the time between the birth of one child and the conception of the subsequent pregnancy. The March of
Dimes (2017) recommends a minimum interpregnancy interval of at least 18 to 24 months after a full-term birth
before attempting another pregnancy. By allowing the person's body to recover from the previous pregnancy, the
risks of premature birth and low birth weight are reduced. Replenishing essential nutrients, such as folic acid, helps
prevent birth defects associated with folic acid deficiency such as neural tube defects (March of Dimes, 2017).
People 35 years or older at the time of birth are considered to be at advanced maternal age and may require
additional considerations due to increased risks associated with fertility decline and age-related pregnancy
complications. Those with certain medical conditions, such as diabetes or high blood pressure, may benefit from
longer interpregnancy intervals to optimize their health and manage their condition before the subsequent
pregnancy. People who experience pregnancy complications, such as preterm birth or cesarean delivery, may
require longer intervals for proper healing and reduced risk of recurrence.

Preconceptual education and assessment involve several components to address various aspects of an individual's
health and readiness for pregnancy. Table 3.23 lists key components of preconceptual counseling.
122  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

     Category of         Steps Involved
     Assessment
                             · evaluating the individual's menstrual history, including cycle regularity, duration, and
     Reproductive                any issues related to fertility
     health
     assessment              · assessing the history of previous pregnancies, including complications, miscarriages,
                                 or birth defects

                             · discussing the use of contraception and family planning methods

     Medical and         · reviewing the person's medical history, including chronic conditions, surgeries, or
     genetic history        medication usage, and assessing their impact on pregnancy

                         · assessing the presence of any genetic disorders or a family history of genetic
                            conditions that may impact the pregnancy or require further evaluation

     Self-care           · discussing the individual's lifestyle factors, such as nutrition, physical activity,
     practices and          substance use (including alcohol, tobacco, and drugs), and stress management
     behavioral factors
                         · assessing any occupational hazards or environmental exposures that may pose risks
                            during pregnancy

                         · identifying any psychosocial factors, such as history of trauma, mental health
                            concerns, or social support systems

     Nutritional         · assessing the individual's dietary habits and providing guidance on a balanced diet
     assessment and         rich in essential nutrients needed for a healthy pregnancy
     supplementation
                         · recommending preconception supplementation, including folic acid, to reduce the
                            risk of neural tube defects and other prenatal vitamins as needed

     Immunizations       · reviewing the individual's immunization status and ensuring that they are up to date
                            with recommended vaccinations, such as rubella and varicella, to protect both the
                            individual and the developing fetus.

     Physical            · conducting a comprehensive physical examination to evaluate general health,
     examination and        including weight, blood pressure, and signs of underlying conditions
     screening
                         · recommending or performing specific screenings or tests based on the individual's
                            medical and reproductive history, such as sexually transmitted infection (STI) testing,
                            cervical cancer screening, or other indicated tests

     Medication review   · reviewing the individual's current medications and assessing their safety during
     and management         pregnancy

                         · collaborating with the health-care provider to make any necessary medication
                            adjustments or changes to ensure their safety during conception and pregnancy

     Preconception       · providing information and education on preconception care, healthy self-care
     counseling and         practices, fertility awareness, and timing intercourse for optimal conception
     education
                         · discussing potential risks and precautions related to specific occupations, travel, and
                            exposures during the preconception period

     TABLE 3.23 Components of Preconceptual Counseling

     Access for free at openstax.org
               3.5 · Preconceptual Care                                                                                      123

Category of    Steps Involved
Assessment
                   · assessing the individual's mental health status and providing resources for stress
Psychologic            management, coping strategies, and emotional support during the preconception
support and            period
mental health
screening          · identifying any history of mental health concerns and coordinating with mental health
                       professionals if needed

Referrals and  · referring the individual to appropriate health-care providers, specialists, or support
follow-up         services based on identified needs or risks

               · scheduling follow-up appointments to monitor progress, address any concerns, and
                  provide ongoing support throughout the preconception period

TABLE 3.23 Components of Preconceptual Counseling

It is important to note that preconceptual education should be tailored to the person's unique circumstances,
considering their medical history, self-care practices, social determinants of health, and personal preferences. The
goal is to optimize the person's health and readiness for pregnancy, mitigate potential risks, and provide necessary
support and education to promote a healthy conception and pregnancy journey.

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Folate (vitamin B9)

People need adequate folate intake even before they become pregnant, as the neural tube forms very early in
pregnancy. Ideally, people should begin taking folic acid supplements or consuming foods rich in folate at least 1
month before conceiving and continue throughout the first trimester of pregnancy.

    · Generic Name: folate, folic acid, vitamin B9
    · Trade Name: n/a
    · Class/Action: vitamin
    · Route/Dosage: 400 to 800 mcg daily; 4 mg daily if at high risk for neural tube defect (history of child with

        neural tube defect)
    · High Alert/Black Box Warning: none
    · Indications: folate deficiency, megaloblastic anemia, sprue, neural tube prevention, dietary supplement
    · Mechanism of Action: DNA synthesis and erythropoiesis
    · Contraindications: undiagnosed anemia
    · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: nausea, abdominal pain, flatulence, irritability, overactivity, erythema, rash,

        pruritis
    · Nursing Implications: Discuss neural tube defect risks to determine appropriate dosage
    · Parent/Family Education: People in the preconception period are advised to consume foods rich in folate,

        such as leafy green vegetables (e.g., spinach, kale), legumes (e.g., lentils, chickpeas), fortified cereals, citrus
        fruits, and avocados.

Self-Care Practices
Preconception is the time for persons to become as healthy as possible to have a safe, noncomplicated pregnancy
and birth. Important self-care practices to prepare for pregnancy include starting the pregnancy at a healthy weight.
Obesity can cause problems with infertility and increases the risk for pregnancy complications such as gestational
diabetes, stillbirth, and preeclampsia. Nurses can encourage nutrition and exercise strategies for patients to
consider during the preconception phase.

Smoking cessation is important prior to trying to conceive. Smoking can cause infertility due to decreased hormone
production and damage to the DNA carried in the sperm (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2021). Nurses can
124  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

     discuss the importance of smoking cessation for parents. Nicotine is a very addictive drug, and cessation can be
     difficult. Nurses can support parents and provide them with helpful information regarding smoking cessation
     programs, nicotine patches and gum, and medications that can aid in smoking cessation prior to conception.

     Substance use is also important to identify, and aiding parents in decreasing and abstaining from alcohol and other
     substances is vital. According to research, one to five drinks per week can affect a person's fertility by interrupting
     the timing of ovulation and reducing the quantity and quality of sperm (Wild, 2022). Like nicotine, alcohol and other
     substances are very addictive, and many parents need help in quitting. Health-care providers and nurses must be
     nonjudgmental and present options for support groups, rehabilitation centers, and medications to help with alcohol
     and drug abstinence.

     Nutrition plays an important role in good health for appropriate hormone development and function and prevention
     of disease. Studies have shown difficulty with ovulation in those who have a diet low in nutrients and high in sugars;
     however, those who follow a Mediterranean diet and exercise have better fertility rates (Silvestris et al., 2019).
     Nurses can educate patients to increase protein, decrease simple carbohydrates, increase complex carbohydrates,
     increase essential fatty acids, and increase foods high in folate and vitamin C. Providing patients with guidance on
     diet and exercise will not only help with fertility but also decrease risks for pregnancy complications. Figure 3.13
     shows an example of a Mediterranean diet.

     FIGURE 3.13 Mediterranean Diet The Mediterranean Diet is an excellent diet for persons considering pregnancy and those who are
     pregnant. (credit: "The Mediterranean pyramid of nutrition style and weekly organization of meals" by E. Silvestris, D. Lovero, and R.
     Palmirotta/Frontiers in Endocrinology, CC BY)

     Stress can be a result and/or a cause of infertility. Research has found that cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) is
     associated with increased rates of pregnancy in persons dealing with infertility (Rooney & Domar, 2018). Relaxation
     techniques, mindfulness, and group support have also been shown to increase pregnancy rates (Rooney & Domar,
     2018). Nurses can discuss the stress associated with infertility and provide resources for therapy and support
     groups.

     Preexisting Conditions
     During the preconception visit, the person's medical history is examined for preexisting conditions that could
     interfere with conception and increase risk for pregnancy complications. Persons with type 1 and 2 diabetes
     mellitus should talk with their endocrinologist or diabetes health-care provider prior to conception. These persons
     should be told their risk factors for increased risk of complications during pregnancy and the importance of
     maintaining good glucose control while trying to conceive and during pregnancy.

     Chronic hypertension has been associated with poor egg quality related to increased estrogen caused by high blood

     Access for free at openstax.org
3.5 · Preconceptual Care                                                                                                125

pressure; if the egg is fertilized, the risk for miscarriage is increased (Zimlich & Rainford, 2022). Chronic
hypertension can also affect sperm motility, semen volume, and total sperm count (Zimlich & Rainford, 2022). The
nurse can educate people on the importance of controlling hypertension prior to and after conception.

Thyroid disorder is a common risk factor for infertility. Persons AFAB have higher incidences of thyroid disease than
persons AMAB, and the most common reason for hypothyroidism is autoimmune thyroiditis (Koyyada & Orsu, 2020).
Hypothyroidism can cause irregularities in the menstrual cycle leading to anovulation and infertility (Koyyada &
Orsu, 2020). It can also lead to preterm birth, miscarriage, and fetal death. Research has shown that treating
hypothyroidism with levothyroxine (Synthroid) in persons with infertility led to a 90.5 percent to 100 percent
success rate in conception, pregnancy, and term birth (Koyyada & Orsu, 2020). Nurses can help educate persons
with thyroid disease on the importance of taking medications consistently to help increase their fertility.

        LINK TO LEARNING

This preconception tool asks questions to determine areas of concern to address (https://openstax.org/r/
77preconception) prior to becoming pregnant.

Family History
Family history for both parents can contribute to risks for pregnancy complications. Testing that can be offered prior
to or during pregnancy to determine if a couple is at risk for having a child with a particular recessive genetic
disorder is called carrier screening. Common recessive conditions that carrier screens can detect are sickle cell
disease, Tay-Sachs disease, cystic fibrosis, spinal muscular atrophy, hemophilia, and other hemoglobin conditions;
these conditions may be associated with specific ethnic groups (ACOG, 2022). To have the recessive disease, the
parent must have two recessive genes for that strand of DNA. If a parent has one recessive gene and one dominant
gene, they are a carrier. The carrier screen identifies if the parent is negative (2 dominant genes), positive (2
recessive genes), or a carrier (1 recessive and 1 dominant gene). The screening results for both parents are
compared, and the chances of them having a child with the disorder are calculated (ACOG, 2022). Figure 3.14 is a
visual description of recessive gene expression. (The term "parent" in the sense of genetic inheritance refers only to
the contributors of the child's genes, and may differ from the people who actually parent the child.)
126  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

     FIGURE 3.14 Recessive Gene Expression "R" is the dominant gene. "r" is the recessive gene. A carrier screen determines if a parent has
     only dominant genes, only recessive genes, or one of each. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Reviewing family history for other chronic conditions allows for increased monitoring for these conditions during
     pregnancy. The nurse or health-care provider will inquire about a family history of hypertension, diabetes,
     gestational diabetes, preeclampsia, bleeding disorders, problems with anesthesia, strokes, cardiovascular disease,
     and thyroid disorders. The history of complications during pregnancy for the patient's mother or sister can give
     insight into possible pregnancy complications for the patient.
     Teratogens
     Substances or agents that can cause congenital abnormalities or birth defects in a developing embryo or fetus
     during pregnancy are called teratogens. These substances can harm fetal development and may result in structural
     or functional abnormalities in the baby. The impact of teratogens on the fetus depends on factors such as the type of
     teratogen, the timing and duration of exposure during pregnancy, and individual susceptibility.
     Gestational age at exposure greatly influences the effect of the teratogen. The most harmful time for exposure is
     during weeks 1 through 8, when organs are developing (Cleveland Clinic, 2022t). The entire first trimester is a
     critical time for teratogen exposure leading to major birth defects of structures and organs. Teratogen exposure
     during the second and third trimesters usually affects fetal growth and causes minor birth defects because organs
     and structures have already developed (Mother to Baby, 2021). Functional defects, such as learning defects, occur
     more often with teratogen exposure in the second and third trimesters. Other adverse outcomes can be preterm
     birth and oligohydramnios (Mother to Baby, 2021).
     Teratogens can include various environmental factors, medications, infections, and other exposures. Table 3.24 lists
     many common teratogens and their effects.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      3.5 · Preconceptual Care                                        127

                    Teratogen                         Effect on Fetus

Alcohol                                               Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, abnormal facial
                                                      features, small head and brain, physical and
                                                      behavioral disabilities

Cigarettes and tobacco                                Fetal growth restriction, premature birth, miscarriage,
                                                      lung and brain issues

Recreational drugs                                    Low birth weight, heart problems, neonatal abstinence
                                                      syndrome, infections

Certain medications:                                  Congenital abnormalities, organ malformation,
Isotretinoin (Accutane)                               developmental issues, cognitive impairments,
Thalidomide                                           increased risk for pre-eclampsia and gestational
Warfarin (Coumadin)                                   hypertension
Methotrexate
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)
Lithium
Valproic acid (Depakote)
Carbamazepine (Tegretol)
Phenytoin (Dilantin)
Misoprostol (Cytotec)
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim)
Aminoglycosides
Fluconazole (Diflucan)
Paroxetine (Paxil)

Infections and Viruses:                               Miscarriage, birth defects, pregnancy complications,
Toxoplasmosis                                         developmental disorders
Rubella
Cytomegalovirus
Herpes simplex virus
Zika virus
Parvovirus B19
Syphilis
Varicella zoster virus
Human immunodeficiency virus
Listeriosis
Hepatitis B and C

TABLE 3.24 Teratogens and Their Effects on the Fetus

Preconception Visit

The preconception visit includes a thorough history and physical examination, laboratory studies, and preconception
education. The nurse plays a large role in providing anticipatory guidance and education.

Physical Exam
A preconception physical examination aims to assess the person's overall health and identify any medical conditions
or risk factors that may affect their ability to conceive and have a healthy pregnancy. During the preconception
physical exam, the health-care provider will conduct a thorough gynecologic exam. Preconception lab tests will be
ordered to assess the person's overall health and identify any underlying medical conditions. The specific lab tests
ordered will vary based on the person's medical history, risk factors, and needs. Table 3.25 lists common
128  3 · Health Promotion, Disease and Injury Prevention, and Well-Person Care

     preconception tests and the reasons for them.

     Testing                          Rationale

     Blood tests                      · complete blood count (CBC): to check for anemia or other blood disorders
                                      · blood type and Rh factor: important to identify blood type and Rh compatibility

                                         with the partner to monitor potential blood type incompatibility issues during
                                         pregnancy
                                      · blood glucose: to screen for diabetes or prediabetes
                                      · blood lipid profile: to assess cholesterol levels and cardiovascular health
                                      · thyroid function tests: to evaluate thyroid hormone levels, as thyroid disorders
                                         can impact fertility and pregnancy
                                      · folic acid and vitamin D levels: to assess nutritional status and determine if
                                         supplementation is needed
                                      · rubella antibody test: to determine immunity to rubella (German measles), as
                                         rubella infection during pregnancy can cause birth defects
                                      · rubella titer: to measure rubella immunity, especially if there is no vaccination
                                         history or history of prior infection
                                      · varicella (chickenpox) titer: to check for immunity to varicella, as varicella
                                         infection during pregnancy can cause complications

     STI tests                        · human immunodeficiency virus (HIV): to check for HIV infection, which can be
                                         transmitted to the fetus during pregnancy or childbirth

                                      · syphilis: to screen for syphilis, which can lead to serious complications during
                                         pregnancy

                                      · hepatitis B and C: to test for hepatitis B and C infections, which can be
                                         transmitted to the fetus during childbirth

     Urinalysis                       · to check for urinary tract infections or other kidney-related issues

     Genetic screening                · may be offered depending on the individual's family history and ethnic
                                         background, to identify carrier status for certain genetic disorders that could be
                                         passed on to the fetus

     Pap smear                        · to screen for cervical cancer or detect abnormal cervical cells

     Pelvic                           · to evaluate the health of the reproductive organs and check for any
     ultrasound/Transvaginal             abnormalities
     ultrasound

     TABLE 3.25 Common Preconception Tests

     Preconception Education
     The nurse can provide preconception education to both partners. Education can cover the fertile window
     surrounding ovulation and how the person can discover that window using natural family planning methods or
     ovulation predictor kits. Figure 3.15 is an example of a natural family planning chart that can be used to track the
     fertile window. Ovulation predictor kits predict the presence of LH (the hormone that causes the release of the egg
     from the follicle). Temperature monitoring allows the person to see that ovulation has occurred by detecting an
     increase in temperature caused by the corpus luteum's production of progesterone.

     Access for free at openstax.org
3.5 · Preconceptual Care                                                                                                          129

FIGURE 3.15 Fertility Awareness Chart The nurse can educate the patient on tracking signs of fertility to increase the chance of
conception. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The nurse can also educate the couple on the importance of both partners' health. Alcohol, drugs, tobacco, obesity,
and other chronic illnesses negatively affect sperm production and quality. Therefore, partners can work together to
abstain from harmful substances and maintain a healthy body weight. The nurse will discuss nutrition and exercise.
Nurses can educate couples on the mental and emotional issues that surround trying to conceive. They can
encourage couples to discuss their feelings and provide counseling resources especially for couples having difficulty
in conceiving.
130 3 · Summary

Summary

3.1 Factors Influencing the Health of Persons Assigned Female at Birth

The health of a person AFAB is influenced by a great number of factors. Access to health care plays a large part in
the health of the individual, family, and community. Health-care education regarding STIs, contraception, mental
health, and general overall health influence choices regarding health and safety.

SDOH also contribute greatly to the health of the individual and community.

Poverty, limited education, unemployment, and inadequate access to health care impact nutrition, housing
conditions, environmental risks, and overall well-being. Nurses play a crucial role in identifying and addressing
these social determinants. Nurses provide resources and education to help improve health outcomes and reduce
health disparities.

3.2 Leading Causes of Death and Health Screenings

Understanding the leading causes of morbidity and mortality among persons AFAB is paramount for public health
efforts. These insights allow policymakers, nurses, physicians, and communities to develop targeted strategies and
interventions to address health disparities. By addressing these health concerns, implementing effective health-
care strategies, and promoting proactive health screening, health-care providers can work toward reducing
mortality rates and improving the overall well-being of persons on a global scale.

Nursing plays a critical role in preventive screening, as it involves identifying and addressing health risks and
potential health problems before they become more serious. Preventive screening aims to detect diseases or
conditions early, providing an opportunity for timely intervention and treatment, which can lead to better health
outcomes and reduced health-care costs.

3.3 Health Promotion

Health care of persons AFAB encompasses a range of components to promote and maintain health and well-being
throughout the lifespan. Nurses are crucial in providing reproductive health services, including family planning and
contraceptive counseling, preconception care, prenatal and postnatal care, and menopause management. Nurses
provide education, assist with screenings and tests, and offer support and guidance during various reproductive
stages.

Nurses are at the forefront of health promotion and education. They are trained to provide information on healthy
self-care practices, including nutrition, exercise, and stress management advice. In addition, nurses also educate
persons about the importance of regular checkups, vaccinations, and healthy behaviors to prevent chronic diseases.
Nurses engage in health counseling to empower persons to take an active role in their health care. They guide
healthy self-care choices and practices and disease prevention. Nurses collaborate with other health-care
professionals to ensure holistic and coordinated care. Nurses play a key role in raising awareness about health
issues, promoting evidence-based practices, and advocating for policies that support individuals' health-care needs.

3.4 Well-Person Care

Nurses play a crucial role in reproductive wellness history and physical exams, as they are often the first health-care
professionals to interact with patients during these assessments. Reproductive wellness history and physical exams
are essential components of health and focus on evaluating and addressing reproductive health concerns. Nurses'
involvement in reproductive wellness history and physicals is essential for providing comprehensive care,
empowering patients with knowledge, and supporting their reproductive health needs throughout their lifespan.

Nursing is integral to trauma-informed care. Nurses have been trained to be compassionate and have a sensitive
approach to providing health care for persons who may have experienced trauma in the past. They acknowledge the
potential impact of trauma on a person's physical and emotional health and aim to create a safe and supportive
environment for the patient during the health-care encounter.

3.5 Preconceptual Care

Preconception care is critical to having a healthy pregnancy. Risk factors or conditions that can increase pregnancy

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               3 · Key Terms 131

complications and impact the fetus's health are identified during the preconception visit. Common risk factors
include advanced maternal age, chronic medical conditions, obesity, smoking, alcohol and substance use,
inadequate nutrition, and infections. Important considerations include lack of immunizations, genetic factors,
environmental exposures, and inadequate prenatal care. Addressing these risks through preconception counseling,
self-care practices, and proper medical management can optimize maternal and fetal health during pregnancy.
Nurses are an integral part in providing education to persons considering conception.

Key Terms

advanced maternal age persons 35 years or older at the time of birth
carrier screening testing offered prior to pregnancy to determine if a couple is at risk for having a child with a

    particular genetic disorder
disordered eating maladaptive nutritional practices that are not severe enough to meet the diagnostic criteria for

    a specific eating disorder but still involve problematic attitudes and behaviors toward food and eating
dyspareunia pain during sexual intercourse
eating disorder serious mental health condition characterized by abnormal eating patterns, attitudes, and

    behaviors toward food and weight; often involves a preoccupation with food, weight, body shape, and a distorted
    perception of one's body image
excitement phase phase of the sexual response in which sexual desire and arousal begin in reaction to sexual
    stimuli, such as physical touch, erotic thoughts, or visual cues
human trafficking recruiting, transporting, transferring, harboring, or receipt of persons through force, fraud, or
    coercion for exploitation
intimate partner violence violence or abuse within an intimate relationship, such as physical assault, sexual
    violence, emotional or psychologic abuse, controlling behaviors, and economic abuse
kyphosis rounding of the upper back due to bone loss
menarche first menstrual period
menarche onset of menstruation, marking the beginning of reproductive capacity
menopause permanent cessation of ovarian function, signaling the end of reproductive capability
morbidity being ill from a particular condition
mortality death from a particular condition
oogenesis egg cell development and maturation process within the reproductive system that occurs during the
    follicular phase of the menstrual cycle
orgasmic phase peak of sexual pleasure and release of accumulated sexual tension
plateau phase phase of the sexual response in which a heightened state of arousal and sexual tension continues
    to build as the body prepares for a potential orgasm
preconception risk factors factors or conditions that can increase the likelihood of complications during
    pregnancy or affect the fetus's health if a person becomes pregnant
pubarche growth of pubic hair
reproductive health complete physical, mental, and social well-being in all matters related to the reproductive
    system and its functions
resolution phase return to baseline where muscles are relaxed and pulse, blood pressure, and respirations return
    to normal
self-esteem subjective evaluation of one's worth and capabilities, the degree to which a person believes in their
    value, abilities, and self-worth
sexual violence any nonconsensual sexual act or behavior, including rape, sexual assault, sexual harassment, and
    coerced or forced sexual acts
substance misuse problematic use of alcohol or drugs that leads to adverse physical, psychologic, social, and
    functional outcomes
teratogens substances or agents that can cause congenital abnormalities or birth defects in a developing embryo
    or fetus during pregnancy
thelarche growth of breasts
vaginismus involuntary muscle contractions that make penetration difficult or impossible
132 3 · Assessments

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. What is a statement that best describes reproductive health?
           a. Reproductive health focuses solely on the ability to reproduce and have children.
           b. Reproductive health encompasses physical well-being but does not include mental and social aspects.
           c. Reproductive health involves complete physical, mental, and social well-being related to the
                reproductive system.
           d. Reproductive health is limited to making informed decisions about contraception methods.

    2. What is a statement about premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) that
        is true?
           a. PMS and PMDD affect only persons who have already reached menopause.
           b. Hormonal fluctuations are not considered potential causes of PMS and PMDD.
           c. PMS and PMDD are characterized by physical symptoms but not emotional symptoms.
           d. PMS and PMDD involve a range of physical and emotional symptoms due to fluctuating hormone levels.

    3. What does intimate partner violence refer to?
           a. violence that occurs in public spaces, such as streets or parks, between acquaintances or strangers
           b. violence or abuse that occurs within a relationship, involving physical assault, sexual violence,
                emotional or psychologic abuse, controlling behaviors, and economic abuse
           c. violence primarily directed toward children by their parents or guardians
           d. violence that is limited to verbal arguments and does not involve physical harm

    4. What population is disproportionately affected by human trafficking, particularly for sexual exploitation?
           a. older adults aged 65 and above
           b. males in their late 20s and 30s
           c. persons AFAB
           d. individuals with higher education levels

    5. What statement best describes social determinants of health (SDOH)?
           a. genetic factors that influence an individual's health outcomes and risks
           b. medical interventions and treatments provided by health-care professionals
           c. conditions in the environments where people live, work, and play that impact health outcomes and risks
           d. personal self-care practices, such as diet and exercise, that affect individual well-being

    6. What role do nurses play in addressing social determinants of health (SDOH)?
           a. Nurses primarily focus on providing medical treatments and interventions.
           b. Nurses have no role in addressing social determinants of health.
           c. Nurses are crucial in identifying and addressing the environmental factors that impact health outcomes.
           d. Nurses solely focus on the physical well-being of individuals and do not address social factors.

    7. What is the leading cause of death in persons AFAB worldwide?
           a. breast cancer
           b. stroke
           c. cardiovascular disease
           d. lung cancer

    8. What cancer type is the leading cause of death in persons AFAB?
           a. breast cancer
           b. lung cancer
           c. cervical cancer
           d. ovarian cancer

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        3 · Assessments 133

 9. According to the WHO, in 2022, what percentage of all new HIV infections occurred among persons AFAB?
         a. 46%
         b. 63%
         c. 10%
         d. 25%

10. According to the ACC/AHA guidelines, what factors are considered to assess a person's 10-year risk of
      developing a first cardiovascular event?
         a. age, sex, race, blood pressure, and smoking status
         b. age, sex, race, total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, systolic blood pressure, blood pressure-lowering
              medication use, diabetes status, and smoking status
         c. blood pressure, cholesterol levels, diabetes status, and weight
         d. age, sex, race, and weight

11. What is a common risk factor for breast cancer? Select all that apply.
         a. being assigned female at birth
         b. having a first-degree relative with breast cancer
         c. carrying mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes
         d. being of African American ethnicity

12. Which lifestyle factor is associated with an increased risk of developing breast cancer?
         a. regular physical activity
         b. moderate alcohol consumption
         c. maintaining a healthy weight after menopause
         d. excessive alcohol consumption

13. What is considered the first day of the menstrual cycle?
         a. day of ovulation
         b. first day of menstrual bleeding
         c. last day of menstrual bleeding
         d. when the corpus luteum forms

14. What hormone is responsible for the development and maturation of the ovarian follicles?
         a. follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
         b. luteinizing hormone (LH)
         c. estrogen
         d. progesterone

15. The menstrual phase of the menstrual cycle is characterized by what?
         a. shedding of the endometrial lining
         b. ovulation
         c. fertilization
         d. implantation

16. In a 28-day menstrual cycle, when does ovulation typically occur?
         a. around day 7
         b. around day 14
         c. around day 21
         d. around day 28

17. After ovulation, what does the ruptured follicle in the ovary transform into?
         a. Corpus luteum
         b. Corpus cavernosum
134 3 · Assessments

           c. Corpus callosum
           d. Corpus albicans

  18. What is the recommended daily calcium intake for persons AFAB aged 51 and above?
           a. 500 mg per day
           b. 800 mg per day
           c. 1,000 mg per day
           d. 1,200 mg per day

  19. What is disordered eating?
           a. an occasional overeating episode
           b. a normal variation in eating patterns
           c. a range of abnormal eating behaviors and attitudes
           d. a preference for specific types of foods

  20. Which of the following is a unique risk factor for substance misuse in individuals AFAB?
           a. Genetic predisposition
           b. High socioeconomic status
           c. Regular physical exercise
           d. History of trauma

  21. What are some specific health effects of substance misuse in persons AFAB?
           a. increased risk of lung cancer
           b. higher likelihood of developing diabetes
           c. elevated risk of liver damage and cardiovascular complications
           d. reduced risk of mental health disorders

  22. The nurse discusses treatment for side effects of perimenopause. What education should be provided?
           a. Menopausal hormone therapy can decrease symptoms of menopause.
           b. Hot flashes are normal, and no one should need treatment for this symptom.
           c. Medications to decrease estrogen can help with insomnia.
           d. Depression is normal, so no treatment is needed.

  23. Which component is important to include in the sexual history assessment to assess the risk of sexually
        transmitted infections (STIs)?
           a. current sexual activity
           b. reproductive plans
           c. education and counseling
           d. history of HIV testing

  24. Why is it important for nurses to approach the topic of sexual history with sensitivity and create a
        nonjudgmental and confidential environment?
           a. to increase patient satisfaction with the health-care provider
           b. to ensure that patients feel comfortable and supported during the assessment
           c. to promote healthy sexual behaviors among patients
           d. to comply with health-care regulations and standards

  25. What component of a health history for a wellness exam includes information on lifestyle factors, such as
        diet, exercise habits, tobacco use, alcohol consumption, and recreational drug use?
           a. chief complaint/reason for visit
           b. gynecologic history
           c. medications and supplements
           d. social history

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        3 · Assessments 135

26. Why is it important to consider special considerations, such as age, cultural background, or specific health
      conditions, during a health history for a well-person exam?
         a. to tailor the examination and screening tests to the individual's health needs
         b. to assess the risk of occupational and environmental exposures
         c. to determine the individual's immunization history
         d. to identify potential safety considerations, such as intimate partner violence or mental abuse

27. What symptom is related to perimenopausal hormone fluctuations? Select all that apply.
         a. musculoskeletal complaints
         b. heart palpitations
         c. sleeping difficulties
         d. severe pelvic pain

28. What physical changes are more persistent and commonly experienced during menopause?
         a. secondary sex characteristics and growth spurt
         b. variable hot flushes and sleep difficulties
         c. thinning of skin and loss or dryness of hair
         d. irregular menstruation for a few years after menarche transition

29. During a trauma-informed gynecologic examination, what principle emphasizes the importance of involving
      the patient in decision making about their health care?
         a. respecting autonomy and empowerment
         b. trauma-sensitive language and communication
         c. providing information and explanation
         d. avoiding triggering situations

30. What should health-care providers be attentive to during the trauma-informed gynecologic examination to
      avoid retraumatization? Select all that apply.
         a. providing information about trauma support resources
         b. establishing safety and trust
         c. recognizing signs of distress and offering support
         d. using trauma-sensitive language and communication

31. What nutrient is particularly important for individuals during preconception to reduce the risk of neural tube
      defects in their fetus?
         a. iron
         b. calcium
         c. folate
         d. vitamin C

32. The nurse encourages the patient to begin taking folate prior to trying to conceive. Why would the nurse
      encourage folate intake?
         a. Taking folate increases the chances of conceiving.
         b. Folate helps prevent neural tube defects.
         c. The nurse is preparing the patient to take vitamins during pregnancy.
         d. Folate decreases miscarriage.

33. What is a common preconception risk factor that can impact pregnancy outcomes?
         a. lack of exercise prior to pregnancy
         b. chronic caffeine intake
         c. high fat diet
         d. lack of immunizations
136 3 · Assessments

  34. Individuals 35 years or older at conception have an increased risk of what complication?
           a. low birth weight
           b. hypoglycemia
           c. neural tube defects
           d. chromosomal abnormalities

  35. Preexisting medical conditions like diabetes, hypertension, and autoimmune diseases can impact pregnancy
        outcomes. What education can the nurse provide?
           a. Your medical condition always gets worse during pregnancy.
           b. Nutrition changes cannot help with fertility.
           c. Maintaining glucose control can increase chances of conceiving.
           d. Autoimmune diseases only affect pregnancy, not infertility.

  36. What blood test is important for potential blood type incompatibility issues during pregnancy?
           a. complete blood count (CBC)
           b. blood glucose
           c. blood type and Rh factor
           d. blood lipid profile

  37. The patient's family history includes sickle cell disease. The patient's partner also has sickle cell disease in
        the family history. What type of test should the nurse discuss with the couple due to their family history?
           a. carrier screening for both parents
           b. ultrasound at 6 weeks' gestation
           c. glucose screening for both parents
           d. thyroid testing

  38. What is the purpose of a Pap smear during preconception screening?
           a. to check for anemia or other blood disorders
           b. to evaluate thyroid hormone levels
           c. to screen for cervical cancer or detect abnormal cervical cells
           d. to assess cholesterol levels and cardiovascular health

  39. Teratogens are substances or agents that can cause congenital abnormalities or birth defects in a developing
        embryo or fetus during pregnancy. What is a true statement about teratogens?
           a. Vitamins can help prevent abnormalities due to teratogens.
           b. Their impact on the fetus depends on factors such as timing and duration of exposure during
                pregnancy.
           c. They include only medications that a pregnant person may take.
           d. They can be avoided by immunizations.

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. List seven strategies nurses use to identify social determinants of health. Briefly describe each strategy.

    2. What common signs and symptoms of vulvar cancer should patients be educated to report?

    3. What strategies can nurses implement to promote mental health hygiene in persons AFAB?

    4. How does the nurse discuss the normal sexual response with a patient?

    5. What are the three steps of a gynecologic examination (pelvic examination)?

    6. Refer to Table 3.23.
        What are the key components of preconceptual counseling, and why is it important to address each aspect
        before pregnancy? Please provide a comprehensive answer that includes the different components of
        preconceptual counseling and their significance in optimizing maternal and fetal health during pregnancy.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           3 · Assessments 137

Reflection Questions

    1. Discuss how the nurse can help the patient overcome problems with health literacy.

    2. How can nurses ensure that breast cancer screening guidelines are appropriately tailored to the unique needs
        and considerations of transgender individuals, considering factors such as their transition and use of hormone
        replacement treatments?

    3. What education should the nurse provide for persons experiencing perimenopause and menopause?

    4. How can health-care providers effectively incorporate trauma-informed principles into their gynecologic
        examinations to create a safe and supportive environment for trauma survivors?

What Should the Nurse Do?

Marta, a 38-year-old mother of two, presents at a community health clinic with concerns about persistent fatigue,
irregular menstrual cycles, and difficulty in concentrating. Diagnosed with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in her
early 20s, Marta, a low-income cashier, resides in a neighborhood near the poverty level. Juggling work and
parenting, she faces financial constraints that impact her ability to access nutritious food. Her medical history
includes a struggle with managing PCOS. Marta, with no psychiatric history, now seeks health-care support as her
symptoms intensify. Vital signs reveal an elevated blood pressure of 140/90 mm Hg, a heart rate of 82 beats per
minute, and a body mass index (BMI) of 31.6.

    1. How do the unique challenges faced by Marta, such as financial constraints and difficulty in accessing
        nutritious food, align with the factors affecting the health of persons assigned female at birth, as discussed in
        the chapter?

    2. In Marta's case, how might the intersection of social determinants, such as low income, juggling work and
        parenting, and residing in a neighborhood near the poverty level, contribute to her elevated blood pressure
        and BMI, as revealed in the vital signs?

    3. How can health-care professionals, particularly nurses, utilize the strategies discussed in the chapter, such as
        conducting health screenings and engaging in patient interviews, to assess and address the social
        determinants influencing Marta's health?

Tricia is a 52-year-old female seeking a routine checkup from her primary care physician. Beyond her immediate
concerns of persistent fatigue and occasional shortness of breath, Tricia reveals a family history of cardiovascular
disease, adding a layer of complexity to her health profile. Her medical history includes hypertension,
hyperlipidemia, and obesity, all of which contribute to her increased risk for cardiovascular issues. Despite having no
recorded psychiatric history, Tricia discloses occasional stress and anxiety, factors that can further exacerbate her
cardiovascular risks. Vital signs are blood pressure of 140/90 mm Hg, heart rate of 76 beats per minute, and BMI of
32.5.

    4. Considering Tricia's health profile and family history, how do global leading causes of morbidity and mortality
        among persons assigned female at birth, such as cardiovascular diseases, cancer, and infectious diseases,
        align with her increased risk for cardiovascular issues?

    5. According to the information provided in the chapter, what are the leading causes of death for persons
        assigned female at birth in the United States, and how do these align with Tricia's health concerns,
        particularly her hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and obesity?

    6. Given Tricia's health history, how might health screening, as discussed in the chapter, aid in early detection
        and intervention for her cardiovascular risks? What specific screening tools could be employed in her case?

Sarah, a 16-year-old high school student, presents to a women's health clinic for a routine checkup and consultation
regarding her reproductive health. She shares concerns about irregular menstrual cycles, reporting that her periods
are often unpredictable and accompanied by severe cramps. Sarah, whose family has no known history of
reproductive health issues, is otherwise healthy and actively engaged in extracurricular activities. She expresses
heightened emotional distress during her menstrual periods, impacting her academic and social life. Sarah's medical
history is unremarkable, with no chronic conditions or prior surgeries. However, she discloses feelings of anxiety
related to her menstrual symptoms, indicating a potential psychosocial aspect to her health concerns. Vital signs
reveal a blood pressure of 118/70 mm Hg, a heart rate of 72 beats per minute, and a BMI of 21.3. Physical
examination findings are generally within normal limits, with no signs of abnormal hair growth, acne, or excessive
138 3 · Assessments

weight gain. Menstrual history suggests that Sarah began menstruating at the age of 12 and has experienced
irregular cycles since then. She denies any history of sexual activity and uses no form of contraception.

    7. What reproductive system structures and functions specific to persons assigned female at birth could be
        contributing to Sarah's irregular menstrual cycles and severe cramps?

    8. Based on the information provided, what specific self-care measures related to menstrual hygiene and
        reproductive health should be emphasized in patient education for Sarah?

    9. Considering the potential psychosocial aspect of Sarah's menstrual concerns, how might nurses address the
        emotional distress she experiences and its impact on academic and social aspects of her life?

Julia, a 28-year-old female, arrives at a community health clinic for her annual well-woman examination, seeking
holistic care for her various health concerns. In the health history interview, Julia reveals a comprehensive picture of
her reproductive health, reporting persistent pelvic pain that she's been enduring for several months. She describes
the pain as sharp and intermittent, often interfering with her daily activities. Additionally, Julia expresses concerns
about irregular menstrual cycles, detailing heavy flow and extended durations. She discloses experiencing
discomfort and pain during sexual intercourse, impacting her overall quality of life and interpersonal relationships.
Julia's medical history is notable for a diagnosis of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in her early 20s, prompting a
discussion about its impact on her reproductive health and overall well-being. Furthermore, she shares a family
history of breast cancer, adding a layer of complexity to her risk assessment. The discussion extends to Julia's
mental health, as she discloses a history of anxiety and depression. She manages these concerns with occasional
counseling sessions, emphasizing the interconnected nature of physical and mental health.

  10. Considering Julia's health history, what are the potential risk factors for her reproductive health, and how
        might her diagnosis of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and family history of breast cancer impact her
        overall well-being?

  11. As a nurse providing holistic care for Julia, what specific nursing actions can be taken to promote well care,
        considering her concerns about pelvic pain, irregular menstrual cycles, and the impact on her mental health?

  12. How can trauma-informed care principles be applied in Julia's case, especially considering her history of
        anxiety, depression, and the potential impact of pelvic pain on her emotional well-being?

Courtney, a 30-year-old female, is planning to become pregnant and visits a reproductive health clinic for a
comprehensive preconception consultation. Courtney, alongside her supportive partner, expresses a strong desire
to ensure the best possible start for their future family. In the initial assessment, Courtney candidly discusses her
reproductive health concerns, noting irregular menstrual cycles that have sparked worries about her ability to
conceive. Courtney's medical history indicates that she manages hypothyroidism, a condition she has dealt with
since her early 20s. Her diligent adherence to prescribed medication has kept the thyroid disorder well-controlled.
Courtney also discloses a history of anxiety.

  13. Considering Courtney's reproductive health concerns, hypothyroidism, and anxiety history, what
        preconception risk factors should be carefully analyzed, and how might these factors impact her ability to
        conceive and have a healthy pregnancy?

  14. Explain the importance of the preconception visit for Courtney and her partner, considering her medical
        history of hypothyroidism and anxiety. How can the preconception visit address potential challenges and
        optimize their readiness for a healthy pregnancy?

  15. How can the nurse educate Courtney and her partner on fertility awareness methods, considering her
        irregular menstrual cycles and hypothyroidism? What role do these methods play in optimizing their chances
        of conception?

Competency-Based Assessments

Jane is a 58-year-old woman presenting to her primary care clinic for a routine health checkup. She has a smoking
history and is concerned about the potential health risks associated with her smoking habit. Jane has been smoking
since she was 20 years old and is currently smoking 10 cigarettes per day. She wants to understand her smoking
history and the concept of pack-years to assess her risk for smoking-related health issues.

    1. How many years has Jane been smoking?
           a. 28 years
           b. 38 years
           c. 48 years

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              3 · References 139

           d. 58 years

    2. What are Jane's pack-years of smoking?
           a. 19 pack-years
           b. 28 pack-years
           c. 42 pack-years
           d. 51 pack-years

    3. Why is it important to identify and address preconception risk factors before becoming pregnant? Provide
        examples of common preconception risk factors and their potential impact on maternal and fetal health
        during pregnancy.

References

Agency for Healthcare Research & Quality. (2022). 2022 National Healthcare Quality and Disparities Report. AHRQ
    Pub. No. 22(23)-0030.

Akter, M. J., & Shirin, E. (2018). Latest evidence on using hormone replacement therapy in the menopause. Journal
   of Bangladesh College of Physicians & Surgeons, 36(1), 26-32. https://doi.org/10.3329/jbcps.v36i1.35508

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2023). Screening for suicide risk in clinical practice. https://www.aap.org/en/
    patient-care/blueprint-for-youth-suicide-prevention/strategies-for-clinical-settings-for-youth-suicide-
    prevention/screening-for-suicide-risk-in-clinical-practice/

American Cancer Society. (2020a). Can ovarian cancer be found early? https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/
    ovarian-cancer/detection-diagnosis-staging/detection.html

American Cancer Society. (2020b). American Cancer Society guideline for colorectal cancer screening.
    https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/colon-rectal-cancer/detection-diagnosis-staging/acs-
    recommendations.html

American Cancer Society. (2022). Cancer facts and figures 2022. https://www.cancer.org/research/cancer-facts-
    statistics/all-cancer-facts-figures/cancer-facts-figures-2022.html

American Cancer Society. (2023a, October). Cancer facts for women. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/risk-
    prevention/understanding-cancer-risk/cancer-facts/cancer-facts-for-women.html

American Cancer Society. (2023b). Key statistics for breast cancer. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/breast-
    cancer/about/how-common-is-breast-cancer.html

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017). Breast cancer risk assessment and screening in
   average-risk women. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. https://www.acog.org/clinical/
    clinical-guidance/practice-bulletin/articles/2017/07/breast-cancer-risk-assessment-and-screening-in-average-
    risk-women

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019). Interpregnancy care. Obstetrics & Gynecology,
   133(1).

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021a, April). Updated cervical cancer screening guidelines.
    https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practice-advisory/articles/2021/04/updated-cervical-cancer-
    screening-guidelines

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021b). Diabetes and women. https://www.acog.org/
    womens-health/faqs/diabetes-and-women

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021c). Health care for transgender and gender diverse
   individuals. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-opinion/articles/2021/03/health-care-
    for-transgender-and-gender-diverse-individuals

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022). Carrier screening. https://www.acog.org/womens-
    health/faqs/carrier-screening
140 3 · References

American College of Radiology. (2021). ACR Appropriateness Criteria: Transgender breast cancer screening.
    https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/3155692/Narrative/

Annie E. Casey Foundation. (2023). Kids Count data center, United States. https://datacenter.aecf.org/

Arnett, D. K., Blumenthal, R. S., Albert, M. A., Buroker, A. B., Goldberger, Z. D., Hahn, E. J., Himmelfarb, C. D., Khera,
    A., Lloyd-Jones, D., McEvoy, J. W., Michos, E. D., Miedema, M. D., Muñoz, D., Smith, S. C., Virani, S. S., Williams, K.
    A., Yeboah, J., & Ziaeian, B. (2019). 2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular
   Disease. Circulation, 140(11). https://doi.org/10.1161/cir.0000000000000678

Auttama, N., Seangpraw, K., Ong-Artborirak, P., Tonchoy, P. (2021). Factors associated with self-esteem, resilience,
   mental health, and psychological self-care among university students in northern Thailand. Journal of
   Multidisciplinary Healthcare, 14, 1213-1221. https://doi.org/10.2147/jmdh.s308076

Basile, L. M. (2020). The 4 best exercises for hormonal imbalance. https://www.healthcentral.com/fitness-and-
    exercise/the-best-exercise-for-hormonal-imbalance

Bertoncelli Tanaka, M., Sahota, K., Burn, J., Falconer, A., Winkler, M., Ahmed, H. U., & Rashid, T. G. (2021). Prostate
   cancer in transgender women: What does a urologist need to know? BJU International, 129(1), 113-122.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/bju.15521

Breehl, L., & Caban, O. (2023, March 27). Physiology, puberty. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK534827

Brown A, Lourenco AP, Niell BL, et al. for the Expert Panel on Breast Imaging. (2021). ACR Appropriateness Criteria®
   transgender breast cancer screening. J Am Coll Radiol, 18(11S), S502-S515.

Camacho, P. M., Petak, S. M., Binkley, N., Diab, D. L., Eldeiry, L. S., Farooki, A., Harris, S. T., Hurley, D. L., Kelly, J.,
    Lewiecki, E. M., Pessah-Pollack, R., McClung, M., Wimalawansa, S. J., & Watts, N. B. (2020). American Association
    of Clinical Endocrinologists/American College of Endocrinology Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and
   Treatment of Postmenopausal Osteoporosis--2020 update. Endocrine Practice, 26(Suppl 1), 1-46.
    https://doi.org/10.4158/gl-2020-0524suppl

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2017). Preventing intimate partner violence across the lifespan: A
   technical package of programs, policies, and practices. https://vawnet.org/material/preventing-intimate-partner-
    violence-across-lifespan-technical-package-programs-policies

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018). Leading causes of death: Female: All races and origins: US,
   2018. https://www.cdc.gov/women/lcod/2018/all-races-origins/index.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019a). Cervical cancer statistics. (2019). https://www.cdc.gov/
    cancer/cervical/statistics/index.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019b). Reduce risk from water. https://www.cdc.gov/hai/prevent/
    environment/water.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020a). Violence prevention: Risk and protective factors.
    https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/youthviolence/riskprotectivefactors.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020b) What are the symptoms of gynecologic cancers?
    https://www.cdc.gov/cancer/gynecologic/basic_info/symptoms.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021a, April 8). Adolescents and young adults. https://www.cdc.gov/
    std/life-stages-populations/adolescents-youngadults.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021b, November 15). About teen pregnancy. https://www.cdc.gov/
    teenpregnancy/about/index.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021c). Sexually transmitted infections prevalence, incidence, and cost
   estimates in the United States. https://www.cdc.gov/std/statistics/prevalence-2020-at-a-glance.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022a, June). Community violence prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              3 · References 141

    violenceprevention/communityviolence/index.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022b). Healthy weight, nutrition, and physical activity.
    https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/index.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022c). Leading causes of death in females, United States.
    https://www.cdc.gov/women/lcod/

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023a, August 31). About adult BMI. https://www.cdc.gov/
    healthyweight/assessing/bmi/adult_bmi/index.html#InterpretedAdults

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023b, September 18). Racism and health. https://www.cdc.gov/
    minorityhealth/racism-disparities/index.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023c). Breast cancer: What are the risk factors for breast cancer?
    https://www.cdc.gov/cancer/breast/basic_info/risk_factors.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023d). Depression among women. https://www.cdc.gov/
    reproductivehealth/depression/index.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023e). Disparities in suicide. https://www.cdc.gov/suicide/facts/
    disparities-in-suicide.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023f). Information on risk behaviors for parents and with teens (ages
   12-19). https://www.cdc.gov/parents/teens/risk_behaviors.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023g). Suicide data and statistics. https://www.cdc.gov/suicide/
    suicide-data-statistics.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023h). What vaccines are recommended for you.
    https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/adults/rec-vac/index.html

Centre for Addiction and Mental Health. (n.d.). Anxiety: Screening & assessment. https://www.camh.ca/en/
    professionals/treating-conditions-and-disorders/anxiety-disorders/anxiety---screening-and-assessment

Cleveland Clinic. (2022). Teratogens. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/articles/24325-teratogens

Coleman-Jensen, A., Rabbitt M. P., Gregory, C. A. & Singh, A. (2022). Statistical supplement to household food
   security in the United States in 2021, AP-105, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.

Cousins, S. (2020). COVID-19 has "devastating" effect on women and girls. World Report, 396(10247), 301-302.
    https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(20)31679-2/fulltext

David-Ferdon C, Simon TR. (2014). Preventing youth violence: Opportunities for action. National Center for Injury
    Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/23501

Dhillon, N., Oliffe, J. L., Kelly, M. T., & Krist, J. (2020). Bridging barriers to cervical cancer screening in transgender
   men: A scoping review. American Journal of Men's Health, 14(3), 1557988320925691. https://doi.org/10.1177/
    1557988320925691

Feldman, S., Jeffries, A. & Garcia-Garcia, M. (2022, April 7). The data behind racism in healthcare.
    https://www.ipsos.com/en-us/knowledge/society/The-Data-Behind-Racism-in-Healthcare

Ferguson, L., Taylor, J., Davies, M., Shrubsole, C., Symonds, P., & Dimitroulopoulou, S. (2020). Exposure to indoor air
    pollution across socio-economic groups in high-income countries: A scoping review of the literature and a
   modelling methodology. Environment International, 143, 105748. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.105748

Fonseca, F., Robles-Martínez, M., Tirado-Muñoz, J., et al. (2021) A gender perspective of addictive disorders.
   Current Addiction Reports, 8, 89-99. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40429-021-00357-9

Frederiksen, U. R. (2021, August 12). Women's sexual and reproductive health services: Key findings from the 2020
   KFF Women's Health Survey--issue brief. KFF. https://www.kff.org/report-section/womens-sexual-and-
    reproductive-health-services-key-findings-from-the-2020-kff-womens-health-survey-issue-brief/
142 3 · References

Freire-Vargas, L. (2018). Violence as a public health crisis. AMA Journal of Ethics, 20(1), 25-28. https://doi.org/
    10.1001/journalofethics.2018.20.1.fred1-1801.

Frost, J. J., Mueller, J., & Pleasure, Z. H., (2021). Trends and differentials in receipt of sexual and reproductive health
   services in the United States: Services received and sources of care, 2006-2019. Guttmacher Institute, 2021.
    https://www.guttmacher.org/report/sexual-reproductive-health-services-in-us-sources-care-2006-2019.

Genazzani, A. R., Monteleone, P., Giannini, A., & Simoncini, T. (2021). Hormone therapy in the postmenopausal
   years: Considering benefits and risks in clinical practice. Human Reproduction Update, 27(6), 1115-1150.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/humupd/dmab026

Getahun, D., Oyelese, Y., Peltier, M., Mensah, N., Avila, C., & Fasset, M. J. (2022). Trends in postpartum depression
   by race/ethnicity and pre-pregnancy body mass index. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology, 228(1),
    S122-S123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2022.11.248

Gorfinkel, I., Perlow, E., & Macdonald, S. (2021) The trauma-informed genital and gynecologic examination.
   Canadian Medical Association Journal, 193(28), E1090. https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.210331

Haufe, A., & Leeners, B. (2023). Sleep disturbances across a woman's lifespan: What is the role of reproductive
   hormones? Journal of the Endocrine Society, 7(5), bvad036. https://doi.org/10.1210/jendso/bvad036

Health Assured. (2023, February). Women's mental health: The statistics. https://www.healthassured.org/blog/
    women-s-mental-health-the-statistics/

Health Resources & Services Administration. (2022). Health literacy. https://www.hrsa.gov/about/organization/
    bureaus/ohe/health-literacy

Healthy People 2030. (n.d.-a). Social determinants of health. https://health.gov/healthypeople/priority-areas/social-
    determinants-health

Healthy People 2030. (n.d.-b). Women: Evidence-based resources. https://health.gov/healthypeople/objectives-
    and-data/browse-objectives/women/evidence-based-resources

Hernandez, J. B., & Kim, P. Y. (2022). Epidemiology morbidity and mortality. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK547668/

Heron, M. (2021). Deaths: Leading causes for 2019. National Vital Statistics Reports, 70(9).

HIV and specific populations. (2021). https://hivinfo.nih.gov/understanding-hiv/fact-sheets/hiv-and-women

Jacobson, J. D., Dugdale, D. C., & Conaway, B. (2022, November 10). Aging changes in female reproductive system.
    Medline Plus. https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/004016.htm

Knight, J., & Nigam, Y. (2017). Anatomy and physiology of ageing 8: The reproductive system. Nursing Times, 113,
    44-47. https://cdn.ps.emap.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2017/08/170830-Anatomy-and-physiology-of-
    ageing-8-the-reproductive-system.pdf

Koyyada, A., & Orsu, P. (2020). Role of hypothyroidism and associated pathways in pregnancy and infertility: Clinical
   insights. Tzu Chi Medical Journal, 32(4), 312-317. https://doi.org/10.4103/tcmj.tcmj_255_19

Lacroix, A. E., Gondal, H., Shumway, K. R., Langaker, M. D. (2023, March 11). Physiology, menarche. StatPearls
    [Internet]. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29261991/

Lan, L., Jain, S., Patel, K. G., Crist, K. D., Borba, C. P. C. (2022, January 31). Perspectives on global women's mental
   health. https://www.psychiatrictimes.com/view/perspectives-on-global-womens-mental-health

Lee, D., Gibson, J. M., Brown, J., Habtewold, J., & Murphy, H. M. (2023). Burden of disease from contaminated
   drinking water in countries with high access to safely managed water: A systematic review. Water Research
   (Oxford), 242, 12024. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2023.120244

Leistikow, N., Smith, M. H. (2022). Perimenopause and mental health: Implications for the assessment and
   treatment of women at midlife.Advances in Psychiatry and Behavioral Health, 2 , 107-118. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.ypsc.2022.05.004

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              3 · References 143

Lockhart, R., & Kamaya, A. (2022). Patient-friendly summary of the ACR appropriateness criteria: Transgender
   breast cancer screening. Journal of the American College of Radiology, 19(4), E19. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.jacr.2021.10.015

March of Dimes. (2017). How long should you wait before getting pregnant again? https://www.marchofdimes.org/
    find-support/topics/planning-baby/how-long-should-you-wait-getting-pregnant-again

Martin, J. A., Hamilton, B. E., & Osterman, M. J. K. (2023). Births in the United States, 2020. NCHS Data Brief, no.
    418. National Center for Health Statistics. https://dx.doi.org/10.15620/cdc:109213

Masters, W., & Johnson, V. (1966). Human Sexual Response. Bantam Books.

Mayo Clinic. (2022, November 1). Calcium and calcium supplements: Achieving the right balance.
    https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/nutrition-and-healthy-eating/in-depth/calcium-supplements/
    art-20047097

Mayo Clinic. (2023). Menopause. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/menopause/symptoms-causes/
    syc-20353397

McHugh, R. K., & Weiss, R. D. (2019). Alcohol use disorder and depressive disorders. Alcohol Research: Current
   Reviews, 40(1), arcr.v40.1.01. https://doi.org/10.35946/arcr.v40.1.01

Morri, M., Ambrosi, E., Chiari, P. Magli, A. O., Gazineo, D., D'Alessandro, F., & Forni, C. (2019). One-year mortality
   after hip fracture surgery and prognostic factors: A prospective cohort study. Science Reports, 9, 18718.
    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-55196-6

Mosconi, L., Berti, V., Dyke, J., Schelbaum, E., Jett, S., Loughlin, L., Jang, G., Rahman, A., Hristov, H., Pahlajani, S.,
    Andrews, R., Matthews, D., Etingin, O., Ganzer, C., de Leon, M., Isaacson, R., Brinton, R.D. (2021). Menopause
   impacts human brain structure, connectivity, energy metabolism, and amyloid-beta deposition. Science Reports,
   11(1), 10867. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-90084-y

Mother to Baby. (2021). Critical periods of development [Internet]. National Library of Medicine.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK582659

Mullins, E., Perry, A., Banerjee, J., Grozeva, D., Bourne, T., Rand, A., Khunda, A., Kermack, A. J., Fayadh, A., Dall'Asta,
    A., Gerede, A., Nejad, A., Hammond, B., Dixon, C., Wyatt, C., Flood, C., O'Brien, C., Glenn-Sansum, C., Huson, C.,
   ... Germán Caro, W. (2022). Pregnancy and neonatal outcomes of COVID-19: The PAN-COVID Study. European
   Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, 276, 161-167. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.ejogrb.2022.07.010

National Cancer Institute. (2019). Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool. https://bcrisktool.cancer.gov/

National Cancer Institute. (2023a). Cervical cancer screening. https://www.cancer.gov/types/cervical/screening

National Cancer Institute. (2023b). Endometrial cancer screening. https://www.cancer.gov/types/uterine/patient/
    endometrial-screening-pdq

National Coalition Against Domestic Violence. (2020). Domestic violence. https://assets.speakcdn.com/assets/
    2497/domestic_violence-2020080709350855.pdf

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. (2023). Coronary heart disease: Women and heart disease.
    https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/coronary-heart-disease/women

National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. (n.d.). NIAID Women's Health Research: Bienniual Report (FY
   2019-2020). https://www.niaid.nih.gov/sites/default/files/NIAID-BiennialReport-2019.pdf

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (2023). Kidney disease statistics for the United
   States. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/health-statistics/kidney-disease

National Institute of Mental Health. (2023, January). Eating disorders. https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/
    eating-disorders

Nong, P., Raj, M., Creary, M., Kardia, S. L., & Platt, J. E. (2020). Patient-reported experiences of discrimination in the
144 3 · References

   US health care system. JAMA Network Open, 3(12), e2029650. 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.29650

North American Menopause Society. (2022). NAMS position statement. The 2022 hormone therapy position
   statement of the North American Menopause Society. Menopause: The Journal of the North American
   Menopause Society, 29(7), 767-794. https://doi.org/10.1097/GME.0000000000002028

Office on Women's Health. (2022). Sexually transmitted infections. https://www.womenshealth.gov/a-z-topics/
    sexually-transmitted-infections

Peacock, K., & Ketvertis, K. M. (2022, August 11). Menopause. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK507826/

Rapfogel, N., Gee, E., & Calsyn, M. (2020, March 23). 10 Ways the ACA has improved health care in the past decade.
    https://www.americanprogress.org/article/10-ways-aca-improved-health-care-past-decade/

Rivara, F., Adhia, A., Lyons, V., Massey, A., Mills, B., Morgan, E., Simckes, M., & Rowhani-Rahbar, A. (2019, October).
   The effects of violence on health. Health Affairs, 38(10). https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2019.00480

Rooney, K. L., & Domar, A. D. (2018). The relationship between stress and infertility. Dialogues in Clinical
   Neuroscience, 20(1), 41-47. https://doi.org/10.31887/DCNS.2018.20.1/klrooney

Saran R., Robinson B., Abbott K. C., et al. (2020). US Renal Data System 2019 annual data report: Epidemiology of
   kidney disease in the United States. American Journal of Kidney Disease, 75, A6-A7. https://www.kidney.org/
    news/newsroom/fsindex

Selhub, E. (2022, September 18). Nutritional psychiatry: Your brain on food. https://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/
    nutritional-psychiatry-your-brain-on-food-201511168626

Sertel, E., & Demir, M. (2023). Evaluation of the effects of COVID-19 disease and the trimester in which the disease
   is diagnosed on obstetric and neonatal outcomes: A retrospective cohort study. Journal of Obstetrics and
   Gynaecology Research, 49(2), 614-624. https://doi.org/10.1111/jog.15510

Shah, S., Jeong, K. S., Park, H., Hong, Y.-C., Kim, Y., Kim, B., Chang, N., Kim, S., Kim, Y., Kim, B.-N., Kwon, H., Bae, S.,
    Kim, H.-C., Leem, J.-H., Park, E.-K., Joo, H., Park, B., Ha, M., & Ha, E. (2020). Environmental pollutants affecting
    children's growth and development: Collective results from the MOCEH study, a multi-centric prospective birth
   cohort in Korea. Environment International, 137, 105547. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.105547

Silvestris, E., Lovero, D., & Palmirotta, R. (2019). Nutrition and female fertility: An interdependent correlation.
   Frontiers in Endocrinology, 10, 346. https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2019.00346

Siniscalchi, K. A., Broome, M. E., Fish, J., Ventimiglia, J., Thompson, J., Roy, P., Pipes, R., & Trivedi, M. (2020).
   Depression screening measurement-based care in primary care. Journal of Primary Care and Community Health,
    11, 2150132720931261. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7673056/

Statista. (2023). Female suicide rates in the U.S. from 2001 to 2021, by age group. https://www.statista.com/
    statistics/1114127/female-suicide-rate-in-the-us-by-age-group/

Steege, A., Silver, S., Mobley, A., & Sweeney, M. H. (2023, February). Work as a key social determinant of health: The
   case for including work in all health data collections. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
    https://blogs.cdc.gov/niosh-science-blog/2023/02/16/sdoh/

Sterling J., & Garcia, M. M. (2020) Cancer screening in the transgender population: A review of current guidelines,
   best practices, and a proposed care model. Translational Andrology and Urology, 9(6) 2771-2785.
    https://doi.org/10.21037/tau-20-954

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2022). Key substance use and mental health
   indicators in the United States: Results from the 2021 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS Publication
    No. PEP22-07-01-005, NSDUH Series H-57). Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality, Substance
    Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (n.d.). 2021 NSDUH Annual National Report.
    SAMHSA.gov. https://www.samhsa.gov/data/report/2021-nsduh-annual-national-report

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              3 · References 145

Taudorf, L., Nørgaard, A., Islamoska, S., Laursen, T. M., & Waldemar, G. (2021). Causes of death in people with
   dementia from 2002 to 2015: A nationwide study. Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, 82(4), 1609-1618.
    https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-201400

The Lancet Public Health (2020). Education: A neglected social determinant of health. The Lancet. Public Health,
   5(7), e361. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-2667(20)30144-4

Tong, M., & Artiga, S. (2021, December 9). Use of race in clinical diagnosis and decision making: Overview and
   implications. https://www.kff.org/report-section/use-of-race-in-clinical-diagnosis-and-decision-making-
    overview-and-implications-issue-brief/

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2022). Injuries, illness, and fatalities. https://www.bls.gov/iif/home.htm

U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2020). Dietary Guidelines for
   Americans 2020-2025 (9th ed.). Author.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2018). Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans (2nd ed.).
    Author.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2021). How smoking affects reproductive health. https://www.fda.gov/tobacco-
    products/health-effects-tobacco-use/how-smoking-affects-reproductive-health

U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2018a). Cervical cancer: Screening.
    https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/cervical-cancer-screening

U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2018b). Intimate partner violence, elder abuse, and abuse of vulnerable
   adults: Screening. https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/intimate-partner-
    violence-and-abuse-of-elderly-and-vulnerable-adults-screening

U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2018c). Prostate cancer: Screening.
    https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/prostate-cancer-screening

U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2021a). Colorectal cancer: Screening.
    https://uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/colorectal-cancer-screening#bootstrap-
    panel--4

U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2021b). Lung cancer: Screening. https://uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/
    uspstf/recommendation/lung-cancer-screening

U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2023a). Depression and suicide risk in adults: Screening.
    https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/screening-depression-suicide-risk-
    adults

U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2023b). Skin cancer: Screening. https://uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/
    uspstf/recommendation/skin-cancer-screening

UNAIDS. (2022). Global HIV and AIDS statistics--Fact sheet. https://www.unaids.org/en/resources/fact-sheet

Understanding community violence. (n.d.). Research Psychiatry College of Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago.
    https://www.psych.uic.edu/research/urban-youth-trauma-center/public-awareness/understanding-community-
    violence

Weiselberg, E. (2022). Menstrual considerations for transgender male and gender diverse adolescents who were
   assigned female at birth. Current Problems in Pediatric and Adolescent Health Care,52 (8), 101239.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cppeds.2022.101239

Wenger, B. (2021). Mikveh. https://jwa.org/encyclopedia/article/mikveh

Westmoreland, P. (Ed.). (2021). Tipping the scales: Ethical and legal dilemmas in managing severe eating disorders
    (1st ed.). American Psychiatric Association Publishing.

Wieland, U., & Kreuter, A. (2019). Anal cancer risk: HPV-based cervical screening programmes. The Lancet:
   Infectious Disease, 19(8), 799-800. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(19)30296-8
146 3 · References

Wild, S. (2022, February 16). Does drinking alcohol affect your fertility? https://www.bupa.co.uk/newsroom/
    ourviews/alcohol-affects-fertility

World Health Organization. (2021a) Adolescent mental health. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
    adolescent-mental-health

World Health Organization. (2021b). Falls. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/falls
World Health Organization. (2023a). Maternal mortality. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/

    maternal-mortality
World Health Organization. (2023b). Dementia. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/dementia
World Health Organization. (2023c). Suicide. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/suicide
World Health Organization. (n.d.-a). Tackling structural racism and ethnicity-based discrimination in health.

    https://www.who.int/activities/tackling-structural-racism-and-ethnicity-based-discrimination-in-health
World Health Organization. (n.d.-b). Violence against women. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/

    violence-against-women
Xu, J. Q., Murphy, S. L, Kochanski, K. D., & Arias, E. Mortality in the United States, 2021. NCHS Data Brief, no. 456.

    National Center for Health Statistics. 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db456.pdf
Zimlich, R., & Rainford, M. (2022). What to know about high blood pressure and pregnancy.

    https://www.verywellhealth.com/high-blood-pressure-and-pregnancy-5192445

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 4

Influences on Fertility

FIGURE 4.1 In Vitro Fertilization Conception occurs at the cellular level. (credit: "InVitroFertilization" by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (US Government Owned Photo)/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
4.1 Fertility and Conception
4.2 Genetics
4.3 Causes of Infertility
4.4 Treating Infertility

INTRODUCTION Many couples envision starting a family without any issues and within the first few months of
trying. The reality, though, is that conception is a complex process. The average success rate is only 20 percent to
37 percent for the average young, fertile, and healthy couple becoming pregnant in the first 3 months of trying
(Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, 2017). While most couples do eventually
achieve a pregnancy, a small subset of patients requires medical intervention. Some people expect to need
infertility treatment, such as those with known medical conditions, members of same-sex relationships, or people
who chose to become single parents. Nurses can provide education, community referrals, and emotional support
during this time.

4.1 Fertility and Conception

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Describe the components of fertility, both physical and psychosocial
    · Describe the stages of conception, including ovulation and fertilization
    · Describe the different causes of infertility
Human reproduction and conception have been celebrated in mythology, with symbols of female fertility evident in
ancient civilizations all around the world. In addition, world mythology reflects the historical importance and need
148  4 · Influences on Fertility

     for fertility and reproduction in different cultures (Behjati-Ardakani et al., 2016). People as far back as 3500 BCE to
     500 CE used the principles of insemination and "magic potions" in attempts to remedy childless royal families
     (Sharma et al., 2018). Though the stigma of infertility has largely changed and is still changing in some countries, the
     desire for a child remains strong for many people (Sharma et al., 2018). Infertility can be a life-changing experience
     for people. It affects both the body and mind and can completely alter a person's relationship with their partner,
     family, and friends. It is important for nurses to consider both the physical and psychosocial components of fertility
     when working with people who are having difficulty in conceiving.

     This section will address the concepts of fertility and infertility, including when patients should be advised to seek
     help, as well as the physical causes of and psychosocial factors involved with fertility. It will also delve into the
     diagnostic testing used to assess the fertility of both partners and the measures that can be used to improve fertility.

     Components of Fertility

     A person's ability to conceive a pregnancy is called fertility. The inability to become pregnant after 1 year of regular
     sexual intercourse without using any form of birth control is called infertility (American College of Obstetricians and
     Gynecologists [ACOG], 2022b). It is a global health problem, affecting approximately 1 in 6 adults worldwide (World
     Health Organization, 2023b). This rate is fairly consistent across different regions and countries, and there is no
     significant difference between resource-poor and resource-rich countries. Global access to affordable reproductive
     care is lacking. In most cases, care is provided as an out-of-pocket expense, which can be financially
     devastating--or completely inaccessible--for people with limited resources.

     Physical
     Three factors are essential for pregnancy to occur: the release of an egg, the presence of sperm, and a healthy
     environment for implantation. Many factors can influence the health of the egg, sperm, and uterus. Environmental
     factors such as pesticides, radiation, and unclean water can cause difficulty with conception. Genetics, infections,
     and substance use can also affect fertility.

     Egg
     The egg, or ovum, is the female gamete, or reproductive cell, and contains one-half the number of chromosomes
     found in the body's cells. Eggs are formed very early during the fetal development of female embryos, with nearly
     one million immature eggs (known as oogonia) present in the ovarian follicles at birth. That number decreases over
     the course of a person's lifespan, with only 400,000 remaining by puberty (Krajnik et al., 2023).

     When stimulated by follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), the oogonium in the immature follicle undergoes mitosis to
     form a primary oocyte and a stem cell. Both new cells are genetically identical diploid cells, meaning that each
     contains the full 46 chromosomes (Hutter, 2023). The primary oocyte then undergoes the first meiotic division to
     form a secondary oocyte and a polar body. The second meiotic division causes the polar body to form two daughter
     polar bodies. The secondary oocyte forms a mature ovum and a third polar body. The result is three polar bodies and
     one mature ovum, all of which contain the haploid number of chromosomes (Figure 4.2).

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.1 · Fertility and Conception                                                                                                          149

FIGURE 4.2 Oogenesis The development of egg cells begins with the oogonia. These cells undergo several rounds of mitosis and meiosis
to develop into a single ovum and three polar bodies. (credit: modification of "Oogenesis" by "Sciencia58"/Wikimedia Commons, CC0 1.0)

Sperm
Sperm cells are the male gametes or reproductive cells. Unlike the female gamete, sperm cells do not develop in the
male body until after puberty in a process known as spermatogenesis. Each seminiferous tubule in the testes is
lined with diploid cells, called spermatogonia, which contain the full 46 chromosomes and constantly undergo
mitotic division. Some spermatogonia move away from the lining of the seminiferous tubule to mature and become
primary spermatocytes. The primary spermatocytes undergo meiotic division to become two haploid (containing 23
chromosomes, instead of the usual 46) secondary spermatocytes. These secondary spermatocytes undergo a
second round of meiosis to become four haploid spermatids, which eventually develop into four sperm cells (Figure
4.3). This entire process takes around 74 days (Komeya et al., 2018).
150  4 · Influences on Fertility

     FIGURE 4.3 Spermatogenesis The development of sperm cells begins with immature spermatogonia. These spermatogonia undergo
     several rounds of mitosis and meiosis to develop into mature sperm cells in the testicles. (modification of work from Anatomy and
     Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     These developing sperm cells move from the seminiferous tubules in the testicles into the head of the epididymis.
     They travel through the epididymis, from the head to the tail, over the course of about 12 days, where they absorb
     nutrients and testosterone (Figure 4.4). By the time they reach the tail of the epididymis, the sperm cells are mature
     and fully able to fertilize an ovum. These mature sperm cells are then stored in the epididymal tail until just before
     ejaculation. When this occurs, sperm cells leave the epididymis and rapidly travel through the vas deferens and
     internal duct system. They combine with fluid released from the seminal vesicles, the Cowper (bulbourethral)
     glands, and the prostate gland to create semen, a nutrient-rich fluid that nourishes the sperm cells. The semen
     enters the urethra near the base of the penis, where strong muscular contractions push the semen out of the body
     (Soni et al., 2022).

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.1 · Fertility and Conception                                                                                                               151

FIGURE 4.4 Movement of Sperm through the Male Reproductive System Developing sperm cells move from the seminiferous tubules to
the epididymal tail before passing into the vas deferens and the other internal ducts in anticipation of ejaculation. (modification of work
from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Each ejaculation releases up to 200 million sperm cells. If sperm cells are ejaculated into the vagina, they propel
themselves through the cervix and into the female reproductive tract by rapid movements of the flagella, a long tail
that protrudes from the end of the sperm cell. It takes sperm cells approximately 4 to 6 hours to travel to the
fallopian tubes. Unlike egg cells, sperm cells can live up to about 5 days in the female reproductive tract
(Conception: How it works, n.d.).

Without the presence of both viable sperm and eggs in the female reproductive tract at the same time, conception
cannot occur.

Uterus
The final component needed for conception is the presence of a hormonally receptive uterus for implantation.
During the menstrual cycle, the uterus undergoes several important changes in anticipation of a pregnancy. As the
ovarian follicles enlarge, they begin to secrete estrogen. That estrogen signals the lining of the uterus, the
endometrium, to proliferate and thicken. This is the proliferative phase of the uterine cycle.

After ovulation occurs and progesterone levels rise, the endometrium enters the secretory phase. The lining
becomes even thicker and more vascular, which helps to prepare for the implantation of a fertilized egg, or zygote
(Figure 4.5). If pregnancy does not occur, the endometrium begins to break down and slough off during
menstruation, triggered by declining progesterone levels in the corpus luteum (Cable & Grider, 2023).
152  4 · Influences on Fertility

     FIGURE 4.5 Endometrial Proliferation during the Menstrual Cycle The uterus undergoes significant development after ovulation as it
     prepares for implantation and possible pregnancy. (modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice
     University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Even if ovulation perfectly coincides with sexual activity to result in a fertilized egg, pregnancy does not occur unless
     the zygote can properly implant in the uterine lining, triggering the hormonal cascade that occurs with pregnancy.

     Psychosocial
     Though conception and pregnancy are largely physiologic events, the nurse must not neglect the important
     psychosocial factors that are associated with fertility and conception. Stress and other societal pressure can impact
     both a person's ability and their desire to conceive.

     Societal Pressures
     Social implications of fertility and reproduction extend beyond the individual and their family to the whole society,
     just as cultural and social change can affect the individual and their family makeup (Behjati-Ardakani et al., 2016).
     Likewise, changes in society have also impacted family-building practices in the United States and globally. People,
     for many different reasons, have opted to wait longer to start a family. "These changing fertility rates by age shifted
     the median age at which women gave birth in the United States from age 27 in 1990 to age 30 in 2019" (Morse,
     2022). Several reasons for the delay in parenthood have been identified, including:

         · a belief that assisted reproductive technologies could correct any fertility problems
         · recognition that families could be formed through adoption
         · not having a partner with whom to build a family
         · not having the social support or financial stability in place to have children
         · ambivalence toward wanting to have children
         · more women focusing on building their career rather than starting a family
         · lack of knowledge about how fertility declines with age (Delbaere et al., 2020).

     Whatever the reason for delay, the effect of delayed childbearing is generally the same: Rates of fecundity decrease
     as the person assigned female at birth ages (Table 4.1). It is important to recognize that while the data about the
     effects of age on fertility are fairly consistent, they are an average. This means that one person may have
     significantly decreased fertility by the time they are 45, while another may have a similar decline by only 35 or 40
     years of age.

                                  Age of Patient in Years Chance of Conception within 1 Year

                                  <30  85%

                                  30   75%

                                  35   66%

                                  40   44%

                                  TABLE 4.1 The Odds of Conception within 1 Year Based on the Age of the
                                  Female Partner (Delbaere et al., 2020)

     In 2018, a large systematic review of 71 studies found that many study participants reported low to moderate

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.1 · Fertility and Conception                                                                                             153

knowledge about age-related fertility decline (Pedro et al., 2018). Researchers found that interventions to increase
this knowledge would be helpful, especially for men, persons with lower education, and family planning clinics
(Pedro et al., 2018). The studies analyzed in this review found that these populations in particular were found to
have lower knowledge about fertility and family planning (Pedro et al., 2018). Nurses working in family planning or
women's health settings should be aware of this knowledge gap and intervene as necessary.

        CULTURAL CONTEXT

Falling Birth Rates

Many countries all over the world have been dealing with low birth rates for the past several years. Countries need,
on average, a birth rate of at least 2.1 children per woman to maintain their population, yet the average birth rate in
Europe is only 1.59 (BBC News, 2020), and it is as low as 0.78 in South Korea (Young & Bae, 2023). There are many
reasons why people are choosing to not have as many children or to not have children at all:

    · Strenuous work culture
    · Poor wages
    · Inflation and high cost of living
    · Changing opinions about marriage (Young & Bae, 2023).

Scandinavia and France have seen success with increasing birth rates by increasing social benefits for families,
including tax breaks, subsidized childcare and generous family leave. However, Scandinavia also began to see falling
birth rates in recent years (BBC News, 2020), and similar policies were also not successful in South Korea (Young &
Bae, 2023). More study is needed to determine what policy changes and social support systems are needed to
improve birth rates moving forward.

(Young & Bae, 2023; BBC News, 2020)

Conception

Conception is a complex process, requiring several different precise processes. Ovulation, fertilization, and
implantation must all occur safely. Factors can interrupt the process of conception, such as hormonal imbalances,
structural abnormalities within the fallopian tube or uterus, or an inhospitable endometrium not allowing
implantation. The quality of the egg and sperm can also affect conception. Timing of these processes must also be
precise. When infertility occurs, health-care providers can examine these processes to potentially identify the cause
of infertility.

Ovulation
Each month after menarche (the first menstrual period), a cyclic pattern of hormonal changes and menstrual
bleeding occurs until menopause, which is the cessation of those cycles. This cycle is initiated by rising
gonadotropin (follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH]) levels, causing a cohort of ovarian follicles to grow, develop, and
secrete estrogen in the form of estradiol (E2). Eventually, most of these egg follicles atrophy, leaving one egg follicle
to become dominant and secrete larger and larger amounts of estradiol (see Figure 4.2). Once the egg is mature,
rising estradiol levels trigger the surge of another hormone, luteinizing hormone (LH), which causes the release of
the mature egg through the process of ovulation. Estrogen levels fall, but the empty egg follicle, now known as the
corpus luteum ("yellow body"), secretes the hormone progesterone (and small amounts of estradiol) to prepare the
body for pregnancy (Cable & Grider, 2023). The corpus luteum is hormonally active for about 14 days before it
degenerates and triggers the next menstrual period if pregnancy has not occurred. If conception does occur, the
corpus luteum will continue to secrete progesterone until the placenta is mature enough to support the growing
pregnancy.

The mature egg is released into the abdomen and is gently swept by the fimbriae, finger-like structures, into the
infundibulum of the fallopian tube, the small tube that allows the passage of the egg from the ovary to the uterus.
Small cilia and gentle muscular contractions, called peristalsis, move the ovum down toward the uterus, which it
enters just below the fundus. In most cases, fertilization with a single sperm cell occurs in the distal third, or
ampulla, of the fallopian tube. The egg is viable for only about 12 to 24 hours after ovulation (Conception: How it
154  4 · Influences on Fertility

     works, n.d.). After that time, it begins to disintegrate if fertilization has not occurred.

     Fertilization
     The penetration of an ovum by a single sperm cell is called fertilization. When that occurs, the membrane of the
     ovum, the zona pellucida, becomes impenetrable to other sperm cells (Conception: How it works, n.d.). This process
     triggers a series of other reactions:

         · completion of the second meiotic division of the secondary oocyte
         · formation of the female pronucleus from the nucleus of the secondary oocyte
         · formation of the male pronucleus from the head of the sperm
         · degeneration of the tail of the sperm
         · fusion of the two pronuclei and combination of the two sets of chromosomes to form the diploid number

     All these reactions occur in the fallopian tube, and once they are complete, the fertilized egg is called a zygote. As
     the zygote begins to travel down the fallopian tube toward the uterus, a series of mitotic divisions occur that cause
     the single-celled zygote to become two cells, then 4 cells, then 8, and finally 16 cells, a solid ball of cells called a
     morula. The zygote does not increase in size during these cellular divisions, so the daughter cells become
     progressively smaller (Figure 4.6). It takes about 4 days for a fertilized egg to form a morula after fertilization (Khan
     & Ackerman, 2023).

     FIGURE 4.6 Fertilization and Cell Division Cell division occurs rapidly after fertilization and continues while the zygote travels from the
     fallopian tube to the uterus. (modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
     CC BY 4.0 license)

     As the morula floats in the uterus, fluid begins to enter the intracellular space and separate the morula into two
     distinct parts. Eventually, the morula develops into a blastocyst on about day 5 after fertilization. The inner cell mass
     contains stem cells, while the outer layer of cells is the trophoblast (Rehman & Muzio, 2023).

     Implantation
     Implantation occurs most often in the fundus of the uterus around 5 to 6 days after fertilization (Conception: How it
     works, n.d.). As the zygote reaches the uterine wall, the trophoblast cells surrounding the blastocyst begin to push

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.2 · Genetics                                                                                                            155

away the endometrial cells, allowing the blastocyst to burrow into the lining of the uterus. The trophoblast now
begins to secrete enzymes that allow it to become completely buried in the endometrial lining, a process known as
implantation. This can cause the blood vessels at the site of implantation to break down slightly, sometimes causing
spotting known as implantation bleeding.

Chorionic villi are long, finger-like projections that extend from the trophoblast into the endometrium. They facilitate
the exchange of oxygen, nutrients, and waste products through the placenta. The zygote officially becomes an
embryo after implantation, from about day 15 until week 8 of pregnancy (Oliver & Basit, 2023).

4.2 Genetics

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Identify the characteristics of autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked recessive genetic
        disorders

    · Compare prenatal and postnatal testing to determine genetic disorders

No discussion of reproduction would be complete without an explanation of how genetic traits are passed from one
generation to the next. In addition to obvious traits such as hair color and eye color, genes that encode for the
synthesis of thousands of proteins that are crucial to normal functioning of the body are also inherited. Missteps in
any of the genetic replication processes can lead to abnormalities in chromosome number, structure, or function,
and can dramatically affect the person's health and well-being. This section will discuss chromosomal inheritance
patterns and analysis, as well as prenatal and postnatal genetic testing options for couples trying to conceive.

Genetic Disorders

Humans typically have a total of 46 chromosomes organized in pairs: 22 pairs of autosomes (body chromosomes)
and 1 pair of sex chromosomes (XX in people who are genetically female or XY in people who are genetically male).
One set of chromosomes (22 autosomes and 1 sex chromosome) is inherited from each parent. Each chromosome
contains thousands of genes, which make up the basic unit of heredity and are composed of proteins and DNA.
Analyzing the chromosomes of both partners can provide insight into the causes of infertility. It can also prevent
transmission of genetic abnormalities that can have a profound effect on the developing fetus.

Chromosome Analysis
A chromosome analysis is a simple blood test that can be performed on either partner and can provide information
about the chromosomal number and structure. The blood sample is treated with a special stain that allows the
chromosomes to be visualized. This gives them the appearance of banded strings. The chromosomes can then be
sorted into their 23 matching pairs so that they can be identified and evaluated. This test, known as a karyotype,
may be indicated for patients based on information gleaned during the history, physical exam, or other assessment
findings (Figure 4.7).
156  4 · Influences on Fertility

     FIGURE 4.7 Karyotype Humans have a total of 22 pairs of autosomes (body cell chromosomes) and one pair of sex chromosomes (XX in
     genetic females or XY in genetic males). (credit: "Human male karyotype" by National Human Genome Research Institute, Public Domain)

     Abnormal Chromosome Number
     All body cells contain the diploid number (2N) of chromosomes, 46. The sex cells (egg and sperm), on the other
     hand, contain only the haploid number (N), or 23 chromosomes. Sometimes, a replication error occurs, and a cell
     contains an abnormal number of chromosomes. There are two types of numerical chromosomal abnormalities:
     aneuploidy, which is an abnormal number of chromosomes, and polyploidy, which is an abnormal number of
     chromosome sets (Milani & Tadi, 2023). Aneuploidies can take the form of a monosomy, which is when a cell is
     missing a chromosome, or the more common trisomy, which is when the cell has an extra chromosome. An example
     of polyploidy is triploid cells (3N), which have 3 full sets of chromosomes, or 69 chromosomes.
     These chromosomal numerical errors most commonly occur as a result of faulty mitotic or meiotic divisions of the
     egg or sperm, but they can also occur during embryonic development or through parental inheritance (Milani & Tadi,
     2023).
     During meiosis, the paired chromosomes normally separate, allowing one complete set of chromosomes to be found
     in each daughter cell. However, if this separation process doesn't happen correctly, an extra chromosome or set of
     chromosomes can be found in one daughter cell, with the other daughter cell missing chromosomes (Figure 4.8).
     This is known as nondisjunction. Nondisjunction is more common in older persons assigned female at birth and in
     patients exposed to certain environmental toxins (Wasielak-Politowska & Kordowitzki, 2022).

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.2 · Genetics                                                                                                                               157

FIGURE 4.8 Nondisjunction in Sperm Cells Abnormal chromosomal numbers occur because of nondisjunction, the improper division of
chromosomes during meiosis or mitosis. In sperm cells, nondisjunction can occur at either meiosis I or meiosis II. (credit: modification of
work from Concepts of Biology. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Many aneuploidies are incompatible with life, but a few relatively common conditions are caused by either trisomies
or monosomies. See 10.4 Fetal Growth and Development for more information about common aneuploidies. If
patients desire genetic testing, screening can be done starting in the first trimester.

Abnormal Chromosome Structure
Structural chromosomal abnormalities occur when there are changes to the chromosome's structure, such as
missing or extra genetic material. These changes can be balanced (there are changes to the arrangement of the
genes, but there is no loss or gain of genetic material) or unbalanced (there is a loss or gain of genetic material).
People with balanced mutations are less likely to have a phenotypic effect, though it is possible, because they retain
all the genetic material (Yahaya et al., 2021).

Like numerical abnormalities, structural chromosomal abnormalities also occur because of errors in cell division,
parental inheritance, or early embryonic division (National Human Genome Research Institute, 2020). Many
different types of mutations can cause these types of errors to occur (Yahaya et al., 2021):

    · Deletion: A piece of the chromosome is missing.
    · Duplication: A piece of the chromosome is repeated, causing additional genetic material.
    · Inversion: One piece of the chromosome is taken out and turned upside down before reconnecting with the

        chromosome.
    · Translocation: A piece of the chromosome is moved to a different location on the same chromosome or to a
158  4 · Influences on Fertility

             different chromosome.
               Reciprocal translocation: Pieces from two chromosomes are exchanged.
               Robertsonian translocation: The short arm of two chromosomes breaks off, allowing the two long arms to
                   stick together in one long chromosome.

     These mutations can occur in any chromosome or group of chromosomes and can cause a wide variety of effects,
     ranging from phenotypically normal to incompatible with life. Even very small unbalanced mutations can have
     significant effects on the person.

     Abnormal Sex Chromosomes
     The sex chromosomes, X and Y, can also be affected by both numerical and structural chromosomal abnormalities.
     These conditions are more likely to cause reproductive problems and infertility (Wang et al., 2022). The most
     common sex chromosome abnormalities are presented in Table 4.2.

     Condition Abnormality Incidence                   Clinical Features

     Turner    Monosomy               1 in 2,000       · short stature
     syndrome  X, or XO               female live      · characteristic physical features (short, webbed neck,
                                      births
                                                          low-set ears, abnormalities in hands and feet)
                                                       · premature ovarian failure
                                                       · abnormal onset of puberty
                                                       · learning challenges
                                                       · cardiovascular abnormalities

     Klinefelter XXY                  1 in 600 male    · small, firm testes
     syndrome                         live births      · sparse body and facial hair
                                                       · gynecomastia
                                                       · tall stature
                                                       · abnormal body structure
                                                       · infertility

     Triple X  XXX                    1 in 1,000       · epicanthal folds
                                      female live      · widely spaced eyes
     syndrome                         births           · inward bowed breastbone
                                                       · seizures
                                                       · hypotonia
                                                       · taller than average height
                                                       · very curved pinky fingers

     XYY       XYY                    1 in 1,000 male  · tall stature
                                      live births      · problems with language
                                                       · problems with coordination
                                                       · behavioral problems
                                                       · hypotonia
                                                       · widely spaced eyes
                                                       · very curved pinky finger

     TABLE 4.2 Disorders Caused by Sex Chromosome Abnormalities (Li et al., 2021)

     Inheritance
     The Human Genome Project, a massive international scientific collaboration, was published in 2001. The goal of this
     project was to sequence the entire human genome. Scientists found approximately 20,000 protein-coding genes,
     along with thousands of other pseudo-genes and RNA coding genes (Jackson et al., 2018). Mutations in those genes

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.2 · Genetics                                                                                                                               159

are widespread and are linked to thousands of diseases.

The genes found on chromosomes are passed from generation to generation. The pattern of inheritance responsible
for this transmission can vary depending on the number of genes responsible for trait expression. Some traits, such
as cleft lip/palate, neural tube defects, and pyloric stenosis, are controlled by multiple genes, known as
multifactorial inheritance. Other traits are controlled by single genes, known as unifactorial inheritance.

Genes are either dominant or recessive. When both genes of a pair are present, the phenotypic trait of the dominant
gene is expressed. If both genes that are present are recessive, the recessive trait will be expressed. Three types of
unifactorial inheritance are autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked recessive (National Library of
Medicine, 2021b).

Autosomal Dominant Inheritance
An autosomal dominant inheritance disorder is caused when only one copy of the dominant allele is needed to
express the trait. Because only one gene is needed to express the trait, there is a 50 percent chance of inheritance
from an affected, heterozygous parent (Figure 4.9). These types of disorders tend to run in families across multiple
generations, known as vertical transmission. The severity of the disorder can sometimes range significantly, even
between one generation and the next. It is also possible for these diseases to form because of a new mutation that
has not been inherited from the previous generation. Patients who have a family member with an autosomal
dominant disease may request genetic testing to see if they are a carrier, particularly if the disorder does not cause
symptoms until later in life, as in Huntington disease. In some cases, the result can affect childbearing decisions or
other major life choices (Severijns et al., 2021).

FIGURE 4.9 Autosomal Dominant Inheritance This diagram demonstrates the inheritance of autosomal dominant traits. Note how 50
percent of the children of a parent with the gene will also inherit the genetic trait or disorder. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Autosomal Recessive Inheritance
Genes that are autosomal recessive require the presence of both recessive alleles for the trait to be expressed.
Someone who is affected by these types of disorders must have inherited the recessive gene from both parents
(National Human Genome Research Institute, 2023). Heterozygous individuals, those who carry both the dominant
and recessive alleles, have a 50 percent chance of passing the recessive allele to their children. If both parents carry
the gene, their child has a 25 percent chance of contracting the disease (Figure 4.10). Offering carrier testing to
couples trying to conceive may help to identify and reduce the risk of these diseases. Autosomal recessive diseases
have a horizontal pattern of inheritance, meaning that they are found among siblings, but not people of earlier
160  4 · Influences on Fertility

     generations. They are found equally in males and females but may be found more frequently in particular ethnicities
     or populations.

     FIGURE 4.10 Autosomal Recessive Inheritance In the autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, when two carriers have children, each
     child has a 25 percent chance of having the disease and a 50 percent chance of being carrier. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
     OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Some of the more common diseases that follow the autosomal patterns of inheritance are presented in Table 4.3.

     Disease          Pattern of      Description
                      Inheritance

     Huntington       Autosomal       Causes the nerve cells in the brain to break down, causing changes in
     disease          dominant        behavior, motor skills, and personality

     Factor V Leiden  Autosomal       Causes an increased risk of thrombosis, particularly in people who are
                      dominant        homozygous for the allele, which can sometimes affect a person's ability to get
                                      or stay pregnant

     Cystic fibrosis  Autosomal       Causes very thick and sticky mucus, which blocks the airways, increases the
                      recessive       risk for infection, and affects the ability of the body to absorb nutrients from
                                      food

     Tay-Sachs        Autosomal       Causes progressive damage and death of cells in the brain
                      recessive

     Phenylketonuria  Autosomal       Causes increase of the amino acid phenylalanine in the body because it blocks
     (PKU)            recessive       the conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine

     Sickle cell      Autosomal       Causes sickle-shaped red blood cells that are unable to properly move
     disease          recessive       through the blood vessels and can accumulate in clumps, causing severe pain
                                      and other complications (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022b)

     TABLE 4.3 Common Autosomal Dominant and Autosomal Recessive Disorders

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.2 · Genetics                                                                                                                        161

X-Linked Recessive Inheritance
X-linked genes are carried on the X chromosome. When these diseases are passed down to the next generation, this
is referred to as X-linked inheritance. These diseases disproportionately affect more males than females because
males must inherit only one affected X chromosome to be affected. Females must inherit two copies, one from each
parent, to have the disease.

Female carriers have a 50 percent chance of passing the affected X chromosome to their children. Affected males
will pass the carrier gene on to any female children. Those female children will be carriers if they receive a normal X
chromosome from their female parent, but they will have the disease if they inherit an affected X chromosome
instead (Figure 4.11). Examples of X-linked recessive disorders include hemophilia and color-blindness.

FIGURE 4.11 X-Linked Inheritance The genes for some diseases are carried on the X chromosome. Male offspring have a 50 percent
chance of inheriting the disorder from a carrier mother. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Fragile X syndrome is another X-linked recessive disease with a complicated inheritance pattern. It occurs during
replication of the X chromosome where specific proteins are skipped instead of replicated. This pattern can occur
only a few times (5 to 44 skipped), causing fewer complications, or many times (>200 skipped), causing the full
condition (The National Fragile X Foundation, n.d.). Complications of fragile X include intellectual disability, behavior
problems, and physical differences, such as large, protruding ears, prominent forehead, and hypermobile joints (The
National Fragile X Foundation, n.d.).

Genetic Testing

Genetic testing is an important component in the management of reproductive care, both in patients who are newly
pregnant, and in those planning to conceive. This type of testing can identify or diagnose genetic disorders early in
the pregnancy, allowing for termination, if desired, or for a greater level of care through pregnancy, birth, and the
newborn period if indicated.

Carrier Screening
Genetic carrier screening can occur either before pregnancy, such as at a preconception visit or before initiating an
infertility treatment cycle, or at the first prenatal visit. It is a simple blood test that can provide information about
whether the patient is a carrier of common genetic diseases. The options for these tests range from screening for a
single disease, such as cystic fibrosis, to extensive panels that test for the genes for over 500 diseases. These
panels mostly screen for autosomal recessive disorders. Most providers will begin by testing the partner assigned
female at birth, and then test the partner assigned male at birth if there is positive result on the initial screening test
162  4 · Influences on Fertility

     (ACOG, 2022a).

     It is important to recognize that carrier screening is an individual choice; some couples may prefer the extensive
     testing panel, while others may prefer a more targeted approach, testing only for diseases common to their ethnic or
     family background. The nurse may need to provide information about autosomal recessive inheritance, the benefits
     of carrier testing, what positive testing results indicate, and their impact on a potential pregnancy. Referral to a
     genetic counselor or specialist may be indicated if either partner has a positive screening test (ACOG, 2022a).

     Prenatal Testing
     There are two types of prenatal genetic testing: prenatal screening and prenatal diagnosis. Both types of testing
     occur during pregnancy.

     Preimplantation Genetic Screening/Diagnosis (PGS/D)
     Preimplantation genetic screening/diagnosis (PGS/D) is a form of very early prenatal screening that can occur only in
     conjunction with in vitro fertilization (IVF). During this procedure, a single cell is removed for biopsy from an embryo
     that was formed in the lab (University of California San Francisco, n.d.).

         · PGS occurs when the embryo is screened for chromosomal aneuploidies, such as Down syndrome.
         · PGD occurs when the embryo is analyzed for the presence of a particular gene, such as the gene associated

             with cystic fibrosis. This testing is particularly helpful in couples who have had carrier screening that identifies
             both partners as carrying a particular genetic disorder.

     Healthy embryos can then be selected for later embryo transfer.

             LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

     Embryo Transfer of Abnormal Embryo after PGD/PGS

     Imagine you are a nurse working with a couple who has been trying to conceive for several years and has had
     several failed treatment cycles. They have decided to undergo PGS with IVF as their next step. After 2 weeks of
     injectable medication, the patient has 18 eggs retrieved, 10 fertilized, and 6 embryos survive to the biopsy
     procedure. Unfortunately, when the results come back, 5 out of the six embryos are aneuploidic, and one embryo
     has trisomy 21, or Down syndrome.

     The provider recommends against transferring any of the embryos, but the couple does not have money to proceed
     with another cycle and would like to transfer the embryo anyway. They state that they would rather be parents to a
     child with Down syndrome than not be parents at all.

     This leads to an ethical question: Is it ethical for the provider to transfer the embryo, knowing that the child will have
     a genetic disorder that could put them at risk for significant cardiac abnormalities? Further, is it ethical for the
     provider to refuse this patient's request?

     How do you feel about this couple's wishes? How would you respond if the couple, or provider, asked your opinion?
     This is a scenario in which there are no easy answers. The nurse can only provide an empathetic ear, educate the
     couple about the risks of moving forward with the transfer, and refer them to genetic specialists or counselors. The
     provider may decide to consult with a legal or ethical specialist for further advice and consideration before moving
     forward with either course of action.

     Prenatal Screening
     The series of tests that are performed during pregnancy to determine the risk of the fetus having an aneuploidy, a
     neural tube defect, or another abnormality suggestive of a genetic disorder is called the prenatal screening. The
     tests include the following:

         · First Trimester Screening: Performed between 10 and 13 weeks of pregnancy, the first trimester screen
             consists of a blood test and ultrasound. The blood test looks at two substances: pregnancy-associated plasma
             protein-A (PAPP-A) and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). Abnormal levels of either of these could
             indicate a chromosomal abnormality. The ultrasound, called a fetal nuchal translucency test, looks at the back
             of the fetus's neck. Increased thickening or fluid is an abnormal result and could indicate a chromosomal

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            4.2 · Genetics  163

        abnormality.
    · Second Trimester Screening: The second trimester screening consists of a blood test between 15 and 22

        weeks of pregnancy measuring alpha-fetoprotein, hCG, unconjugated estriol, and inhibin A. An ultrasound can
        also be performed between 18 and 22 weeks of pregnancy. The blood test looks for markers that suggest
        Down syndrome, Edwards syndrome, and neural tube defects. The ultrasound is a comprehensive test that
        measures the fetus's abdominal organs, limbs, brain, spine, and facial features for signs of a chromosomal
        abnormality.
    · Noninvasive Prenatal Testing (NIPT): NIPT is a maternal blood test that is offered early in the first trimester.
        The test looks at small fragments of fetal DNA that are found in the pregnant person's bloodstream. Those
        cells are from the placenta and are shed throughout the pregnancy. While this type of test does not definitively
        diagnose a genetic disorder, it does screen for chromosomal abnormalities, like trisomies and aneuploidy
        (Goldwaser & Klugman, 2018).

Prenatal Diagnosis
Prenatal diagnostic testing is more specific than screening. Patients with positive results on their screening test or
those who are at higher risk for having a fetus with a genetic disorder (such as older patients) are good candidates
for this type of testing. Samples are taken directly from the fetal tissues and used for chromosomal analysis. Table
4.4 compares the two main types of procedures used for prenatal diagnosis: chorionic villus sampling, which
analyzes placental cells, and amniocentesis, which evaluates the amniotic fluid surrounding the fetus.

            Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS)                                                 Amniocentesis

Timing      Anytime in the first or second trimester, but ideally between                   Between 15 and 20 weeks'
            10 and 12 weeks' gestation                                                      gestation

Source of   Chorionic villi of the placenta                                                 Amniotic fluid
sample

Procedure   Sample of placental tissue obtained transcervically or                          Sterile needle introduced into
            transabdominally under ultrasound guidance                                      the amnion sac under
                                                                                            ultrasound guidance

Advantages  · the only diagnostic test available in the first trimester                     · allows for direct
               for earlier diagnosis                                                           examination of fetal
                                                                                               chromosomes
            · allows direct examination of the chromosomes
                                                                                            · can also be used to
                                                                                               detect intraamniotic or
                                                                                               fetal infection

                                                                                            · can be used to detect
                                                                                               neural tube defects

TABLE 4.4 Comparison of Chorionic Villus Sampling and Amniocentesis (Carlson & Vora, 2017)
164  4 · Influences on Fertility

     Disadvantages                              Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS)                       Amniocentesis

                                  · may reflect confined placental mosaicism (the placenta       · not performed in the
                                     has an abnormal number of chromosomes, but the                 first trimester, delaying
                                     fetus is chromosomally normal) in a small percentage of        decisions about
                                     results                                                        pregnancy outcomes

                                  · does not test for neural tube defects                        · higher risk of
                                                                                                    complications earlier in
                                                                                                    the pregnancy

     Risk of        1 in 455                                                                     1 in 900
     pregnancy
     loss

     TABLE 4.4 Comparison of Chorionic Villus Sampling and Amniocentesis (Carlson & Vora, 2017)

     Postnatal Testing
     Postnatal testing, or the newborn screen, occurs after the baby is born and consists of a capillary blood test
     collected after the first 24 hours of life before discharge or 6 days of age. This universal testing program is mandated
     by U.S. law but is run by each state. The program recommends testing for 31 core disorders and an additional
     secondary 26 disorders that do not present at birth with symptoms (Advisory Committee on Heritable Disorders in
     Newborns and Children, 2023). The most common disorders on the newborn screen are cystic fibrosis,
     galactosemia, PKU, thyroid dysfunction, and sickle cell disease. The hope is that early detection and treatment of
     these conditions improves the quality of life for newborns who test positive. Chapter 23 Newborn Assessment
     provides additional information on the newborn screen and assessing the newborn for possible genetic conditions.

     It is the nurse's responsibility to collect the sample by heel stick, usually 2 to 3 days after birth and after the baby
     has had a chance to feed. If collected before the 24-hour mark, the test may not be valid and may yield a false-
     negative result. It is important for the nurse to recognize that the results may have a profound impact on the
     patient's reproductive future as well. The parents may not have realized that they are both carriers for these
     conditions until their newborn tests positive.

     4.3 Causes of Infertility

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Describe the different types of infertility in persons assigned female at birth
         · Describe the different types of infertility in persons assigned male at birth
         · Explain various treatments to improve fertility

     Fertility is a delicate balance that depends on many different factors. Nutritional deficiencies, substance use, and
     exposure to environmental toxins can all result in poor-quality egg and sperm cells and can contribute to infertility.
     There are two types of infertility: primary infertility is diagnosed if a person has never been pregnant, and
     secondary infertility occurs when a person who has previously carried and delivered a pregnancy cannot become
     pregnant again. Infertility can be caused by factors in the partner assigned female at birth, the partner assigned
     male at birth, or both. In many cases, a specific cause can't be found for a couple's inability to conceive.

     Infertility of Persons Assigned Female at Birth

     According to a large multinational study performed by the World Health Organization, approximately 37 percent of
     infertile couples experience infertility of persons AFAB (Walker & Tobler, 2022). That same study identified the most
     common identifiable factors as follows:

     · ovulatory disorders--25 percent
     · endometriosis--15 percent
     · pelvic adhesions--12 percent

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.3 · Causes of Infertility                                                                                                165

    · tubal blockage--11 percent
    · other tubal/uterine abnormalities--11 percent
    · hyperprolactinemia--7 percent (Walker & Tobler, 2022)

A comprehensive history and physical assessment can help to determine the possible cause(s) of a patient's
inability to conceive.

Medications can lead to infertility. Chemotherapy agents can damage the tissue of the ovary leading to infertility
(Bhardwaj et al., 2023). Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) at high doses or in long-term use can cause
difficulty in conceiving. Antipsychotic medications, spironolactone (Aldactone), and illegal drugs such as marijuana
and cocaine can also affect fertility (NHS, 2023).

Hormonal and Ovulatory Dysfunction
Ovulatory dysfunction makes up the largest percentage of cases of female factor infertility. If an egg is not released
by the ovary on a regular basis, there is no opportunity for fertilization or conception. The two main types of
ovulatory dysfunction are oligoovulation, a pattern of irregular ovulation, and anovulation, the complete absence of
ovulation. The World Health Organization has subdivided ovulatory disorders into four classifications (Walker &
Tobler, 2022).

  1. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadal anovulation: This disorder is characterized by decreased secretion of
        gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). When GnRH secretion is decreased, the secretion of FSH and LH
        from the anterior pituitary gland is also suppressed. This leads to low estrogen, poor follicular growth, and
        anovulation. Also known as hypothalamic amenorrhea, this condition is most common in people with eating
        disorders, excessive exercise, decreased caloric intake, or significant weight loss.

  2. Normogonadotropic normoestrogenic anovulation: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common
        type of normogonadotropic normoestrogenic anovulation, affecting 8 percent of all persons AFAB of
        childbearing age (Walker & Tobler, 2022). It is responsible for between 80 percent and 85 percent of all cases
        of anovulation (Walker & Tobler, 2022). People can be diagnosed with PCOS if they have at least two of the
        three criteria: oligo/anovulation, clinical signs of high androgens (acne, hirsutism, male pattern hair loss), or
        polycystic ovaries on ultrasound (Figure 4.12) (Tay et al., 2020). People with PCOS often do not ovulate
        regularly; it is believed that there is an abnormal pulsing of GnRH, which leads to dysfunction in developing a
        mature follicle (Walker & Tobler, 2022).

  3. Hypergonadotropic hypoestrogenic anovulation: This type of anovulation is associated with the natural aging
        process, as well as primary ovarian insufficiency (POI), defined as ovarian failure before the age of 40. The
        number and quality of eggs that a person has decreases with age. It is believed that the decrease in quality is
        due to the increased occurrence of meiotic nondisjunction (errors in cell division), which can lead to
        chromosomal abnormalities. POI is most notably associated with Turner syndrome, a genetic syndrome that
        causes a person AFAB to have a 45X karyotype, instead of the typical 46XX. In addition, cigarette smoking is
        associated with premature menopause and decreased numbers of ovarian follicles (Walker & Tobler, 2022).

  4. Hyperprolactinemic anovulation: Hyperprolactinemia, or elevated serum prolactin levels, can lead to several
        effects:
          suppression of GnRH from the hypothalamus
          low LH, which causes anovulation and amenorrhea
          poor progesterone secretion from the corpus luteum
        Normal prolactin levels are typically under 20 ng/mL. Serum levels above 100 ng/mL are typically associated
        with pituitary microadenomas, a benign tumor of the pituitary gland.
166  4 · Influences on Fertility

     FIGURE 4.12 Polycystic Ovary An ovary with PCOS contains many small follicles. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
     CC BY 4.0 license)

       CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

       Analyze Cues: Polycystic Ovary Syndrome

       Irregular periods are a common symptom among patients seeking infertility treatment. Of the many potential
       reasons why someone may have irregular periods, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is one of the most common
       causes, and fertility nurses must be aware that it is present in 6 percent to 12 percent of patients of childbearing
       age (PCOS, 2022). However, people with PCOS have other symptoms besides irregular periods, and many
       people with PCOS do not have irregular cycles. The nurse must learn to recognize the other cues that make up
       the entire clinical presentation of PCOS, which may include:

           · obesity;
           · hirsutism (abnormal hair growth on the face, back, or chest);
           · acne;
           · male pattern hair loss;
           · insulin resistance and other metabolic changes;
           · polycystic ovaries noted on transvaginal ultrasound; and
           · elevated serum androgen levels.

     Endometrial or Uterine Problems
     Structural problems in the uterus can also prevent pregnancy from happening, as implantation may not be possible.
     These may include the following:

         · Uterine fibroids: Uterine fibroids are noncancerous growths that occur in the muscle tissue of the uterus.
             They can be subserosal (in the outer wall of the uterus), intramural (in the muscular layer), or submucosal (in
             the inner layer; Figure 4.13). Not all fibroids will affect fertility, and, in fact, most will not. However, very large
             fibroids, or those that protrude into the endometrial cavity are more likely to make conception more difficult
            (Fibroids and fertility, n.d.).

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.3 · Causes of Infertility                                                                                                                   167

    FIGURE 4.13 Uterine Fibroids Fibroids are benign tumors that are found in the uterus. They can occur in the inner lining of the
    cavity, in the muscular lining, or in the outer serosal layer of the uterus. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
    BY 4.0 license)

· Uterine polyps: Uterine polyps are also noncancerous growths, but these are found in the endometrial lining.
   Polyps are often an incidental finding during testing, but their effect on fertility is not clear (Chami &
   Saridogan, 2017). While many people with uterine polyp can successfully carry a pregnancy to term, research
   does suggest that removing them may be beneficial before proceeding with fertility treatment, particularly in
   vitro fertilization (IVF).

· Abnormal shape: Congenital abnormalities of the uterus can present in many ways (Figure 4.14). Depending
   on the extent of the abnormality, sperm may not be able to reach the egg, or implantation of a fertilized egg
   may not be possible.

    FIGURE 4.14 Congenital Abnormalities of the Uterus Congenital abnormalities of the uterus can cause the uterus to present in
    many different shapes and conformations. Depending on the shape, it may be difficult for someone to become and stay pregnant.
    (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

· Scarring: Scarring from previous trauma, surgeries, or infections can block the passage of sperm through the
   uterus or the movement of a fertilized egg into the uterus. It can also prevent implantation from occurring in
   the uterus and may increase the risk for ectopic pregnancy elsewhere in the reproductive tract.

· Endometriosis: Endometriosis is the development of endometrial tissue outside the uterus. This tissue
   responds to the hormones of the menstrual cycle, which cause it to grow and proliferate and then break down
   and bleed, just like a menstrual period. However, blood from endometriosis has nowhere to go and becomes
   trapped in the body, causing scar tissue or adhesions. This tissue can block sperm or the egg from reaching
   the fallopian tube for fertilization to take place (Hill et al., 2020).

· Endometritis: Endometritis is an inflammation or infection of the endometrial lining of the uterus. If present,
   it can prevent implantation and contribute to infertility. Endometritis can be acute, such as a postpartum
168  4 · Influences on Fertility

             infection after a cesarean delivery, or it can be chronic.

     Tubal Issues
     Blockages in the fallopian tube(s), also known as tubal occlusion, can prevent sperm cells from reaching the egg.
     These blockages can result from several factors, including:

         · infection
         · inflammation
         · scar tissue from endometriosis or previous pelvic or abdominal surgery
         · adhesions
         · structural issues (Roberts, 2023)

     A hydrosalpinx is a type of blockage in the fallopian tube caused by the buildup of fluid. Like a blockage from scar
     tissue, it causes difficulty for the movement of both sperm and egg and results in infertility (Figure 4.15).
     Hydrosalpinx also increases the risk for ectopic pregnancy, where a fertilized egg implants outside the uterus, most
     commonly in the fallopian tube. The risk factors for developing a hydrosalpinx are the same as for a tubal blockage,
     including infection, pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), and scar tissue or adhesions from prior abdominal surgery
     (Yao et al., 2023).

     FIGURE 4.15 Hydrosalpinx in the Fallopian Tube A hydrosalpinx is an accumulation of fluid in the fallopian tube, which prevents the
     passage of sperm or egg. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Infertility of Persons Assigned Male at Birth

     Infertility in persons AMAB is responsible for around 20 percent of cases and contributes to another 30 percent to
     40 percent of all infertility cases (Leslie et al., 2023). Many potential etiologies, including structural, hormonal,
     infectious, and genetic, exist. These factors can cause azoospermia, defined as the complete absence of sperm
     cells, or oligospermia, a low sperm count.

     Medications can also affect infertility with persons AMAB. Chemotherapy, methotrexate (Trexall), isotretinoin
     (Accutane), and systemic steroids can lead to infertility. Tetracycline can affect sperm and lead to infertility (Velez &
     Ohlander, 2021). Antidepressants can cause premature ejaculation, erectile dysfunction, and poor libido. Opioids
     can cause hypogonadism. And illegal substances such as cocaine and marijuana can also lead to infertility (Velez &
     Ohlander, 2021).

     Issues with Sperm Transport
     Blockages in the vas deferens or ejaculatory ducts can prevent the release of sperm cells during ejaculation or the
     transport of sperm through the reproductive tract. These blockages can result from:

         · scar tissue after surgery, trauma, or injury
         · infection
         · the presence of a tumor that presses on the reproductive structures
         · a vasectomy

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.3 · Causes of Infertility                                                                                                                    169

    · congenital absence of the vas deferens (World Health Organization, 2023a).

Hormonal Causes
Abnormalities in hormones produced by the pituitary gland, hypothalamus, or testes can lead to the poor production
of sperm. These hormones include testosterone, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and prolactin.
Hormonal abnormalities can be caused by pituitary or hypothalamic disease or tumors, some drugs or medications,
and even hyperthyroidism. Testosterone supplementation can also significantly reduce sperm production (Patel et
al., 2019).

Alterations in Spermatogenesis
Spermatogenesis is the production of mature sperm cells. Exposure to some toxins can affect gonadal production.
These are known as gonadotoxins and can reduce the ability of the testes to make healthy, motile sperm cells.
Potential gonadotoxins include drugs and medications, infection, chronic illness, exposure to chemicals, previous
radiation or chemotherapy, or exposure of the testicles to heat (Durairajanayagam, 2018; Schlegel et al., 2021).

Varicoceles may also impact spermatogenesis. A varicocele is an enlargement of the veins in the spermatic cord of
the scrotum, sometimes to the point where they are visible (Figure 4.16). They are a typical anatomic finding in
around 15 percent of persons assigned male at birth (Leslie et al., 2023). While most varicoceles do not cause any
problems, they can cause infertility or depressed sperm counts in a small percentage of patients (Leslie et al.,
2023). The exact mechanism of action is unknown, but it is hypothesized that the pooling of blood in the enlarged
veins may raise scrotal temperature (Leslie et al., 2023).

FIGURE 4.16 Varicocele A varicocele is a tortuous enlargement of the scrotal veins in the testicle. It is a normal finding in some people but
can cause discomfort and, in some cases, infertility. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Presence of Sperm Antibodies
Sperm antibodies are produced when the immune system does not recognize sperm cells as part of the body and
initiates an immunologic reaction. This reaction damages sperm cells and may make them immotile, or unable to
move. While not common, this condition does occur in some patients after testicular trauma, infections, or
vasectomy reversal (Silva et al., 2021).

Difficulties with Sexual Intercourse
Finally, disorders of sexual intercourse can also affect conception. Erectile or ejaculatory disorders can prevent the
transmission of sperm into the female reproductive tract. This is frequently caused by age, chronic illness like
diabetes, and psychosocial issues. In addition to more commonly known conditions such as premature ejaculation,
erectile dysfunction, and insufficient sexual practices, a condition called retrograde ejaculation can contribute to a
170  4 · Influences on Fertility

     low sperm count. Retrograde ejaculation is the backward movement of ejaculate into the bladder instead of being
     expelled from the urethra (National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease, n.d.). Impotence can
     also be caused by alcohol abuse or antihypertensive medications.

     Stress
     Many people who struggle with infertility report high levels of stress, but whether high levels of stress cause
     infertility is unknown (Rooney & Domar, 2018). Further study is needed to explore this relationship, but the nature of
     self-reported symptoms can make it difficult to get a true understanding of what is happening. Patients may be
     underestimating or minimizing their symptoms or experiences to appear that they are doing better than they are, or
     patients may experience falsely elevated (or depressed) optimism depending on where they are in their treatment
     cycle (Rooney & Domar, 2018). Stress has been shown to increase cortisol, which can lead to infertility.

     High stress levels are very common in patients undergoing infertility treatment, and can contribute to depression,
     anxiety, and reduced quality of life (Figure 4.17). Implementation of a mind-body or mindfulness program may help
     to reduce symptoms of stress and improve coping. Such programs have been successful in helping patients to
     reduce stress and even improve pregnancy rates through many different modalities, including "cognitive behavior
     therapy, relaxation training, lifestyle changes, journaling, self-awareness, and social support components" (Rooney
     & Domar, 2018). Offering these types of programs or collaborating with professionals who do is an effective way to
     help patients deal with the psychosocial complications associated with infertility treatment.

     FIGURE 4.17 Stress and Infertility While the relationship between stress and infertility is complicated, many couples undergoing fertility
     treatment report high levels of stress. The nurse can help by providing community resources and ideas for stress management. (credit:
     "Anxious black woman covering face with hand on bed" by Alex Green/Pexels, CC0)

     Ways to Improve Fertility

     Patient teaching is an essential function for the nurse caring for patients undergoing infertility testing. Some patients
     may have a significant knowledge gap about how to optimize fertility or the odds for conception. Providing patient
     teaching and anticipatory guidance at each step can help to reduce stress and uncertainty and improve patient
     knowledge.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                4.3 · Causes of Infertility                          171

Ways to improve fertility are an appropriate teaching point for both the patient just starting out on their path to
parenthood and those who are undergoing more advanced treatments. Table 4.5 presents several suggestions that
can improve both male and female fertility.

                Technique                    Rationale

Persons Assigned Female at Birth

Maintain a healthy weight.                   · Being overweight or underweight can affect ovulation and
                                                the menstrual cycle.

                                             · Pregnancy is riskier when the person is at a higher or lower
                                                weight.

Avoid alcohol, tobacco, and recreational     · Alcohol, tobacco, and recreational drugs may affect a
drugs.                                          developing fetus if pregnancy results.

                                             · Smoking and recreational drugs are known to decrease
                                                fertility and increase the risk of miscarriage.

Reduce caffeine consumption.                 · High levels of caffeine consumption are linked with
                                                decreased fertility.

Prevent sexually transmitted infections      · STIs can directly impact fertility by causing the formation
(STIs).                                         of scar tissue or blockages in the fallopian tubes.

Avoid exposure to toxins.                    · Some toxins directly affect hormone levels and can disrupt
                                                estrogen and other pregnancy hormones.

Maintain a healthy diet rich in fruits,      · A healthy diet promotes a healthy pregnancy and reduces
vegetables, lean protein, and whole grains.     the risk of some complications.

Stay hydrated.                               · Adequate levels of hydration can keep cervical mucus thin
                                                and easier for sperm to pass through.

Monitor ovulation.                           · Keeping track of ovulation helps with timing intercourse.
                                             · Monitoring can identify potential problems so that medical

                                                intervention can happen sooner.

Take a prenatal vitamin.                     · While this doesn't promote fertility, it is good practice for
                                                all people trying to conceive a pregnancy.

                                             · Higher amounts of folate and folic acid promote spinal
                                                development in the developing fetus.

Persons Assigned Male at Birth

Maintain a healthy weight.                   · This can improve sperm quality.

TABLE 4.5 Ways to Improve Fertility (Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine in collaboration with the
Society for Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, 2017)
172  4 · Influences on Fertility

                            Technique                                              Rationale
     Avoid exposure to toxins.                     · Avoiding toxins reduces risk of damage to sperm cells.

     Eat an antioxidant-rich diet:                 · An antioxidant-rich diet may improve sperm quality and
         · Increase intake of fruits and              morphology (Panth et al., 2018).
             vegetables.
         · Take a multivitamin.
         · Increase omega-3 fatty acids.

     Exercise regularly.                           · Exercise boosts testosterone levels, which can increase
                                                      sperm count and quality.

     Stop smoking and recreational drug use.       · Smoking is associated with poor sperm quality.
                                                   · Steroids and cannabis can cause poor sperm function.

     Avoid raising scrotal temperature:            · Raising scrotal temperature may reduce sperm count.
         · Avoid hot baths or placing laptops on
             the lap.
         · Wear boxer underwear instead of tight-
             fitting briefs.

     TABLE 4.5 Ways to Improve Fertility (Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine in collaboration with the
     Society for Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, 2017)

     Coital practices can also impact a couple's ability to conceive. The nurse should assess for knowledge gaps related
     to best practices. Teaching points may include:

         · How and why to track ovulation by using basal body temperature, ovulation predictor kits, or monitoring
             cervical mucus.

         · That the fertile period begins up to a week before ovulation and continues until the day after ovulation occurs.
             Patients should be having intercourse at least every other day during this window.

         · That no evidence suggests coital position increases or decreases the odds of conception.
         · That lubricants, including saliva, olive or coconut oil, and other commercial products, should be avoided

             because of their effect on sperm. If necessary, get a lubricant specifically intended for couples trying to
             conceive (Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine in collaboration with the
             Society for Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, 2017).

             LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

     What Should Happen When Patients with a Questionable Ability to Parent Desire Infertility
     Treatment?

     Imagine that you are working at a private practice fertility center and are preparing to counsel a new couple who just
     met with the health-care provider. The health-care provider calls you into their office to discuss the couple's
     situation and plan. The provider explains that both partners are in their mid-forties, are recently married, desire
     conception, and have significant developmental disabilities. They currently live in supervised housing. The provider
     is concerned about the couple's ability to parent a newborn and asks you to meet with them and assess the situation
     as well.

     After meeting with the couple, you share similar concerns with the provider and especially note a limited ability to
     understand the complex instructions associated with in vitro fertilization, the recommended treatment. You share

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.4 · Treating Infertility                                                                                                173

your assessment findings with the provider, and a discussion ensues about the ethical principles associated with
withholding care. You begin researching the issue and note a committee statement put forward by the Ethics
Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM). The paper states: "Offspring welfare is a
valid consideration that fertility programs may take into account in accepting patients and providing services as long
as they do not discriminate on the basis of disability or other impermissible factor" (Ethics Committee of the ASRM,
2013). The statement goes on to say: "While practitioners and clinics may--except in the case of impermissible
discrimination--make their own moral decisions about whether to accept individuals as patients, their decisions
should be based on empirical evidence, not stereotype or prejudice" (Ethics Committee of the ASRM, 2013).

You also refer to the ANA Code of Ethics, specifically to the first provisions:

  1. "The nurse practices with compassion and respect for the inherent dignity, worth, and unique attributes of
        every person.

  2. The nurse's primary commitment is to the patient, whether an individual, family, group, community, or
        population.

  3. The nurse promotes, advocates for, and protects the rights, health, and safety of the patient." (American
        Nurses Association, 2015, p. v)

You realize that there are multiple issues at play in this situation. Not only is your priority the patient who presents
at the office today but also the potential children and family that may result. How can you help this couple in a way
that demonstrates compassion and respect for their dignity and self-worth? Would your opinion change if they were
able to conceive naturally as opposed to undergoing infertility treatment? What impact would helping this couple
have a child have not only on the couple and their family but also on the supervised housing group and community
at large? Would putting this couple through an IVF cycle protect their health and safety and the safety of any child
created? You take some time to reflect on these provisions and the questions they raise.

A decision is made to schedule a phone conversation between the physician, nursing staff, reproductive
psychologist, and the couple's mental health professional (with their permission). The couple's therapist reassures
the interprofessional team that the couple has a large family support system and would be adequate parents.
However, it is agreed that the couple does not have the capacity to undergo an in vitro fertilization procedure but
would be able to tolerate three insemination cycles. After the three attempts do not produce a pregnancy, the
couple withdraws further care. Upon discussing the case with the provider, you recommend developing explicit
policies and procedures to follow in case this situation arises again.

4.4 Treating Infertility

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Identify fertility tests and know the nursing implications of both the testing modality and the
        communication of results

    · Describe the options available for family planning when a couple is in infertility therapy
    · Identify and discuss the complications that can occur during infertility treatment

When a couple makes the decision to seek care for infertility, it is a major investment in time, energy, and finances.
It can also be an extremely vulnerable time for them, as they grapple with struggling to do what is commonly
perceived as "natural" and "easy." They may deal with many challenging and changing emotions: jealousy as they
witness friends and family members effortlessly starting their families, blame and resentment directed toward their
partner, guilt for their own medical issues, fear that treatment may not work, and anxiety if it does work. Well-
meaning family members may offer poor advice or tell them to "relax and let it happen" or that "it will happen if it's
meant to be." The couple may wonder if they have the financial means to pay for treatment that is expensive, likely
not covered by insurance, and not guaranteed to work.

While the nurse may not perform many of the clinical procedures for the patient undergoing infertility treatment,
they can provide much needed support and knowledge. Infertility nurses often approach patient care with a holistic
approach by advocating for their patient's needs, providing emotional support during the difficult wait, answering
countless questions, and making sure that they don't feel alone in their journey to parenthood.
174  4 · Influences on Fertility

     This section will delve into the different testing options for infertility assessment, discuss different family-building
     options, and review the potential complications of these treatments. In addition to the fertility-specific care they
     provide, nurses must also review strategies for advocacy and therapeutic communication, as these are essential
     skills when working with this population.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Resolve is an infertility organization for people undergoing testing or treatment. This organization provides support,
     advocacy, and education to all patients on their journey through infertility. Resolve offers several ways for people to
     access support and advocacy opportunities (https://openstax.org/r/77Resolve) that can help to empower patients
     and their partners.

     Fertility Testing

     When a patient or couple presents with difficulty in conceiving, the first step is a comprehensive assessment.
     Fertility factors for both sexes should be evaluated at the initial assessment so that important data that contributes
     to treatment planning is not missed. Before any diagnostic testing is performed, a full medical history should be
     taken. Topics to ask about include:

         · childhood and sexual development
         · full menstrual history
         · pregnancy history (include the partner AMAB; have they contributed to conception of a child?)
         · sexual history or practices as appropriate
         · how long they have been attempting to conceive
         · surgical and medical history
         · previous infections or trauma (Kuohung & Hornstein, 2023)

     In addition to fertility-specific testing, other diagnostic tests may be required to get a full picture of a patient's
     general and reproductive health (Table 4.6).

                                      Test                                                 Rationale

     Persons Assigned Female at Birth

     Prolactin                              · Elevated prolactin levels can indicate the
                                               presence of a prolactinoma, a benign
                                               tumor of the pituitary gland that can affect
                                               reproductive hormones.

     Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)      · Thyroid abnormalities can affect
                                               reproductive hormones.

     Blood type and Rh factor               · It is important to know blood type and Rh
                                               factor before pregnancy to assess the risk
                                               of Rh incompatibility.

                                            · Blood type may be required before a
                                               surgical procedure, such as egg retrieval,
                                               laparoscopy, or hysteroscopy.

     TABLE 4.6 General Testing for Partners of Both Sexes Undergoing Fertility Assessment

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               4.4 · Treating Infertility                               175

                                      Test                                          Rationale
Complete blood count (CBC)
                                                               · CBC screens for anemias and thalassemia.
                                                               · CBC may be required before a surgical

                                                                  procedure, such as egg retrieval,
                                                                  laparoscopy, or hysteroscopy.

Infectious disease panel (human immunodeficiency virus         · Panel screens for the presence of
[HIV 1/2], human T-cell lymphotropic virus [HTLV 1/2], rapid      infectious diseases, which can affect how
plasma reagin (RPR), hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B     gametes are stored in the laboratory.
core antibody, hepatitis C antibody)
                                                               · Screen determines if the patient is at risk
Rubella and varicella                                             for rubella or varicella, which can affect a
                                                                  pregnancy. Patient may need to be
                                                                  immunized prior to initiating fertility
                                                                  treatment.

Pap smear                                                      · Pap smear is part of general health/well-
Cervical cultures for chlamydia and gonorrhea                     woman preventive health screening.

                                                               · Cultures screen for sexually transmitted
                                                                  infections that can impact fertility.

Person Assigned Male at Birth                                  · It may be important to know blood type
Blood type and Rh factor                                          and Rh factor before partner's pregnancy
                                                                  to assess for the risk of Rh incompatibility.

Infectious disease panel (HIV 1/2, HTLV 1/2, RPR, hepatitis B  · Panel screens for the presence of
surface antigen, hepatitis B core antibody, hepatitis C           infectious diseases, which can affect how
antibody)                                                         gametes are stored in the laboratory and/
                                                                  or transferred to the partner.

TABLE 4.6 General Testing for Partners of Both Sexes Undergoing Fertility Assessment

Fertility Assessment of Persons Assigned Female at Birth
Assessing the partner AFAB includes testing the reproductive tract and the hormones controlling the function.
Ovarian reserve, ovulation, and uterine and tubal function should be evaluated. These tests can help narrow down
the cause of infertility to address and treat those issues.

Ovarian Reserve
A person's ovarian reserve is the number of immature eggs that remain in the ovary. Ovarian reserve is typically
high in young patients but declines with age. It can be assessed in several ways:

    · Anti-Müllerian Hormone (AMH): AMH is a hormone that is produced by the granulosa cells of the ovarian
        follicles and can be used to assess ovarian reserve (Moolhuijsen & Visser, 2020). The higher the number of
        ovarian follicles that remain in the ovary, the higher the serum level of AMH. It can be measured in a simple
        blood test at any point in a patient's cycle.

    · Day 3 hormone assay: Measuring follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and estradiol (E2) levels on day 2, 3, or 4
        of the menstrual cycle can be helpful in determining ovarian function. Higher levels of FSH or E2 early in the
        menstrual cycle indicate declining ovarian reserve because higher levels of those hormones are needed to
176  4 · Influences on Fertility

             recruit an ovarian follicle.
         · Antral follicle count: The small ovarian follicles that can be seen and counted on transvaginal ultrasound are

             called antral follicles. This test is also performed on day 2, 3, or 4 of the menstrual cycle. The number of
             antral follicles on each ovary is counted and measured. A higher number of antral follicles indicate better
             ovarian reserve or function.
         · Inhibin B: Inhibin B is a nonsteroidal hormone that is produced by developing ovarian follicles. High levels of
             inhibin B suppress FSH secretion from the pituitary. However, as the number of ovarian follicles declines, so
             too does the amount of inhibin B and its suppressive effect on FSH, accounting for the rise of FSH in older
             patients (Wen et al., 2021).

     It is important to recognize that the above markers measure only egg quantity, not egg quality; both decline with
     age.

     Ovulation Testing
     Ovarian function is also evaluated by measuring the regularity and reliability of ovulation. Knowing when ovulation
     has occurred or is expected to occur is crucial for the couple to appropriately time intercourse. This can be done
     very simply at home using an over-the-counter ovulation predictor kit. These kits contain a test stick evaluating the
     presence of luteinizing hormone in the urine, which surges right before ovulation. The patient can be advised to take
     the test every morning or, sometimes, twice a day, as they near ovulation. Intercourse should occur every day to
     every other day once the test turns positive. A negative result indicates the absence of luteinizing hormone, meaning
     that the LH surge isn't happening at that time. The patient may be advised to call the office when the test turns
     positive for further instructions, or to simply attempt intercourse at home and call with the results approximately 2
     weeks later (Fauser, 2023; Su et al., 2017).

     It is also possible to measure serum hormone levels to determine where a patient is in their cycle:

         · Low estrogen and progesterone levels suggest early phases of the cycle, before an ovarian follicle has been
             recruited.

         · High estrogen levels, but low progesterone levels, suggest the follicular, or early phase of the cycle. Ovulation
             has not yet occurred.

         · High estrogen levels and high LH levels indicate the LH surge and that ovulation will begin very soon.
         · High estrogen and high progesterone levels indicate that ovulation has already occurred, and the cycle is in

             the luteal phase (Reed & Carr, 2018).

     Tracking cycle information is important because it signals that a patient is, or is not, ovulating. For example, a
     patient who consistently has anovulatory progesterone levels or very low estrogen levels may require ovulation
     induction medication because they are not ovulating, which means that pregnancy cannot occur.

     Uterine Structure
     Evaluating the shape and structure of the uterus is important before the patient initiates fertility treatments, which
     can be costly, time-intensive, and emotionally difficult. It is important to ensure that embryos or sperm are going
     into a uterine cavity that is capable of implantation. A sonohysterogram, also known as hysterosonogram or saline
     infusion sonogram, is a simple, in-office procedure that can be performed to evaluate the uterine lining and cavity.
     After obtaining informed consent, performing a pregnancy test, and assessing for allergies (particularly to latex),
     sterile saline is injected through the cervix and into the uterus. Concurrent transvaginal ultrasonography is
     performed to visualize the saline in the cavity. Displacement of the fluid can indicate the presence of polyps,
     fibroids, or other structural abnormalities. This test should be performed only between days 6 and 10 of the
     menstrual cycle due to the risk of a pregnancy being disrupted by the saline (ACOG, 2023a).

     In some cases, there may be indication for laparoscopy, a minimally invasive surgical procedure that allows direct
     observation of the uterus and other pelvic structures. It is particularly useful for diagnosing endometriosis, scarring,
     or adhesions, which can be missed on pelvic ultrasound or hysterosalpingography, which is discussed later (Arab,
     2022).

     Tubal Patency
     Patent fallopian tube are essential for conception. They are the site of fertilization and facilitate transmission of
     sperm to egg and fertilized egg to the uterus. If the tubes are blocked from scarring, infection, or trauma, pregnancy

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.4 · Treating Infertility                                                                                                                    177

is unlikely. The primary test used to evaluate tubal patency is hysterosalpingography, which is performed at an
outpatient radiology center and involves the infusion of radioactive dye through a small catheter in the cervix and
into the uterus and fallopian tubes (ACOG, 2023b). A special x-ray of the pelvis is taken to visualize the path of the
dye through the reproductive tract (Figure 4.18). If the fallopian tubes are open, the dye will spill out into the
abdominal cavity and be reabsorbed. There is a risk of infection, so the provider may recommend prophylactic
antibiotics before or after the procedure. It is also important to assess for allergies to contrast dye.

FIGURE 4.18 Hysterosalpingogram The left side shows a blocked fallopian tube, in which the dye is retained within the uterus and does
not spill into the pelvis. The right side shows a normal hysterosalpingogram, in which the dye flows through the fallopian tube and into the
pelvis. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

This test is usually performed only when indicated, such as with previous suspicious findings on a sonohysterogram,
a history of chlamydia infection(s), or a previous ectopic pregnancy.

Fertility Assessment of Persons Assigned Male at Birth
Assessment of both partners should occur at the same time so that the provider has a full picture of all the clinical
issues impacting the couple. Initial testing of the partner AMAB is noninvasive and usually begins with a semen
analysis, a simple test that evaluates the quantity and quality of sperm in a sample.

Semen Analysis
A semen sample can be collected at home or in a designated collection room in the office. It should be collected
after 3 to 7 days of abstinence. If collected at home, it should be brought into the office/laboratory within 1 hour
(Sunder & Leslie, 2022). If the patient is unable to ejaculate independently, a partner can assist, but there are a few
important guidelines:

    · Avoid contamination of the sample with saliva.
    · Avoid the use of lubricants, except for those specially designed for people who are trying to conceive.
    · Ejaculation must occur in the designated collection container or a collection condom that has been provided

        by the laboratory.

The lab will measure pH and volume of the semen and then prepare slides to measure and assess the remainder of
the parameters. The World Health Organization (WHO) has developed a series of normal limits of reference for
patients undergoing semen analysis (Table 4.7).
178  4 · Influences on Fertility

                                                    Parameter      Value

                                      Semen volume (mL)            1.4 (1.3-1.5)

                                      Total sperm number (106 per ejaculate) 39 (35-40)

                                      Total motility (%)           42 (40-43)

                                      Progressive motility (%)     30 (29-31)

                                      Nonprogressive motility (%)  1 (1-1)

                                      Immotile sperm (%)           20 (19-20)

                                      Vitality (%)                 54 (50-56)

                                      Normal forms (%)             4 (3.9-4)

                                      TABLE 4.7 WHO Semen Analysis Reference Values (Boitrelle et al.,
                                      2021)

     If the parameters are within (or very close to) the normal range, no further testing may be indicated. However, if the
     morphology or count is significantly lower than normal, then further testing may be indicated. This may require a
     referral to a urologist who specializes in reproductive issues. Specialty tests may include testing for the presence of
     anti-sperm antibodies, autoimmune issues, or DNA fragmentation.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Semen Analysis Testing in Orthodox Jewish Patients

     While a semen analysis is a noninvasive and simple test of male factor infertility, ejaculation without the intent of
     conception is prohibited in the Orthodox Jewish faith. This can pose a problem when patients are unable to produce
     a sample for analysis. The nurse can recommend that the patient speak with his rabbi, who may or may not allow
     the couple to produce a specimen during intercourse using a special collection condom.

     Other rabbis may suggest postcoital testing (PCT) as a first step instead. The couple will be instructed to have
     intercourse during ovulation and then present to the clinic. A speculum will be inserted into the vagina, and a small
     sample of cervical fluid removed. That fluid is placed on a glass slide and examined under the microscope for the
     presence and movement of sperm cells.

     While this testing isn't diagnostic of male factor infertility or confirmatory for male fertility, the PCT test is less costly
     and invasive than a full treatment cycle, especially if no sperm are present in the sample. In addition, the
     preliminary data obtained from it may persuade the rabbi to approve the semen analysis if indicated.

     While this approach may not be used often, it allows the couple to feel that their religion and culture are respected
     and valued by the provider.

     Ultrasonography
     Ultrasonography of the testicles can reveal the presence of structural abnormalities, such as varicocele, or
     blockages in the vas deferens, ejaculatory ducts, or seminal vesicles. Blockages in the ejaculatory ducts or other
     structures may prevent sperm from traveling through the reproductive tract and exiting the body during ejaculation,
     causing a low or absent sperm count.

     Other Testing
     Additional male factor fertility testing may include:

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.4 · Treating Infertility                                                                                                   179

    · Hormone testing: Hormones, such as testosterone or follicle-stimulating hormone, when imbalanced, may
        alter sperm count or fertility. Other hormones tested may include luteinizing hormone, estradiol, and/or
        prolactin. (Urology Care Foundation, n.d.)

    · Genetic testing: Some genetic disorders can also alter sperm count or production. It is possible to test for
        chromosome abnormalities through either a blood test or the evaluation of a sperm sample (Pelzman &
        Hwang, 2021).

    · Testicular biopsy: In rare cases, testicular biopsy may be indicated to determine whether motile sperm cells
        are found in the testicles.

Options for Treatment

Once the initial assessment has been completed, the provider will create a plan of care that considers the testing
results and the personal desires and reproductive goals of the patient. This may involve additional testing (such as
to determine the source of an infection) or planning for a treatment cycle.

The first step includes correcting any underlying causes that are contributing to subfertility (Carson & Kallen, 2021;
Puscheck, 2020). For example, this may mean surgical correction of uterine abnormalities, hormonal management
of hyperprolactinemia, or laparoscopic draining of hydrosalpinges. The partner AMAB may require removal of
varicoceles, medical management of hormone abnormalities, such as thyroid disease or hypogonadism, or reversal
of a vasectomy.

In some cases, the partner AFAB will need additional medical testing to rule out any contraindications to pregnancy.
This is especially true in patients with preexisting medical conditions, such as heart disease, chronic illness, a
history of cancer, or advanced age. This will be required before a treatment cycle can be initiated.

Pharmacologic Treatment
Pharmacologic management of infertility, also known as ovulation induction or ovarian stimulation, is used in
conjunction with many of the treatment options available for infertility. Medication is used to stimulate
superovulation, the development and maturation of several egg follicles, the number depending on the planned
treatment cycle. A couple undergoing intrauterine insemination will require roughly two egg follicles, while a couple
undergoing in vitro fertilization may need a greater number of follicles to have a good outcome at egg retrieval
(Evans et al., 2020; Sermondad et al., 2023). Nurses should provide education to the patient that these medications
can cause mood swings and depression and increase the chance of multiple fetuses. The following medications are
used in fertility treatments:

    · Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs): Clomiphene citrate (Clomid) is the primary drug in this class
        of medications. It is an oral pill that is taken for 5 days, beginning at the start of a patient's menstrual cycle,
        usually on day 5. It is thought to work by blocking estrogen receptors in the pituitary, inhibiting the feedback
        loop, and increasing the secretion of follicle-stimulating hormone.

    · Leuprolide: Leuprolide (Lupron Depot) is a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRH-agonist) that is
        used to suppress natural ovulation, allowing the provider to control the patient's cycle and appropriately time
        any additional procedures.

    · Follitropins (FSH): Follitropins are injectable forms of FSH that are used in ovulation induction.
    · Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCGhmg): hCG is the last medication in the treatment cycle. It is used to

        trigger follicular maturation and ovulation before intrauterine insemination or IVF. The nurse must stress that
        hCG can cause a false-positive result on a home pregnancy test and should be avoided for at least day 14 after
        injection.
    · Hormonal support: The medications used during IVF can suppress endometrial development and secretion of
        estrogen and progesterone, and the patient may require supplemental administration of these two hormones.

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Clomid

Clomid is a common drug prescribed in the infertility or women's health setting. It is often used as an initial agent to
induce ovulation and may be particularly useful in patients with PCOS or other ovulatory disorders.
180  4 · Influences on Fertility

         · Generic Name: clomiphene citrate
         · Trade Name: Clomid
         · Class/Action: selective estrogen receptor modulators
         · Route/Dosage: Clomid is available as 50-mg pills administered orally once per day for 5 days. Patients are

             instructed to begin taking this medication on day 5 of their cycle. The dosage can be increased to a total of
             150 mg (3 pills) taken once a day for 5 days, depending on the patient's response.
         · High Alert/Black Box Warning: Some patients may develop visual symptoms that can worsen with time and
             use. In most cases this is reversible, but irreversible changes have been documented. Patients should be
             instructed to report any visual symptoms to their provider. Some patients, particularly those with PCOS, have
             developed ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) with use of this drug. The patient should always be
             prescribed the lowest effective dose and instructed to report symptoms of OHSS.
         · Indications: indicated for the treatment of ovulatory dysfunction in persons who desire pregnancy
         · Mechanism of Action: Clomid interacts with estrogen receptors in the pituitary and hypothalamus, affecting
             the feedback loop between estrogen and FSH. This leads to a surge of gonadotropins, increasing the number
             of developing ovarian follicles.
         · Contraindications: hypersensitivity to Clomid, pregnancy, history of liver disease, ovarian cysts, abnormal
             uterine bleeding, pituitary tumor, or abnormal adrenal or thyroid hormone function
         · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: ovarian enlargement, hot flashes, headache, bloating, nausea/vomiting,
             breast pain
         · Nursing Implications: Provide education about the medication and instructions for its use, including when to
             return for follow-up care. Review the signs and symptoms of OHSS. Document all education and instructions
             provided.

     (Clomid, 2017)

     Intrauterine Insemination
     The fertility procedure intrauterine insemination (IUI), performed by medical providers or specially trained nurses,
     involves injecting specially washed sperm cells through a catheter into the uterus (Figure 4.19). Some providers
     prefer to do a single insemination 36 hours after hCG injection; others prefer to do inseminations at 12 and 36 hours
     after hCG injection. IUI can be performed after a cycle with either clomiphene citrate or injectable gonadotropins or,
     in some cases, after tracking an unmedicated cycle. If injectable gonadotropins are used, the provider may
     recommend additional progesterone support after insemination (Casarramona et al., 2022).

     FIGURE 4.19 Intrauterine Insemination During an IUI, a specially trained practitioner passes washed sperm directly into the uterus using
     a very thin catheter. This procedure usually takes place around the time of ovulation to optimize the chance of conception. (attribution:

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.4 · Treating Infertility                                                                                                  181

Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Intrauterine insemination can also be performed using donated sperm, either from an anonymous donor or from a
known donor. Extensive infectious disease testing is required any time sperm from an anonymous donor is used for
insemination. IUI is the preferred method of treatment for patients with unfavorable cervical mucus, semen allergy,
or endometriosis, as the sperm is introduced directly into the uterus.

In Vitro Fertilization
The fertility procedure in vitro fertilization (IVF) is an intense process that involves the stimulation of
superovulation, the removal of eggs through surgical aspiration, fertilization in the lab, and transfer of resulting
embryo back to the uterus. The steps are as follows:

    · Ovulation Induction: Medications are used to induce ovulation. Progesterone and estrogen supplementation
        are needed if transferring embryos during that cycle.

    · Follicular Monitoring: While the patient is using the medication, they will visit the office to monitor their
        response to the medication. Blood work measurement of estradiol levels and an ultrasound of the ovaries to
        measure follicular growth and development are common. Seeing the estradiol level rise each day is a sign that
        the cycle is progressing well (Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology, n.d.).

    · Trigger: Once the patient has ovarian follicles that measure around 19 to 24 mm and an appropriate estradiol
        level, the provider will make the determination that the patient is ready to have their eggs retrieved. They will
        take their hCG injection, which is the final injection in the cycle (Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology,
        n.d.-a).

    · Egg Retrieval: The egg retrieval is an outpatient procedure using mild sedation. The provider will insert the
        transvaginal ultrasound probe to visualize the ovaries. A needle will be gently advanced through the vaginal
        wall and into the ovary to drain the fluid and collect the eggs. That fluid is immediately sent to the lab for
        analysis, and the patient is allowed to recover briefly before being sent home to rest. A sperm sample is
        obtained during or before the egg retrieval (Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology, n.d.-b).

    · Fertilization: In the lab, the embryologist will analyze and fertilize the most mature eggs. Fertilization can
        occur naturally or with the use of intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). Natural fertilization occurs when the
        eggs and sperm cells are placed in the same dish, and fertilization is allowed to occur. ICSI is done when the
        embryologist selects the best sperm cells and injects them into the mature eggs, one sperm per egg Figure
        4.20). Any fertilized eggs are allowed to develop into embryos and checked each day for their progress. It is
        common for not all eggs to be fertilized and for not all the fertilized eggs to become healthy embryos (Ho,
        2023).
182  4 · Influences on Fertility

              FIGURE 4.20 Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection (ICSI) ICSI is a method of fertilization in which a single sperm is injected into a
              mature egg. This procedure is sometimes performed during in vitro fertilization. (credit: "Icsi" by Ekem/Wikimedia Commons, Public
              Domain)

         · Embryo Transfer: Embryo transfer usually occurs on day 5 or day 6 after egg retrieval and fertilization, once
             the embryos have become blastocyst. The patient should have started progesterone and estrogen
             supplements after the egg retrieval and will continue taking them through week 10 of pregnancy. The provider
             will speak with the patient before the procedure to let them know how many of their eggs have developed into
             blastocysts and determine a plan for transfer. Most providers will transfer only one or two embryos at a time to
             reduce the risk of multiples. The selected embryos are loaded into a pipette, which is gently passed through
             the cervix using ultrasound guidance. The embryos are deposited into the uterus, and the patient is sent home
             to rest for a few days. The patient is instructed to take a pregnancy test 2 weeks after their egg retrieval (Ho,
             2023).

         · Cryopreservation: Any extra embryos that the patient is not transferring can undergo cryopreservation,
             meaning they can be frozen and saved for later use. Sometimes, the patient may prefer having only a frozen
             embryo transfer because of their personal schedule. At other times, the patient may have genetic testing
             (PGD) performed on the embryo, which can delay transfer until the results are available. In general, frozen
             embryos can be preserved and thawed when the patient is ready for transfer (Ho, 2023).

             LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

     Embryo Cryopreservation

     Gamete and embryo cryopreservation is a procedure that can potentially lead to many ethical questions or
     concerns. While fertility practices require the patient or couple to make those decisions before initiating treatment,
     circumstances can change in a way that was not anticipated, leading to people changing their minds.

     For example, imagine that a couple undergoes IVF and has four embryos cryopreserved at the end of their cycle.
     They never become pregnant, and a few years later, they decide to get divorced. Before beginning treatment, the
     couple had agreed to have the embryos destroyed in the event of a divorce. However, the female patient is now 42
     and going through menopause. Her chances of success at another IVF cycle are minimal, and she no longer wants to
     discard those embryos so that she can have a chance at parenthood. How does her advancing age impact their

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.4 · Treating Infertility                                                                                                183

decision and your opinion? What about if either patient develops reproductive cancer and is no longer able to make
eggs or sperm?

As nurses, it is not our job to reconcile these ethical decisions. However, we may develop strong feelings about what
is right or wrong. We may also need to provide education and support to patients who are dealing with these
situations. Ultimately, the patients may need to take their case to court to have the judge render a decision.

Third Party Reproduction
The fertility procedure third party reproduction is the use of a third party--usually a sperm donor, an egg donor, or a
gestational carrier, commonly called a surrogate--in conjunction with a treatment cycle (Salazar et al., 2023). Sperm
donors can also be used with intrauterine insemination and IVF, but egg donors and gestational carriers must
undergo IVF. Donors can be anonymous or known to the couple.

Gestational surrogates carry the pregnancy; they have no genetic relationship to the fetus. The embryos are formed
from the gametes of either the intended parents or the selected donor(s). Traditional surrogates donate their egg
and carry the fetus. However, this type of surrogacy is rarely used nowadays. Gestational carriers can also be hired
through an agency or known to the couple.

The ability to use an agency gestational carrier depends on the state where the patient is seeking care. This process
is completely legal and regulated in some states, like California, and expressly prohibited in other states, like
Nebraska (Surrogacy laws, n.d.). Some states have other requirements in place to access gestational surrogacy,
such as being a married, heterosexual couple (Surrogacy laws, n.d.).

These cycles proceed in the exact manner as a typical IVF cycle, though additional testing is required. The donor
must undergo infectious disease testing, including a test less than 30 days before the egg retrieval, as well as urine
drug testing, genetic carrier screening, and in some cases a psychologic screening as well. In addition, all the parties
involved (donors, gestational carriers, intended parents) will likely need to obtain legal contracts that outline
everybody's rights and responsibilities throughout the cycle. These contracts should be in place before the cycle
begins.

Gamete Intrafallopian Transfer, Zygote Intrafallopian Transfer, and Tubal Embryo Transfer
There are three fertility procedures that are rarely used. The first, gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT), is similar
to IVF: The patient will undergo ovulation induction and laparoscopic egg retrieval (performed through an incision in
the abdomen instead of transvaginally). The retrieved eggs and sperm provided by the partner AMAB are mixed in a
pipette and transferred immediately into the fallopian tube for fertilization to occur in the body. The second, zygote
intrafallopian transfer (ZIFT) is similar to both GIFT and IVF: This procedure starts as a traditional GIFT, but
fertilization is allowed to occur in the laboratory. Once the fertilized eggs have formed zygotes, they are transferred
back into the fallopian tubes. The final one, tubal embryo transfer (TET), is similar to ZIFT but requires that the
embryo be allowed to develop to a more advanced stage before being transferred back into the fallopian tube. GIFT,
ZIFT, and TET all require that the patient have at least one patent fallopian tube, which must be verified by
hysterosalpingogram. Transferring the embryo into a blocked tube increases the patient's risk for ectopic pregnancy
or cycle failure. These procedures are not performed very often because of the need for laparoscopic surgery for the
transfer.

        LINK TO LEARNING

The American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) is the professional organization that represents
professionals of all disciplines working in the reproductive medicine specialty. It offers practice and ethics
statements, as well as a wealth of patient educational materials (https://openstax.org/r/77ASRM) that can improve
teaching.

Risks Related to Infertility Treatment

Like any medical procedure, infertility treatments do pose some risks to the patient. Educating patients about what
to expect, what is normal, and what should be reported is a crucial function of all nurses practicing in this field. In
184  4 · Influences on Fertility

     addition, it is important to recognize signs and symptoms of potentially serious complications and how to manage
     them.

     Multiples
     Getting pregnant with multiples is a major risk factor for patients undergoing infertility treatment. The medications
     used during ovulation induction stimulate the development of several eggs, which can lead to twins, triplets, or even
     higher-order multiples. A multiple pregnancy is risky for both the patient and the fetuses, increasing maternal
     morbidity and fetal and neonatal morbidity and mortality (Practice Committee of the Society for Reproductive
     Endocrinology and Infertility, Quality Assurance Committee of the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology,
     and the Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, 2022). As a result, the American
     Society for Reproductive Medicine encourages both patients and providers to consider the transfer of only a single
     embryo, known as elective single embryo transfer (eSET), especially in patients who are good candidates.

     A patient who becomes pregnant with higher-order multiples may be asked to consider a multifetal reduction, a
     procedure in which the number of developing fetuses is reduced to give one or more than one fetus a greater chance
     at survival to term. The decision to have a reduction is often very difficult for the patient, particularly if they have
     been trying to get pregnant for a long time. Many patients find it to be an unacceptable option.

     Pregnancy Complications
     Studies suggest that people undergoing infertility treatments, specifically IVF, are at higher risk for some pregnancy
     complications. This is often a question asked by patients as well. The issue is complicated for several reasons. First,
     the cause of infertility may contribute to the increased risk for some of those complications. For example, a patient
     with PCOS who has an increased risk for insulin resistance may develop gestational diabetes during pregnancy after
     IVF. However, PCOS is the major contributing factor, not the fact that the patient had IVF. Second, many of the
     complications, such as preterm labor, low birth weight, pre-eclampsia, and cesarean delivery, are associated with
     the higher rate of multiple gestation related to IVF. A 2018 study found that multiple gestations were largely
     responsible for the increased risk of preterm birth (Oberg et al., 2018). The authors also found that many of the
     placenta-related complications (placenta previa and placental abruption) were not related to the use of infertility
     treatment (Oberg et al., 2018). While research is ongoing, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
     (ACOG) makes several recommendations to address this risk:

         · counsel patients about their risk before initiating treatment;
         · carefully evaluate patients for and address any medical conditions that could increase the risk for perinatal

             complications;
         · make an effort to limit the number of gestations, including eSET when appropriate, and following ASRM

             guidelines regarding embryo transfer;
         · screen for and address any potential risk to offspring related to genetic conditions; and
         · discuss the option of multifetal reduction in higher-order multiple gestations (Perinatal risks, 2020).

     Miscarriage is still a risk with infertility treatment due to several factors, primarily maternal age. The rate is
     comparable to the rate of pregnancy loss in the general population: "The rate of miscarriage may be as low as 15
     percent for women in their 20s to more than 50 percent for women in their 40s." (American Society for Reproductive
     Medicine, 2015).

     Ectopic Pregnancy
     An ectopic pregnancy is one in which a fertilized egg implants in the fallopian tube or other location outside the
     uterus. This is a life-threatening situation for the patient because of the risk that the fallopian tube can rupture and
     cause internal bleeding. In the past, the rate of ectopic pregnancy was much higher in people undergoing infertility
     treatment (Cirillo et al., 2022). However, a 2022 study looking at 27,376 infertility cycles found that the ectopic
     pregnancy rate was comparable to that of the general population, around 1.8 percent (Cirillo et al.). Researchers did
     note that people undergoing infertility treatment may have characteristics that put them at higher risk for ectopic
     pregnancy, such as the presence of scar tissue or adhesions, pelvic infection, or endometriosis (Cirillo et al., 2022).

     Serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels are drawn every 2 days in the beginning of a pregnancy. This type
     of test provides a quantitative value of the amount of hormone in the blood. This is different from a home pregnancy
     test, which detects the presence of only a threshold amount of hCG. The levels of hCG in a healthy pregnancy
     typically double every 2 to 3 days. Ectopic pregnancy must be suspected when a patient has a poorly rising hCG

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.4 · Treating Infertility                                                                                              185

level or the absence of an intrauterine pregnancy on a transvaginal ultrasound. Other signs and symptoms may
include vaginal bleeding, pelvic pain, referred pain to the shoulder, rectal pressure, low back pain or weakness,
dizziness, or fainting. If an ectopic pregnancy is suspected based on ultrasound findings and the patient is
asymptomatic, they may be able to be treated with methotrexate, a chemotherapy agent that stops cells from
dividing and ends the pregnancy. However, the patient may need to be treated with emergency laparoscopic surgery
if the fallopian tube ruptures or if internal bleeding occurs.

Cancer
Research into the risk of cancer after undergoing infertility treatment is ongoing. However, early studies are
promising. According to the National Cancer Institute Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, the effects of
ovulation induction on endometrial and ovarian cancers appear to be negligible. The institute did find one exception,
though: "The only significant excess risk was that of ovarian cancer associated with clomiphene exposures among
[persons] who remained nulligravid during follow-up" (National Cancer Institute, n.d.). They also found a
significantly higher risk for breast cancer in persons who had participated in more than 12 clomiphene cycles, which
is much higher than a patient would undergo in the clinical setting (National Cancer Institute, n.d.).

A very large study looked at 1,085,172 Danish children born as a result of various types of infertility treatment and
ovulation induction medications. Researchers found that while there was a very small increased risk of childhood
cancer in children born because of frozen embryo transfer, this association was not found with other types of
infertility treatment or medication (Hargreave et al., 2019).

Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) is one of the most common complications of ovulation induction
medication. It occurs most commonly during IVF but happens rarely with the use of clomiphene or gonadotropins
for IUI. This condition is caused by an overresponse to the ovarian stimulating medication, causing many developing
egg follicles and a high estradiol level. This causes ovarian enlargement and fluid to leak into the abdomen, causing
bloating. OHSS ranges from mild to severe, depending on the amount of fluid present in the abdomen. Patients with
mild OHSS present with mild bloating, nausea, and weight gain. It may progress to moderate OHSS when those
same symptoms are present and increased in intensity and number. Severe OHSS is diagnosed when the patient has
significant bloating, leading to vomiting, pain, shortness of breath, and even blood clots in the legs.

Nurses must be aware of these symptoms, especially when working in the acute care setting where a patient may
seek help. Interventions that help with OHSS include:

    · increasing fluid intake of electrolyte-rich fluids
    · intravenous fluids if the patient is struggling to drink enough fluid
    · measuring weight daily to track fluid gain
    · bed rest or decreased activity to reduce the risk of ovarian torsion
    · paracentesis of the abdomen to reduce fluid accumulation (National Library of Medicine, 2021a).

OHSS can progress and become severe, especially if not appropriately managed. In most cases, OHSS resolves
within 2 weeks once the patient gets their period after the cycle. However, if the patient becomes pregnant, the
symptoms of OHSS can continue to be problematic for a couple of weeks (American Society for Reproductive
Medicine, 2014). For this reason, some providers recommend that a couple freeze all developing embryos instead of
transferring them immediately after their IVF cycle, especially if the patient is at higher risk for OHSS.

Egg-Retrieval Procedure Complications
Like all invasive procedures, the egg-retrieval procedure does pose risks, though they are rare. Complications
associated with the procedure include:

    · vaginal bleeding or pain
    · ovarian hemorrhage due to puncture
    · damage to bladder, bowel, ureter, or large blood vessels
    · infection (American Society for Reproductive Medicine, 2015).

It is important for the nurse in the postanesthesia care unit, the infertility center, and the acute care center to be
aware of the signs and symptoms of these conditions and alert the provider immediately. Though rare, these
complications could pose a significant risk to the patient if not promptly treated.
186  4 · Influences on Fertility

     Stress
     Stress to the individual, couple, and family can be profound and challenging when undergoing infertility treatment.
     By the time they seek care, they have likely struggled with trying to conceive for months. They may have dealt with
     pregnancy loss or miscarriage and may be grieving the loss of the family they thought they would have. This stress is
     compounded during infertility treatment: They may be worried about being able to cope with the number of
     injections needed, the financial implications of their treatment, challenges to work and personal schedules, and, of
     course, whether the treatment will work.

             REAL RN STORIES

     Nurse: Nicole, MSN, RN
     Years in Practice: 8
     Clinical Setting: Outpatient infertility center
     Geographic Location: California

     It is always important to listen to your patient and hear what they are telling you, especially if it doesn't match their
     clinical data. Several years ago, I was working as a registered nurse in an outpatient infertility center where the
     nurses rotated taking call each weekend to address urgent patient concerns and questions. I received a phone call
     on Saturday afternoon from a pregnant patient who reported significant cramping. She denied vaginal bleeding,
     fever, or any other symptoms.

     After performing a brief assessment over the phone, I accessed her digital chart to review her clinical information.
     This patient had come into the office the day before for her first pregnancy scan. Everything was normal: Her beta-
     hCG levels had risen appropriately from the beginning of her pregnancy and a single intrauterine pregnancy (IUP)
     with a heartbeat was visualized on ultrasound.

     Objectively, I knew that cramping was normal in early pregnancy and that all her clinical data pointed to a normal,
     healthy pregnancy. However, her voice didn't sound quite right, and she seemed like she was in a lot of pain. I
     reassured her that it was probably normal but instructed her to head to the emergency room to get checked out, just
     in case. She did and notified us later that she was diagnosed with a heterotopic pregnancy. In addition to the normal
     intrauterine pregnancy, she had a second ectopic pregnancy in her fallopian tube that had ruptured. She was
     bleeding into her abdomen and required emergency surgery. Heterotopic pregnancy is a very rare, and serious,
     complication of infertility treatment. In fact, the physician I worked for had never seen a case of heterotopic
     pregnancy in his many years of practice.

     Assessing your patient is sometimes more than just looking at clinical cues. As your clinical experience grows, you
     will start to develop nursing intuition that will help guide you in your decision making. Nursing intuition is more than
     just a "gut feeling." It is the accumulation of nursing knowledge and expertise and critical thinking skills, and should
     be honored. This case is an example of how objective clinical data combined with my subjective assessment that
     something wasn't quite right led to the patient receiving the urgent care they needed without delay.

     It is not unusual for all those stressors to impact not only the couple's marital relationship but also their
     relationships with others. Making a baby is an incredibly personal act, and having a highly trained and invasive
     medical team telling a couple when to have intercourse or avoid it can take the fun and intimacy out of the process.
     The couple may face pressure from family members to try again when they aren't quite ready or to take a break
     when they want to dive back in with another cycle. Well-meaning family or friends may ask invasive questions or
     offer unhelpful advice. When added to the stress associated with the medical treatment itself, it's no wonder that
     most people undergoing infertility care report high levels of stress and anxiety (Domar, n.d.).

     The nurse plays a pivotal role in helping the couple deal with infertility-related stress by assessing coping skills,
     stress levels, and support. The nurse may be able to offer coping strategies, an empathetic ear, or education that
     can help to put concerns to rest. If needed, the nurse can also recommend local support groups or provide a referral
     to a nearby reproductive therapist who specializes in helping couples at this stage in their life.

     Access for free at openstax.org
4.4 · Treating Infertility                                                                                               187

        LINK TO LEARNING

Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology (SART) is a professional organization dedicated to professionals
working in the infertility field. They also record and publish member clinic statistics (https://openstax.org/r/77SART)
so that the public can make an informed decision when selecting a clinic.
188 4 · Summary

Summary

4.1 Fertility and Conception

Fertility is the ability to conceive a pregnancy. Many intricate processes must successfully occur to achieve
conception. Couples with infertility may seek care from a reproductive endocrinologist who specializes in the
treatment of infertility. Infertility can be caused by factors in either or both partners, though in many cases, a
specific cause cannot be identified. Assessing a couple who presents with infertility involves looking at both
partners and the three main factors that are essential for conception: the release of an egg, the presence of sperm,
and a healthy environment for implantation. Though conception and pregnancy are largely physiologic events, the
nurse must not neglect the important psychosocial factors that are associated with fertility and conception,
including stress and societal pressures. Patient teaching is an essential function for the nurse caring for all patients
considering conception.

4.2 Genetics

Humans typically have a total of 46 chromosomes organized in pairs: 22 pairs of autosomes (body chromosomes)
and 1 pair of sex chromosomes (XX in people who are genetically female or XY in people who are genetically male).
One set of chromosomes (22 autosomes and 1 sex chromosome) is inherited from each parent. Sometimes, an error
in replication occurs, and an abnormal number of chromosomes results.

Genetic transmission between generations can lead to autosomal dominant inheritance disorders and autosomal
recessive disorders. X-linked disorders disproportionately affect more males than females because males must
inherit only one affected X chromosome to be affected.

Patients have many options for genetic screening, both prenatally and postnatally. Prenatal screening is done during
pregnancy to determine the risk that the fetus has for aneuploidy, a neural tube defect, or another abnormality
suggestive of a genetic disorder. Prenatal diagnostic testing includes chromosomal analysis. Postnatal testing, or the
newborn screen, is done after the baby is born and consists of a capillary blood test. The hope is that early detection
and treatment of these conditions improves the quality of life for newborns.

4.3 Causes of Infertility

Causes of infertility are multifactorial. Many causes of infertility in both persons assigned female at birth and those
assigned male at birth are similar, such as medications, environmental toxins, hormones, and medical conditions.
Treatments are available for many causes of infertility; yet not all causes of infertility are diagnosable or treatable.
The nurse can be an excellent support to couples experiencing infertility by providing education, referrals, and
emotional support.

4.4 Treating Infertility

When a patient or couple presents with difficulty in conceiving, the first step is a comprehensive assessment of both
partners. Once the initial assessment has been completed, the provider will create a plan of care. Pharmacologic
management of infertility, also known as ovulation induction or ovarian stimulation, is used in conjunction with many
of the treatment options available for infertility. Medications are used to control the menstrual cycle and ovarian
response to increase the odds of conception. IUI and IVF are procedures available for treatment of infertility. Like
any medical procedure, infertility treatments do pose some risks. Educating patients about what to expect, what is
normal, and what should be reported is a crucial function of all nurses practicing in this field. In addition, it is
important to recognize signs and symptoms of potentially serious complications and how to manage them.

Key Terms

amniocentesis test that evaluates the amniotic fluid surrounding the fetus
aneuploidy abnormal number of chromosomes
anovulation complete absence of ovulation
antral follicle small ovarian follicle that can be seen and counted on transvaginal ultrasound
autosomal dominant type of inheritance that occurs when only one copy of the dominant allele is needed to

    express the trait
autosomal recessive type of inheritance that requires the presence of both recessive alleles for the trait to be

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               4 · Key Terms 189

    expressed
autosome body chromosome
azoospermia complete absence of sperm cells
chromosome contains thousands of genes, which make up the basic unit of heredity and are composed of proteins

    and DNA
cryopreservation freezing of embryos after in vitro fertilization for later use
diploid cell containing two sets of chromosomes, such as the body cells
fallopian tube small tube that allows the passage of the egg from the ovary to the uterus
fertility person's ability to become pregnant
fertilization penetration of an ovum by a single sperm cell
gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT) procedure that includes ovulation induction and laparoscopic egg retrieval

    (performed through an incision in the abdomen instead of transvaginally), the mixing of retrieved eggs and sperm
    provided by the male partner, and the transfer of those gametes immediately into the fallopian tube for
    fertilization to occur inside the body
gonadotoxin chemical or substance that can affect the production of sperm or ova
haploid cell containing one set of chromosomes, such as the gametes
hysterosalpingography infusion of radioactive dye through a small catheter in the cervix and into the uterus and
    fallopian tubes.
in vitro fertilization (IVF) intense process that involves the stimulation of superovulation, the removal of eggs
    through surgical aspiration, fertilization in the lab, and transfer of resulting embryos back to the female patient
infertility inability to become pregnant after 1 year of regular sexual intercourse without using any form of birth
    control
intrauterine insemination (IUI) medical procedure performed by medical providers or specially trained nurses, in
    which specially washed sperm cells are injected through a catheter into the uterus
karyotype simple blood test where the sample is treated with a special stain that allows the chromosomes to be
    visualized, sorted into their 23 matching pairs so that they can be identified and evaluated
laparoscopy minimally invasive surgical procedure that allows direct observation of the uterus and other pelvic
    structures
meiotic occurring by the process of meiosis, when a parent cell divides to produce two daughter cells, each with
    only one set of chromosomes
mitotic occurring by the process of mitosis, when a single parent cell divides to produce two daughter cells with
    the full set of parental chromosomes
multifactorial inheritance controlled by multiple genes
newborn screen capillary blood test that occurs after birth; mandated by U.S. law but is run by each state and
    recommends testing for 31 core disorders and an additional secondary 26 disorders
nondisjunction abnormal separation of chromosomes (or lack of separation) during mitosis or meiosis that results
    in an extra chromosome, or set of chromosomes, found in one daughter cell, with the other daughter cell missing
    chromosomes
oligoovulation pattern of irregular ovulation
oligospermia low sperm count
ovarian reserve number of immature eggs that remain in the ovary
ovulation release of a mature egg
polyploidy abnormal number of chromosome sets
prenatal screening series of tests that occur during pregnancy to determine the risk that the fetus has an
    aneuploidy, neural tube defect, or other abnormality suggestive of a genetic disorder
primary infertility lack of fertility in a person who has never been pregnant
primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) ovarian failure before the age of 40
secondary infertility lack of fertility in a person who has previously carried and delivered a pregnancy
semen analysis simple test that evaluates the quantity and quality of sperm in a sample
sonohysterogram in-office procedure that can be performed to evaluate the uterine lining and cavity
spermatogenesis production of mature sperm cells
superovulation development and maturation of several egg follicles
third party reproduction use of a third party, usually a sperm donor, an egg donor, or a gestational carrier, in
190 4 · Assessments

    conjunction with an IVF cycle
unifactorial inheritance controlled by single genes
varicocele mass of varicose veins in the spermatic cord
vertical transmission tendency of disorders to run in families across multiple generations
X-linked type of inheritance in which genes carried on the X chromosome are passed down to the next generation
zygote diploid cell that results from the joining of an egg and sperm
zygote intrafallopian transfer (ZIFT) procedure that starts as a traditional GIFT, but fertilization is allowed to

    occur in the laboratory; once the fertilized eggs have formed zygotes, they are transferred back into the fallopian
    tubes

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. In which structure does fertilization usually occur?
           a. the ovary
           b. the uterus
           c. the fallopian tube
           d. the vagina

    2. How many mature ova result from a single cycle of oogenesis?
           a. 1
           b. 2
           c. 3
           d. 4

    3. What hormone is secreted by the corpus luteum after ovulation?
           a. prolactin
           b. progesterone
           c. luteinizing hormone
           d. follicle-stimulating hormone

    4. What karyotype would the nurse anticipate for a patient with Klinefelter's syndrome?
           a. XO
           b. XXY
           c. XYY
           d. XXX

    5. What information would the nurse include when teaching a patient newly diagnosed with Huntington disease
        about having children?
           a. "Both you and your partner must carry the gene for your children to get the disease."
           b. "The gene is found on the X chromosome. Only male children have a risk of inheriting the disease."
           c. "You have a 50 percent chance of passing the gene on to your children."
           d. "It occurs only when the chromosomes don't divide correctly, causing one cell to have too many
                chromosomes."

    6. What patient statement indicates the need for further education about amniocentesis?
           a. "It can be used to test for neural tube defects."
           b. "It is performed between 15 and 20 weeks' gestation."
           c. "It is performed using a sterile needle to withdraw a sample of amniotic fluid."
           d. "The sample can be obtained using a transcervical approach."

    7. What is an example of a statement by the patient that indicates effective teaching by the nurse about
        methods to improve fertility?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        4 · Assessments 191

         a. "Caffeine does not affect my fertility."
         b. "I should start taking prenatal vitamins to increase my chances of conception."
         c. "My partner should avoid any exercise while we are trying to conceive to avoid damaging the sperm."
         d. "Smoking can increase my risk of miscarriage."

 8. What condition would the nurse suspect in a patient with irregular menstrual cycles, obesity, and abnormal
      hair growth on the face?
         a. endometriosis
         b. hyperprolactinemia
         c. polycystic ovary syndrome
         d. hydrosalpinx

 9. What term would the nurse use to document the lab results of a patient with a zero sperm count?
         a. azospermia
         b. oligospermia
         c. varicocele
         d. retrograde ejaculation

10. The nurse is reviewing the hormonal blood work from a patient who is tracking their cycle to try to conceive
      this month. The patient's estradiol and progesterone levels are low. What statement would the nurse include
      in the patient teaching?
         a. "You have already ovulated this month. Let us know if you are not pregnant, and we will try again next
              month."
         b. "You should have intercourse tonight and tomorrow. This is the best time to try to conceive."
         c. "You are at the very beginning of your cycle and will be getting your period very soon."
         d. "We can't tell where you are in your cycle from this blood work. You may need to repeat it next week."

11. The nurse would anticipate that a patient with elevated levels of which hormone would require radiologic
      imaging of the brain?
         a. TSH
         b. prolactin
         c. progesterone
         d. FSH

12. What patient may need laparoscopic surgery?
         a. a patient with low antral follicle count
         b. a patient with an elevated prolactin level
         c. a patient with patent fallopian tubes on hysterosalpingogram
         d. a patient with suspected endometriosis

13. What medication would the nurse include in the discharge teaching for a patient after an egg retrieval?
         a. birth control pills
         b. follitropin
         c. estrogen supplementation
         d. ganirelix acetate

14. What condition would the nurse suspect when a patient calls to report feeling very bloated after egg retrieval
      3 days ago?
         a. ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome
         b. ectopic pregnancy
         c. ovarian hemorrhage
         d. hydrosalpinx
192 4 · Assessments

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. What information would you provide to a patient who asks why it is possible to get pregnant only for about a
        week each month?

    2. Why are males disproportionately affected by color-blindness?

    3. How would you explain the different options for early genetic screening to a newly pregnant patient?

    4. How would you respond to a patient who asks why they need to be tested for HIV before undergoing fertility
        treatment?

    5. How would you reply to a patient who asks about their risk for cancer after taking infertility medications?

Reflection Questions

    1. What information should you provide to a 35-year-old patient who asks if she can wait until she's older to get
        pregnant?

    2. What information would you provide to a patient who recently learned that they are a carrier for cystic
        fibrosis?

    3. Which test would you recommend to a patient who had an abnormal result on their first trimester screening
        and expresses the desire to terminate the pregnancy if the fetus has a serious genetic abnormality?

    4. How would you respond when a patient states that they want several embryos transferred so that they can
        have twins?

    5. Why is it important for the patient to take a GnRH agonist or antagonist as part of their ovulation induction
        medication?

What Should the Nurse Do?

Alex is 32 years old and presents to a fertility clinic seeking guidance on conception-related concerns. Alex and her
partner have been attempting to conceive for over a year without success. She reports irregular menstrual cycles,
ranging from 28 to 40 days, and notes increased emotional distress associated with each unsuccessful attempt.
Alex's medical history reveals a diagnosis of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) since her early 20s. Despite
managing PCOS with lifestyle modifications, including dietary changes and regular exercise, conception remains
elusive. Psychosocially, Alex expresses heightened anxiety about her ability to conceive and build a family. Her vital
signs include a blood pressure of 120/78 mm Hg, a heart rate of 76 beats per minute, and a body mass index (BMI)
of 25.3. The patient's psychiatric history includes a brief episode of depression in her late teens, managed with
counseling.

    1. Considering Alex's case, how might the physical components of fertility, such as ovulation and hormonal
        changes, contribute to her challenges in conceiving? Additionally, discuss the psychosocial factors mentioned
        in the case that could impact Alex's fertility journey.

    2. Based on the information provided in the chapter, explain the stages of conception, focusing on ovulation and
        fertilization. How might abnormalities in these stages, as seen in Alex's case, contribute to infertility?

    3. Utilizing the chapter content, discuss the different causes of infertility and how PCOS, as seen in Alex's case,
        fits into these causes. What role does diagnostic testing play in identifying specific causes?

Taylor is 28 years old. She visits a genetic counseling clinic due to concerns about her family's medical history.
Taylor's father was recently diagnosed with Huntington disease, an autosomal dominant genetic disorder. Fearing
the potential inheritance of the disorder, Taylor seeks guidance on her reproductive choices and the likelihood of
passing the condition to her future children. Taylor reports no symptoms of Huntington disease at present, and her
medical history is unremarkable. She expresses anxiety about the uncertainty surrounding her genetic
predisposition. Vital signs reveal a blood pressure of 118/72 mm Hg, a heart rate of 80 beats per minute, and a BMI
of 23.6.

    4. Given Taylor's family history of Huntington disease, which is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder, explain
        the characteristics of autosomal dominant inheritance. How does it differ from autosomal recessive and X-
        linked recessive patterns?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           4 · Assessments 193

    5. Considering Taylor's concerns about Huntington disease, how can genetic testing assist her in making
        informed reproductive choices? Discuss the importance of genetic counseling in this context.

    6. In Taylor's situation, what prenatal and postnatal testing options are available to assess the risk of
        Huntington disease in her future children? Compare the advantages and limitations of these options.

Arjun, a 32-year-old software engineer, and his partner, Aisha, a 30-year-old teacher, arrive at the fertility clinic
seeking assistance with fertility-related challenges. Arjun shares that despite actively trying to conceive for the past
18 months, the couple has not achieved a successful pregnancy. Arjun expresses his growing concern about his
reproductive health, particularly due to the lack of any prior experience fathering a child. During the consultation,
Arjun discloses experiencing occasional testicular discomfort but emphasizes that it is not accompanied by
significant pain. He notes that these sensations have been intermittent and do not seem to be associated with any
specific activities or conditions. Aisha provides additional details, mentioning that they have been tracking Aisha's
menstrual cycles and timing intercourse during what they believe to be her fertile period. Arjun's medical history
reveals a generally healthy person with no known chronic conditions, allergies, or previous surgeries. He denies any
history of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) or other reproductive health issues. His lifestyle involves moderate
physical activity, and he maintains a balanced diet. Arjun is a non-smoker and reports occasional social alcohol
consumption.

    7. Based on Arjun and Aisha's case, what aspects of Aisha's health history and potential factors mentioned in
        the chapter could be explored to understand the reasons for their infertility, considering conditions like
        ovulatory disorders and structural problems?

    8. Considering Arjun's case, how might the information provided about male factor infertility, such as hormonal
        abnormalities and exposure to gonadotoxins, help in understanding Arjun's concerns about his reproductive
        health?

    9. In the context of Arjun and Aisha's case, how could patient teaching about ways to optimize fertility be
        tailored to address their specific needs and concerns during their fertility journey?

Priya is 35 years old when she presents at a fertility clinic accompanied by her husband, Rahul. The couple is
seeking assistance due to challenges in conceiving a child despite actively trying for over 2 years. Priya reports
irregular menstrual cycles and occasional pelvic pain during menstruation. Her medical history reveals a diagnosis
of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in her early twenties. She manages PCOS with lifestyle modifications and has
no significant psychiatric history. During the initial assessment, Priya describes experiencing emotional distress and
feelings of inadequacy related to their fertility struggles. Rahul is supportive but expresses concern about the
impact of infertility on their relationship. Priya's vital signs, including blood pressure, heart rate, and BMI, fall within
normal ranges.

  10. Based on Priya's case, what specific fertility tests might be recommended, considering her history of irregular
        menstrual cycles and PCOS diagnosis?

  11. As a nurse, what are the key nursing implications when communicating fertility test results to Priya and Rahul,
        especially considering Priya's emotional distress?

  12. Describe the family planning options that Priya and Rahul might explore during infertility therapy, considering
        Priya's PCOS and emotional distress.

  13. Identify and discuss potential complications that Priya might encounter during infertility treatment. How
        should the nurse educate her about these risks?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. Create a poster for a high school health class that explains the development of sperm cells. Include a diagram
        of the process.

    2. Explain fragile X transmission.

    3. Develop a 5-minute presentation that explains the benefits and uses of the newborn screen.

    4. Design a pamphlet that can be distributed to patients that discusses ways they can increase or protect their
        fertility before or while trying to get pregnant.

    5. Prepare patient educational materials to be given to patients when they are discharged from having their egg
        retrieval. What type of information would you include?
194 4 · References

References

Advisory Committee on Heritable Disorders in Newborns and Children. (2023, February). Recommended Uniform
   Screening Panel. https://www.hrsa.gov/advisory-committees/heritable-disorders/rusp

Albagoush, S. A., Koya, S., Chakraborty, R. K., & Schmidt, A. E. (2023, January 17). Factor V Leiden mutation.
    StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK534802/

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020). Perinatal risks associated with assisted reproductive
   technology. ACOG Committee Opinion #671. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-
    opinion/articles/2016/09/perinatal-risks-associated-with-assisted-reproductive-technology

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022a). Carrier screening: Frequently asked questions.
    https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/carrier-screening

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022b). Treating infertility: Frequently asked questions.
    https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/treating-infertility

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023a). Sonohysterography. https://www.acog.org/womens-
    health/faqs/sonohysterography

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023b). Hysterosalpingography (HSG).
    https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/hysterosalpingography

American Nurses Association. (2015). Code of ethics with interpretive statements. https://www.nursingworld.org/
    practice-policy/nursing-excellence/ethics/code-of-ethics-for-nurses/coe-view-only/

American Society for Reproductive Medicine. (2014). Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS).
    https://www.reproductivefacts.org/globalassets/_rf/news-and-publications/bookletsfact-sheets/english-pdf/
    ovarian_hyperstimulation_syndrome_ohss_factsheet.pdf

American Society for Reproductive Medicine. (2015). In vitro fertilization (IVF): What are the risks?
    https://www.reproductivefacts.org/news-and-publications/fact-sheets-and-infographics/in-vitro-fertilization-ivf-
    what-are-the-risks/

American Society for Reproductive Medicine. (n.d.). Defining infertility. https://www.reproductivefacts.org/news-
    and-publications/fact-sheets-and-infographics/defining-infertility/

American Society for Reproductive Medicine. (n.d.). Fibroids and fertility. https://www.reproductivefacts.org/news-
    and-publications/fact-sheets-and-infographics/fibroids-and-fertility/

Arab, W. (2022, January-March). Diagnostic laparoscopy for unexplained subfertility: A comprehensive review.
   JBRA Assisted Reproduction, 26(1). 145-152. https://doi.org/10.5935/1518-0557.20210084

Balasundaram, P., & Avulakunta, I. D. (2023, March 8). Edwards syndrome. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK570597/

BBC News. (2020). How do countries fight falling birth rates? https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-51118616

Behjati-Ardakani, Z., Akhondi, M. M., Mahmoodzadeh, H., & Hosseini, S. H. (2016, January-March). An evaluation of
   the historical importance of fertility and its reflection in ancient mythology. Journal of Reproduction & Infertility,
   17(1), 2-9.

Bhardwaj, J. K., Bikal, P., & Sachdeva, S. N. (2023). Chemotherapeutic drugs induced female reproductive toxicity
   and treatment strategies. Journal of Biochemical and Molecular Toxicology, 37(7), e23371-n/a. https://doi.org/
    10.1002/jbt.23371

Boitrelle, F., Shah, R., Saleh, R., Henkel, R., Kandil, H., Chung, E., Vogiatzi, P., Zini, A., Arafa, M., & Agarwal, A. (2021,
    December). The Sixth Edition of the WHO Manual for Human Semen Analysis: A critical review and SWOT
   analysis. Life, 11(12), 1368. https://doi.org/10.3390/life11121368

Cable, J. K., & Grider, M. H. (2023, May). Physiology, progesterone. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK558960/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              4 · References 195

Carlson, L. M., & Vora, N. L. (2017, August 8). Prenatal diagnosis. Obstetrics and Gynecology Clinics of North
   America. 44(2), 245-256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ogc.2017.02.004

Carson, S. A., & Kallen, A. N. (2021). Diagnosis and management of infertility: A review. JAMA, 326(1), 65-76.
    https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2021.4788

Casarramona, G., Lalmahomed, T., Lemmen, C. H. C., Eijkemans, M. J. C., Broekmans, F. J. M., Cantineau, A. E. P., &
    Drechsel, K. C. E. (2022). The efficacy and safety of luteal phase support with progesterone following ovarian
   stimulation and intrauterine insemination: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Frontiers in Endocrinology, 13.
    https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2022.960393

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022a, May 9). Cystic fibrosis. https://www.cdc.gov/genomics/disease/
    cystic_fibrosis.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022b, August 18). What is sickle cell disease? https://www.cdc.gov/
    ncbddd/sicklecell/facts.html

Chami, A. A., & Saridogan, E. (2017, February). Endometrial polyps and subfertility. The Journal of Obstetrics and
   Gynecology of India, 67(1). 9-14. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13224-016-0929-4

Cirillo, F., Paladino, I., Ronchetti, C., Busnelli, A., Morengh, E., Grilli, L., Patrizio, P., Zannoni, E., & Levi-Setti, P. E.
    (2022, November 28). Ectopic pregnancy risk factors in infertile patients: A 10-year single center experience.
   Scientific Reports, 12, 20473. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-24649-w

Clomid (clomiphene citrate). (2017). https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/
    016131s028lbl.pdf

Conception: How it works. (n.d.). https://crh.ucsf.edu/about-fertility/conception

Delbaere, I., Verbiest, S., & Tydén, T. (2020, January 22). Knowledge about the impact of age on fertility: A brief
   review. Upsala Journal of Medical Sciences, 125(2): 167-174. https://doi.org/10.1080/
    03009734.2019.1707913

Domar, A. (n.d.). Relaxation and stress management. https://resolve.org/get-help/helpful-resources-and-advice/
    managing-infertility-stress/relaxation-and-stress-management/

Durairajanayagam, D. (2018). Lifestyle causes of male infertility. Arab Journal of Urology, 16(1), 10-20.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aju.2017.12.004

Ethics Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM). (2013, March 7). Child-rearing ability
   and the provision of fertility services: A committee opinion. Fertility and Sterility, 100(1). 50-53. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.fertnstert.2013.02.02

Evans, M. B., Stentz, N. C., Richter, K. S., Schexnayder, B., Connell, M., Healy, M. W., Devine, K., Widra, E., Stillman,
    R., DeCherney, A. H., & Hill, M. J. (2020). Mature follicle count and multiple gestation risk based on patient age in
   intrauterine insemination cycles with ovarian stimulation. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 135(5), 1005-1014.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000003795

Fauser, B. C. (2023, June). Patient education: Infertility treatment with gonadotropins (Beyond the Basics).
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/infertility-treatment-with-gonadotropins-beyond-the-basics/print

Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center. (n.d.). Phenylketonuria. https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/
    7383/phenylketonuria

Goldwaser, T., & Klugman, S. (2018). Cell-free DNA for the detection of fetal aneuploidy. Fertility and Sterility,
   109(2), 195-200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2017.12.019

Hargreave, M., Jensen, A., Hansen, M. K., et al. (2019, December 10). Association between fertility treatment and
   cancer risk in children. JAMA, 322(22), 2203-2210. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2019.18037

Hill, C. J., Fakhreldin, M., Maclean, A., Dobson, L., Nancarrow, L., Bradfield, A., Choi, F., Daley, D., Tempest, N., &
    Hapangama, D. K. (2020). Endometriosis and the fallopian tubes: Theories of origin and clinical implications.
196 4 · References

   Journal of Clinical Medicine, 9(6), 1905. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm9061905

Ho, J. (2023). Patient education: In vitro fertilization (IVF) (Beyond the Basics). https://www.uptodate.com/
    contents/in-vitro-fertilization-ivf-beyond-the-basics

Hu, S., Su, C., Zhou, L., & Dai, L. (2024). Reliability and validity of the Chinese version of the COMPI Fertility Problem
   Stress Scale--Short Form for infertile women. International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics. https://doi.org/
    10.1002/ijgo.15342

Huntington's Disease Society of America. (n.d.). Overview of Huntington's disease. https://hdsa.org/what-is-hd/
    overview-of-huntingtons-disease/

Hutter, C. M. (2023). Diploid. https://www.genome.gov/genetics-glossary/Diploid

Jackson, M., Marks, L., May, G. H. W., & Wilson, J. B. (2018, December 3). The genetic basis of disease. Essays in
   Biochemistry, 62(5), 643-723. https://doi.org/10.1042/EBC20170053

Khan, Y. S., & Ackerman, K. M. (2023, April 17). Embryology, week 1. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK554562

Komeya, M., Sato, T., & Ogawa, T. (2018, August). Spermatogenesis: A century-long research journey still halfway
   around. Reproductive Medicine and Biology, 17(4), 407-420. https://doi.org/10.1002/rmb2.12225

Krajnik, K., Mietkiewska, K., Skowronska, A., Kordowitzki, P., & Skowronski, M. T. (2023). Oogenesis in women: From
   molecular regulatory pathways and maternal age to stem cells. International Journal of Molecular Sciences,
   24(7), 6837. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24076837

Kuohung, W., & Hornstein, M. D. (2023, June). Evaluation of infertility in couples (Beyond the basics).
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/evaluation-of-infertility-in-couples-beyond-the-basics

Legal Professional Group. (n.d.) Surrogacy laws by state. https://connect.asrm.org/lpg/resources/surrogacy-by-
    state?ssopc=1

Leslie, S. W., Sajjad, H., & Siref, L E. (2023, April). Varicocele. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK448113/

Leslie, S. W., Soon-Sutton, T. L., & Khan, M. A. (2023, March 3). Male infertility. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/BK562258/

Li, H., Mao, Y., and Jin, J. (2021, May 10). The correlation between maternal age and fetal sex chromosome
   aneuploidies: A 8-year single institution experience in China. Molecular Cytogenetics, 14(25). https://doi.org/
    10.1186/s13039-021-00545-2

Milani, D. A. Q., & Tadi, P. (2023, April 24). Genetics, chromosome abnormalities. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557691/

Moolhuijsen, L. M. E., & Visser, J. A. (2020, November 1). Anti-Müllerian hormone and ovarian reserve: Update on
   assessing ovarian function. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 105(11). 3361-3373.
    https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgaa513

Morse, A. (2022, April 6). Stable fertility rates 1990 to 2019 mask distinct variations by age.
    https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2022/04/fertility-rates-declined-for-younger-women-increased-for-
    older-women.html

National Cancer Institute: Division of Cancer Epidemiology & Genetics. (n.d.) Follow-up studies of women evaluated
   and treated for infertility. https://dceg.cancer.gov/research/who-we-study/cohorts/infertility-treated-women-
    follow-up-study

National Human Genome Research Institute. (2020). Chromosome abnormalities fact sheet.
    https://www.genome.gov/about-genomics/fact-sheets/Chromosome-Abnormalities-Fact-Sheet

National Human Genome Research Institute. (2023). Autosomal recessive disorder. https://www.genome.gov/
    genetics-glossary/Autosomal-Recessive-Disorder

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              4 · References 197

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (n.d.). Diabetes, sexual, & bladder problems.
    https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/diabetes/overview/preventing-problems/sexual-bladder-
    problems

National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. (2023, February 7). Tay-Sachs disease.
    https://www.ninds.nih.gov/health-information/disorders/tay-sachs-disease

National Library of Medicine. (2021a). Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/
    007294.htm

National Library of Medicine. (2021b). What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
    https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/understanding/inheritance/inheritancepatterns/

National Organization for Rare Diseases. (2020). Cystic fibrosis. https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/cystic-
    fibrosis/

NHS. (2023). Causes: Infertility. https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/infertility/causes/

Oberg, A. S., VanderWeele, T. J., Almqvist, C., & Hernandez-Diaz, S. (2018, June 22). Pregnancy complications
   following fertility treatment--disentangling the role of multiple gestation. International Journal of Epidemiology,
   47(4), 1333-1342. https://doi.org/10/1093/ije/dyy103

Oliver, R., & Basit, H. (2023, April). Embryology, fertilization. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK542186/

Panth, N., Gavarkovs, A., Tamez, M., & Mattei, J. (2018). The influence of diet on fertility and the implications for
   public health nutrition in the United States. Frontiers in Public Health, 6, 211. https://doi.org/10.3389/
    fpubh.2018.00211

Patel, A. S., Leong, J. Y., Ramos, L., & Ramasamy, R. (2019). Testosterone is a contraceptive and should not be used
   in men who desire fertility. The World Journal of Men's Health, 37(1), 45-54. https://doi.org/10.5534/
    wjmh.180036

Pedro, J., Brandão, T., Schmidt, L., Costa, M. E., & Martins, M. V. (2018, June 29). What do people know about
   fertility? A systematic review on fertility awareness and its associated factors. Upsala Journal of Medical
   Sciences, 123(2): 71-81. https://doi.org/10.1080/03009734.2018.1480186

Pelzman, D. L., & Hwang, K. (2021). Genetic testing for men with infertility: Techniques and indications.
   Translational Andrology and Urology, 10(3), 1354-1364. https://doi.org/10.21037/tau-19-725

Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine in collaboration with the Society for
   Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility. (2017). Optimizing natural fertility: A committee opinion. Fertility
   Sterility, 107(1), 52-58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2016.09.029

Practice Committee of the Society for Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Quality Assurance Committee of
    the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology, and the Practice Committee of the American Society for
    Reproductive Medicine (2022). Multiple gestation associated with infertility therapy: A committee opinion.
   Fertility and Sterility, 117(3), 498-511. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35115166/

Puscheck, E. E. (2020). Infertility. https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/274143-overview?form=fpf

Reed, B. G., & Carr, B. R. (2018). The normal menstrual cycle and the control of ovulation. Endotext.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279054/

Rehman, B., & Muzio, M. R. (2023, May 1). Embryology week 2-3. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK546679/

Roberts, A. (2023) Fallopian tube recanalization for the management of infertility. CVIR Endovascular, 6(13).
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s42155-023-00356-z

Rooney, K. L., & Domar, A. D. (2018). The relationship between stress and infertility. Dialogues in Clinical
   Neuroscience, 20(1), 41-47. https://doi.org/10.31887/DCNS.2018.20.1/klrooney
198 4 · References

Salazar, A., Diaz-García, C., & García-Velasco, J. A. (2023). Third-party reproduction: A treatment that grows with
   societal changes. Fertility and Sterility, S0015-0282(23)00057-2. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.fertnstert.2023.01.019

Schlegel, P. N., Sigman, M., Collura, B., DeJonge, C. J., Eisenberg, M. L., Lamb, D. J., Mulhall, J. P., Niederberger, C.,
    Sandlow, J. I., Sokol, R. Z., Spandorfer, S. D., Tanrikut, C., Treadwill, J. R., Oristaglio, J. T., & Zini, A. (2021,
   January). Diagnosis and treatment of infertility in men: AUA/ASRM guideline Part II. The Journal of Urology,
   205(1). 44-51. https://doi.org/10.1097/JU.0000000000001520

Sermondade, N., Sonigo, C., Pasquier, M., Ahdad-Yata, N., Fraison, E., & Grynberg, M. (2023, March). Searching for
    the optimal number of oocytes to reach a live birth after in vitro fertilization: A systematic review with meta-
   analysis. Fertility and Sterility Reviews, 4(2), P101-115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xfnr.2023.03.002

Severijns, Y., de Die-Smulders, C. E. M., Gültzow, T., de Vries, H., & van Osch, L. A. D. M. (2021). Hereditary diseases
    and child wish: Exploring motives, considerations, and the (joint) decision-making process of genetically at-risk
   couples. Journal of Community Genetics, 12(3), 325-335. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12687-021-00510-x

Sharma, S. R., Saxena, R., & Singh, R. (2018, December). Infertility & assisted reproduction: A historical & modern
   scientific perspective. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 148(Suppl 1). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
    articles/PMC6469376/

Sickle Cell Speaks. (n.d.). What is sickle cell? https://sicklecellspeaks.com/understanding-sickle-cell/what-is-sickle-
    cell/

Silva, A. F., Ramalho-Santos, J., & Amaral, S. (2021). The impact of antisperm antibodies on human male
   reproductive function: An update. Reproduction, 162(4). R550R71. https://doi.org/10.1530/REP-21-0123

Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology. (n.d.-a). ART medications. https://www.sart.org/patients/a-patients-
    guide-to-assisted-reproductive-technology/general-information/art-medications/

Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology. (n.d.-b). Collection of semen. https://www.sart.org/patients/a-
    patients-guide-to-assisted-reproductive-technology/general-information/art-medications/

Soni, K. K., Jeong, H.-S., & Jeong, S. (2022). Neurons for ejaculation and factors affecting ejaculation. Biology, 11(5),
    686. https://doi.org/10.3390/biology11050686.

Su, H. W., Yi, Y. C., Wei, T. Y., Chang, T. C., & Cheng, C. M. (2017). Detection of ovulation, a review of currently
   available methods. Bioengineering & Translational Medicine, 2(3), 238-246. https://doi.org/10.1002/
    btm2.10058

Sunder, M., and Leslie, S. W. (2022, October 24). Semen analysis. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK564369/

Tay, C. T., Hart, R. J., Hickey, M., et al. (2020). Updated adolescent diagnostic criteria for polycystic ovary syndrome:
   Impact on prevalence and longitudinal body mass index trajectories from birth to adulthood. BMC Medicine, 18,
    389. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-020-01861-x

The National Fragile X Foundation. (n.d.). Genetics & inheritance. https://fragilex.org/understanding-fragile-x/
    fragile-x-101/genetics-inheritance/

University of California San Francisco. (n.d.). Preimplantation genetic diagnosis. https://www.ucsfhealth.org/
    treatments/pre-implantation-genetic-diagnosis

Urology Care Foundation. (n.d.). What is male infertility? https://www.urologyhealth.org/urology-a-z/m/male-
    infertility

Velez, D., & Ohlander, S. (2021). Medical therapies causing iatrogenic male infertility. Fertility and Sterility, 116(3),
    618-624. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2021.07.1202

Walker, M. H., & Tobler, K. J. (2022, December). Female infertility. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK556033/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              4 · References 199

Wang, H., Liang, B., Wang, Y., Huang, H., Lin, N., & Xu, L. (2022, December 22). Retrospective analysis of the sex
   chromosomal copy number variations in 86 fetuses using single nucleotide polymorphism arrays. Frontiers in
   Genetics, 13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.997757

Wasielak-Politowska, M., & Kordowitzki, P. (2022). Chromosome segregation in the oocyte: What goes wrong during
   aging. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 23(5), 2880. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23052880

Wen, J., Huang, K., Du, X., Zhang, H., Ding, T., Zhang, C., Ma, W., Zhong, Y., Qu, W., Liu, Y., Li, Z., Deng, S., Luo, A., Jin,
    Y., Zhang, J., & Wang, S. (2021). Can inhibin B reflect ovarian reserve of healthy reproductive age women
   effectively? Frontiers in Endocrinology, 12, 626534. https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2021.626534

World Health Organization. (2023a, April 3). Infertility. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/infertility

World Health Organization. (2023b, April 23). Infertility prevalence estimates: 1990-2001. https://www.who.int/
    publications/i/item/978920068315

Yahaya, T. O., Oladele, E. O., Anyebe, D., Obi, C., Bunza, M. D. A., Sulaiman, R., & Liman, U. U.. (2021). Chromosomal
   abnormalities predisposing to infertility, testing, and management: A narrative review. Bulletin of the National
   Research Center, 45, 65. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42269-021-00523-z

Yao, W. X., Zheng, D. Z., Liu W. F., Zhou, M. M., Liu, L., & Cai, M. J. (2023). Prognostic value of hysterosalpingogram
   after salpingostomy in patients with hydrosalpinx. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 43(1). https://doi.org/
    10.1080/01443615.2022.2158322

Young, J., & Bae, G. (2023). South Korea breaks its own record for world's lowest fertility rate. https://www.cnn.com/
    2023/02/22/asia/south-korea-lowest-fertility-rate-record-2022-intl-hnk/index.html
200 4 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 5

Family Planning

FIGURE 5.1 Methods of Family Planning Many contraceptive options are available to patients. The nurse has a unique opportunity to
explain to patients the pros and cons of each method. (credit: "Female holding contraceptives" by Marco Verch Professional Photographer,
CC BY 2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
5.1 Contraception: The Nurse's Role
5.2 Natural Methods of Contraception
5.3 Barrier Methods of Contraception
5.4 Short-Acting Reversible Hormonal Methods of Contraception
5.5 Long-Acting Reversible Contraception
5.6 Emergency Contraception
5.7 Sterilization
5.8 Induced Abortion

INTRODUCTION Every day approximately 800 women die from pregnancy-related conditions (World Health
Organization [WHO], 2023d). Specific populations are at increased risk for pregnancy complications. Empowering a
person to choose if and when to have a child by providing safe and affordable access to contraception is shown to
reduce poverty, morbidity, mortality, instances of unintended pregnancies, abortions, maternal deaths, and infant
deaths (Sarder et al., 2021)
Healthy People 2030's objective of improved pregnancy outcomes and prevention of unintended pregnancy is a
priority in contraceptive counseling. Nearly half the pregnancies in the United States are unplanned. Unplanned
pregnancy can lead to outcomes such as perinatal depression, anxiety, preterm birth, low birth weight, and
decreased maternal-infant attachment (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2023). Contraceptive
availability is a foundational goal; however, sociocultural expectations also play an important role in this initiative.
Attitudes of women and the society they live in--the feeling that they should produce until a set number of children
are born or until they can no longer give birth--is a key sociocultural inhibition to the use of contraception (Bapolisi
202  5 · Family Planning

     et al., 2024).

     5.1 Contraception: The Nurse's Role

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Perform a history and physical for a person seeking contraception
         · Explain the general information and education provided to a person seeking contraception

     This section discusses the history and physical performed and education provided when a person seeks
     contraception. The history includes a detailed reproductive history in addition to the personal and family health
     history. The physical exam often includes a pelvic exam and sexually transmitted infection (STI) testing when
     indicated.

     History and Physical for Contraception

     Obtaining a health history for contraception encompasses a thorough reproductive and medical history. The nurse
     enquires about menarche, frequency and length of menstrual cycle, characteristics of the cycle (pain, heavy
     bleeding, clots, mood changes), number of pregnancies and births, pregnancy complications, previous use of
     contraception, STI history, desire for pregnancy and spacing of births, surgeries, infertility, family history, and
     genetic history, along with any risk of thrombosis or clotting. Table 5.1 lists specific questions to help the nurse and
     patient determine the best contraception for that patient.

     Nurse's Question                                    Reason

     Tell me about your periods. Are they heavy or       Helps determine any irregularities in the cycle or any
     irregular? Do you experience clots and/or pain? Do  discomforts that could be relieved by noncontraceptive
     you experience other symptoms such as headaches or  properties of a contraceptive method
     nausea?

     How many times have you been pregnant? How many     Determines past fertility; explores elected and/or
     live births?                                        spontaneous abortions

     Were all of your pregnancies planned?               Explores if the person has been successful in
                                                         preventing pregnancy and becoming pregnant on their
                                                         time plan

     If unplanned, were you using any type of            Determines what methods have worked in the past and
     contraception?                                      which have not

     Are you in a monogamous relationship?               Allows the nurse to discuss a barrier method to prevent
                                                         STIs

     Did you have any pregnancy or abortion              Determines risk factors associated with pregnancy that
     complications?                                      the person should be counseled about regarding timing
                                                         or contraindications for pregnancy or contraception

     TABLE 5.1 The Reproductive Health History

     Choosing a contraceptive technique should include shared decision making between the nurse and the person
     making the decision.

     Questions to Consider Prior to Providing Contraceptive Education
     The nurse becomes familiar with what is important in a contraceptive method for the person. This allows the nurse
     to point out pros and cons of each method related to the individual needs of that person. The nurse should
     determine if the person has any religious or sociocultural considerations related to pregnancy prevention, how often
     they anticipate having penetrative sex, and their sexual orientation and gender. The nurse must take care to ask

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                              5.1 · Contraception: The Nurse's Role                                     203

patients who are LGBTQIA+ the contraceptive questions on the intake form. Regardless of a patient's sexual
orientation or gender identity, contraception can provide many health benefits. Table 5.2 lists other important
questions to ask during contraceptive counseling.

Nurse's Question           Reason

What is important to you   Allows the nurse to understand what property of the method is important to the
about your contraceptive   person (long-term or short-term method, taking a pill every day, not needing to
method?                    think about contraception daily, not wanting hormones, needing STI protection)

What contraceptive         Allows the nurse to determine if a previous contraceptive method was
method(s) have you used    acceptable and sheds light on what the person liked or disliked about that
before, and would you use  method
it(them) again?

How important is it to     Allows the nurse to discuss efficacy of each method
prevent pregnancy?

How well do you remember   Determines if a daily, weekly, monthly, or long-term method will be most
to do something daily?     effective

Are you planning a         Important to know the plan for pregnancy to determine if long-term or short-
pregnancy in the future?   term contraception is ideal for that person.
When?

TABLE 5.2 Contraceptive Counseling Questions

        LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

Providing Birth Control to Minors

Different states have different laws regarding providing birth control to people under 18 years of age. This means
some health-care providers are bound by law to inform parents or guardians about a patient's desire for birth
control. In other states, minors have the right of confidentiality and consent. Either way, health-care providers must
provide informed consent and counseling in regard to birth control. This requires the patient to understand the risks,
benefits, and potential side effects of the method. The nurse or health-care provider must ensure the minor
understands this information prior to signing a consent form. If the minor does not understand the information, the
nurse or provider can encourage the patient to call a parent or guardian to sign the consent for them.

Using the MEC Criteria by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Certain contraceptive options are contraindicated due to a person's health history. For example, methods containing
estrogen come with more risk and must be chosen carefully. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
has developed the U.S. Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use (US MEC), shown in (Table 5.3), a
straightforward way to assess if a patient is eligible for a type of contraception based on medical conditions or
previous medical conditions (Curtis et al., 2016). The US MEC helps the nurse or clinician compare the patient's
medical history with the contraceptive they wish to use. This tool uses a rating scale to determine the safety of all
contraceptive forms, with 1 being the safest and 4 being not safe at all (Curtis et al., 2016). This assists in
determining the risk versus benefit of each contraceptive option and to ensure the patient has made an informed
decision when choosing a contraceptive for themselves.
204  5 · Family Planning

     MEC Number                       Definition

     1                    There is no restriction for use of the contraceptive method.

     2                    There is an advantage of using a contraceptive method that outweighs any risk.

     3                    There is a risk that outweighs the advantages of the contraceptive method.

     4                    There is an unacceptable health risk if the contraceptive method is used.

     TABLE 5.3 Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use Defined

     The nurse can print the PDF version of the MEC (https://openstax.org/r/77MedEligCrit) and hang it in clinic rooms for
     reference. Nurses can also download the MEC app onto their computer or smartphone. This is a great way to
     enhance evidence-based practice and ensure safe care for all patients during contraceptive visits.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     The U.S. Medical Criteria for Contraceptive Use (https://openstax.org/r/77contraception) are a great tool to help
     nurses assess if a patient's contraception is appropriate and safe for them based on their current sexual activity,
     plans for the future, and medical history.

     Safer Sex
     The safest sex is abstaining from sexual intercourse. Safer sex is the prevention of STIs and pregnancy. Safer sex
     methods include vaccination against human papillomavirus (HPV) and hepatitis B and using internal or external
     condoms, spermicides, and diaphragms or cervical caps. The nurse can educate the person on using multipurpose
     prevention technologies, methods that protect from both STIs and pregnancy, consisting of internal and external
     condoms (CDC, 2023c). Decreasing the number of sexual partners and frequent testing for STIs can decrease the
     risk of transmission. The nurse encourages the person to talk with their partner about past partners, history of STIs,
     and history of drug use.

     Safer sex also includes the use of reliable contraception. The nurse can help explain all the pros and cons of each
     contraceptive method and use shared decision making to find a method the person will use regularly and
     appropriately. Information on emergency contraception (EC) should also be provided by the nurse. The nurse should
     discuss consent for intimate touching and sex, stressing that a person can say "no" at any time during a sexual
     encounter. Alcohol and drugs can alter judgment and should be avoided, as they can lead to high-risk behaviors
     including unsafe sex.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     The nurse provides education on safer sex while a person is in the office. However, some patients are shy about
     discussing sex. The CDC provides a list of conversation tips (https://openstax.org/r/77safesex) to help patients
     discuss safer sex with their partner and with their health-care provider.

     Contraception Education

     The nurse's role in providing contraception education is not only determining what method the patient wants but
     also assisting them in choosing the safest and most effective method they will use. A patient may be seeking a
     contraceptive method for menstrual regulation, premenstrual symptoms, preventing conception, or dysmenorrhea,
     which is very painful menstrual cramping that interferes with the person's daily living. When providing education on
     contraception, it is important for the nurse to ensure the patient understands the information provided and feels in
     control of the final decision. This may include using a certified medical interpreter when the nurse and patient are
     not fluent in the same language. The contraceptive visit also provides the nurse with the opportunity to include

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.2 · Natural Methods of Contraception                                                                                    205

education about sexuality, menstruation, reproductive health, reproductive choice, and self-care behaviors that can
benefit the patient's health and well-being.

General Information to Include When Discussing Contraception
The nurse will develop a trusting relationship with the person, reminding them that the information they discuss will
remain private. The nurse assures them they are in a safe place to ask questions or discuss their sexuality. The
nurse helps the patient determine what they want from the contraceptive method. Health-care providers and nurses
must remain unbiased regarding their opinion of the method or reason for contraception use.

Topics Covered in Contraceptive Counseling
Contraceptive methods have different mechanisms of action, side effects, effectiveness, and contraindications. The
nurse should discuss the following topics while explaining each method:

    · name and classification of method
    · ideal and actual effectiveness
    · how the method works to prevent pregnancy
    · effectiveness in STI prevention
    · side effects and adverse effects
    · contraindications
    · lab and other monitoring
    · patient education

After these topics have been discussed, the person will make an educated decision on what method is ideal. The
nurse also explains that as life changes, the contraceptive method can change to meet new needs.

5.2 Natural Methods of Contraception

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Compare and contrast the different fertility awareness methods
    · Explain coitus interruptus
    · Describe abstinence as a method of contraception

The decision to use natural methods of contraception can be made by intimate couples with comprehensive,
informed knowledge of available choices, risks, benefits, and long-term effects. Other factors that can influence the
decision to use nonpharmacologic methods include religion, sociocultural expectations, cost-effectiveness, lack of
insurance, and a desire to avoid the use of pharmacologic contraceptive products. Nurses can provide guidance and
education to people desiring to use these methods.

Fertility Awareness Methods

Natural methods of contraception include fertility awareness methods (FAM), which are those that require the
person who is menstruating to monitor the menstruation cycle and fertile window and avoid vaginal coitus (penile-
vaginal intercourse) during the fertile window. Some people use a combination of fertility awareness and a barrier
method during the fertile window. The six methods to monitor fertility discussed in this chapter are the calendar
rhythm method, standard days method, Billings Ovulation Method, symptothermal method, basal body temperature
method, and lactational amenorrhea method. FAM are 95 percent to 99 percent effective with perfect use
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists [ACOG], 2022c). Typical use efficacy is approximately 75
percent (Natural family planning, 2022).

Calendar Rhythm Method
The calendar rhythm method assumes that ovulation occurs within 14 days of the start of menstruation. To use this
method, the menstruating person must know for certain the start day of the menstrual period and keep a record of
the past 6 months of periods from start date to end date, to identify the shortest and longest menstrual cycle. The
first day of the menstrual cycle is noted as the first day of menstruation. The fertile phase is calculated from 18 days
before the end of the shortest recorded cycle through 11 days from the end of the longest recorded cycle. The
individual/couple must abstain from vaginal coitus during that time frame. For example, if the individual has
recorded a shortest menstrual cycle of 28 days and a longest of 35 days, the individual's fertile time will be
206  5 · Family Planning

     calculated as shown in Table 5.4.

     Calculation                                              Interpretation

     18 days before the end of the shortest menstrual cycle:  Fertile period begins at day 10 of cycle.
     28-18 = 10

     11 days from the end of the longest menstrual cycle:     Fertile period ends at day 24 of cycle.
     35-11 = 24

                 Fertile period is 14 days, from day 10 of the menstrual cycle through day 24.

                 TABLE 5.4 Calculations for the Calendar Rhythm Method

     Standard Days Method
     The standard days method is a good option for those whose menstrual cycle is consistent, regular, and between 26
     and 32 days in length. With perfect use, this method is 95 percent effective, and typical use is 88 percent effective
     (Weis & Festin, 2020). The nurse educates the patient/couple to avoid vaginal coitus or to use a barrier method
     between cycle days 8 through 19 (Hatcher, 2018). Downloadable apps can help patients to remember to abstain or
     to use barrier protection during these days, or patients can use CycleBeads.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     CycleBeads are a method of helping a patient follow the standard days method of birth control. They consist of a
     beaded strand (https://openstax.org/r/77cyclebeads) that contains blue, white, yellow, and red beads. Blue beads
     mark days when pregnancy is very unlikely, white beads mark days when pregnancy is likely, the red bead marks the
     day when menstruation should begin, and the yellow bead marks when menstruation should begin for those with
     shorter periods (like 26-day cycles). This beaded strand can help a patient to either avoid pregnancy or become
     pregnant, if desired. There is also an app the patient can download for their mobile device if desired.

     Billings Ovulation Method
     The Billings Ovulation Method is the most "hands on" method among the fertility awareness methods and has been
     shown to be 96.6 percent to 98.9 percent effective with perfect use and 66.4 percent to 90 percent with typical use
     (Ayala-Ramirez et al., 2023; Turner, 2021). This method involves the person's assessment of cervical mucus
     throughout the menstrual cycle. The amount and character of cervical mucus change throughout the menstrual
     cycle because of the levels of estrogen and progesterone in the blood and the position of the cervix. At the time of
     ovulation, the mucus becomes more estrogen dominant and presents as a much more copious, clear, and
     stretchable discharge called spinnbarkeit. The reason for this change at ovulation is to allow sperm to move with
     more fluidity through the vagina and uterus to get to an egg and fertilize it (Hatcher, 2018). Additionally, spinnbarkeit
     will appear in a "ferning" pattern when placed on a glass slide under a microscope. After ovulation, the consistency
     of cervical mucus returns to thick and sticky, due to an increase in progesterone, and creates a difficult passage for
     sperm (Hatcher, 2018). To use this method of contraception, the individual/couple must abstain from vaginal coitus
     during the first menstrual cycle to assess the cervical mucus for amount, feeling, color, and clearness of
     spinnbarkeit, and to become familiar with characteristics throughout the month (Hatcher, 2018). On the peak day of
     ovulation, the individual will notice increased wetness and clear, stretchable cervical mucus. This should be noted in
     the ovulation journal. To use this method of contraception and avoid pregnancy, intercourse should be avoided for
     the next 5 days. This method is appropriate for those who have irregular menstrual cycles.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Contraception in Uganda

     A study of Ugandan contraception use revealed that because of traditional gender norms, many times women were

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.2 · Natural Methods of Contraception                                                                                        207

not involved in the decision-making process for family planning. A predominant theme in Uganda is the negative
beliefs regarding family planning, including fear of infertility and beliefs that women who use contraception are
promiscuous. When men are choosing contraceptive methods without consulting their partner, they choose more
traditional forms of contraception instead of modern, long-term contraception.

Younger generations in Uganda are attempting to change these ideas. In a group aged 18 to 24 years, several
spouses in the study stated they had more communication regarding contraception and child spacing. These women
felt supported by their spouse. However, some women who had the support of their spouse could not use
contraception due to lack of financial resources.

The study found that educated men had different ideas of family planning and limiting pregnancies. The writers
recommend continued education regarding family planning for younger male and female Ugandans.

(Namasivayam et al., 2022)

Basal Body Temperature Method
The basal body temperature (BBT) method is a component of the symptothermal method. This requires the
ovulating person to wake at the same time every day. Before even sitting up, the person obtains their BBT with a
specific BBT thermometer. The person documents their temperature on a chart, online program, or smartphone
app. Figure 5.2 shows a sample BBT chart. During ovulation, the BBT rises approximately 0.5°-1° F (0.3° to 0.6° C)
and remains elevated until bleeding occurs, signaling the next cycle (ACOG, 2022c). By charting the BBT, the person
can detect the subtle changes of a sudden drop immediately before the rise in temperature. The rise in temperature
at ovulation is in response to increased progesterone levels that occur in the second half of the menstrual cycle
(Hatcher, 2018). The most fertile days are 2 to 3 days before the temperature rise, meaning the person must track
their BBT for several months to understand the pattern of fertile days during the cycle. To prevent pregnancy,
couples should abstain from vaginal coitus or use a barrier method 5 days before ovulation until 3 days after
ovulation to avoid fertile days.

FIGURE 5.2 Sample Basal Body Temperature Chart This is a sample chart documenting BBT, showing a spike in temperature around
ovulation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Symptothermal Method
The symptothermal method is a combination of multiple fertility awareness methods and is >99 percent effective
with perfect use and has 76 percent to 88 percent typical use efficacy (Nwadike, 2021b; Turner, 2021). To use the
symptothermal method, the individual/couple will need information about menstrual cycle days, intercourse timing,
how to assess cervical mucus changes, and basal body temperature (Hatcher, 2018). The nurse educating the
208  5 · Family Planning

     individual/ couple regarding this fertility awareness method must be knowledgeable about various assessments and
     signs of ovulation. Some people recognize a sign of ovulation as a midcycle abdominal pain called mittelschmerz.
     Mittelschmerz is usually a one-sided, lower abdominal pain at the time of ovulation, sometimes described as dull
     and achy or sharp and sudden (Nwadike, 2021a). By educating the person about changes within their body, the
     nurse can help them determine what days they can abstain from having intercourse and avoid pregnancy (Hatcher,
     2018).

     Lactational Amenorrhea Method (LAM)
     Lactational amenorrhea method (LAM) is a contraception method based on a person who is breast-feeding and
     meets all of the following criteria: exclusively breast-feeding at least every 4 to 6 hours, amenorrheic, and within the
     first 6 months after childbirth (CDC, 2023b). High prolactin levels in the person's body prevent ovulation as long as
     the infant is exclusively breast-feeding without formula supplementation, the first menses have not returned, and
     the infant is nursing every 4 hours in the day and every 6 at night (CDC, 2023b). Ovulation occurs before the first
     menses postpartum and with lactation. If breast-feeding decreases for any reason, fertility may return quickly
     (Alberta Health Services, 2024). If any of these conditions is not met, a different method of contraception should be
     discussed, as the patient no longer meets the requirements of this method.

     Populations for Whom Fertility Awareness Methods Are Not the Best Primary Contraception
     Fertility awareness methods (FAM) are appropriate family-planning options for patients desiring to prevent
     conception. For example, many people of the Muslim, Jewish, and Catholic faiths choose not to use barrier and
     pharmacologic contraception for religious reasons. FAM are also ideal for monogamous relationships because of the
     lack of protection against STIs while requiring a supportive partner during designated periods of abstinence. For
     some people, hormonal contraception can be dangerous. For these populations, FAM may be a good contraceptive
     option.

     Adolescents
     Adolescents, generally, are not appropriate candidates for fertility awareness methods of contraception. Due to the
     need for deep understanding of menstrual cycles, trustworthiness of intercourse timing, and irregularities of
     menstrual cycles, FAM are not usually the first choice for contraception for this age group. Adolescents experience
     very high levels of menstrual cycle irregularities and may therefore have difficulty predicting when ovulation may
     occur. But sexual and menstrual knowledge that the nurse provides to adolescents leads to increased adolescent
     contraceptive use, decreased adolescent pregnancy outcomes, improved communication between adolescents and
     their parents, and improved communication in high-risk sexual situations (Lindberg et al., 2021; Santa Maria et al.,
     2017).

     Perimenopausal Patients
     Much like adolescents, perimenopausal people experience irregular menstrual cycles. The menstrual cycle can be
     21 days in length one month; alternatively, the person can wait many months to experience menses again. This
     makes fertility awareness methods of contraception less effective. The individual/couple using this method of
     pregnancy prevention would have to abstain from intercourse for many days because of not knowing when ovulation
     was occurring (Hatcher, 2018).

     Abstinence

     The definition of abstinence is difficult due to the lack of consensus on what is and is not considered abstinence. For
     clarification, this text will distinguish between contraceptive abstinence and sexual abstinence. Contraceptive
     abstinence can be defined as preventing pregnancy by abstaining from vaginal intercourse, with avoidance of semen
     entering the vagina to fertilize an ovum. Perfect use of contraceptive abstinence is 100 percent effective. Sexual
     abstinence means different things to different people. Some believe it means all intimate acts between partners
     must be avoided, while others believe it allows any contact except penile-vaginal coitus. When providing
     contraception counseling, the nurse must determine the person's definition of abstinence to ascertain if semen
     could come in contact with the vagina during their intimate practices. During counseling, nurses can educate and
     empower people that it is acceptable to tell their partners that they are not ready to have penetrative sex, especially
     if none of the contraceptive options fit their lifestyle. The nurse should counsel the person to have a backup method
     of contraception available (such as condoms or coitus interruptus).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        5.2 · Natural Methods of Contraception                      209

Coitus Interruptus

Coitus interruptus, also called withdrawal or pulling out, is a method of contraception in which the penis is
withdrawn from the vagina prior to ejaculation. This method requires large amounts of self-control. The partner with
the penis must withdraw from the vagina completely before ejaculation occurs for this method to be effective.
Studies have shown that sperm exists in the pre-ejaculate fluid, contributing to the high failure rate of this method
of family planning (Killick et al. 2011). The benefit of the withdrawal method for patients is that it is free and easy to
use, but the failure rate is around 20 percent (Planned Parenthood, n.d.-b). The nurse would educate the patient
who chooses this method on signs of ejaculation and that even when the penis is withdrawn before ejaculation the
method is only 80 percent effective.

Table 5.5 summarizes the pros, cons, and efficacy of the different fertility awareness methods of contraception.
When discussing the effectiveness of contraception, the following terms are used: perfect use effectiveness, which
is the rate of effectiveness in a clinical trial, and typical use effectiveness, which is how effective the method is
when used in real life over a year.

Method    Pros            Cons                                          Perfect      Typical Use
                                                                        Use          Efficacy (%
                                                                        Efficacy (%  successful
                                                                        successful   pregnancy
                                                                        pregnancy    prevention)
                                                                        prevention)

FAM       Free, fits      Must have a thorough understanding of the     95-99        76

          religious       method; not as effective with irregular

          requirements menstrual cycles

Billings  Free, fits      Must be comfortable touching oneself,         96.6-98.9 *
          religious       abstinence before and after ovulation; must
          requirements,   abstain for at least 1 month to become
          can be used     familiar with their own cervical mucus
          with irregular
          cycles

BBT       Free, easy to Must take temperature prior to any activity;    *            76

          use             multiple events can interfere with

                          temperature regularity; only shows a change

                          in temperature after ovulation, when fertile

                          days have already occurred; must abstain

                          before and after ovulation

Symptothermal Free, easy to Same as FAM, Billings, and BBT methods      >99          *

          use, more

          effective

          because it

          combines

          methods

TABLE 5.5 Comparing and Contrasting Fertility Awareness Methods *Statistics for family awareness methods are not always available
or accurate due to lack of research on these methods compared to other contraceptive methods (Turner, 2020). (CDC, 2023a; Hatcher,
2018; Turner, 2020)
210  5 · Family Planning

     Method               Pros           Cons                                  Perfect      Typical Use
                                                                               Use          Efficacy (%
                                                                               Efficacy (%  successful
                                                                               successful   pregnancy
                                                                               pregnancy    prevention)
                                                                               prevention)

     LAM                  Free, no       Limited-time method; must meet all 3  98.5-99.5 98

                          abstinence     requirements

                          needed if all

                          requirements

                          met

     Coitus               Free, no       Must have great self-control          96           80
     interruptus          abstinence
                          required

     Contraceptive        Free; can      Must have great self-control          100          *
     abstinence           have intimate
                          contact
                          without
                          penis-in-
                          vagina
                          contact

     TABLE 5.5 Comparing and Contrasting Fertility Awareness Methods *Statistics for family awareness methods are not always available
     or accurate due to lack of research on these methods compared to other contraceptive methods (Turner, 2020). (CDC, 2023a; Hatcher,
     2018; Turner, 2020)

     5.3 Barrier Methods of Contraception

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Compare and contrast the risks, benefits, advantages, and disadvantages of barrier contraception
             methods

         · Discuss population-focused use of barrier contraception methods

     Preventing pregnancy using a barrier method blocks the passage of sperm through the reproductive tract, which
     prevents the sperm from reaching the egg for fertilization. Barrier methods of contraception are useful for those who
     cannot use hormonal contraception due to current or previous medical history or those not wanting hormonal birth
     control. Barrier methods offer a cost-effective and safe way to prevent pregnancy without having to meet with a
     health-care provider. These methods can be utilized as short-term options or as "backup" methods. Barrier
     methods include external and internal condoms, diaphragm, cervical cap, and the cervical sponge. Chemical
     methods can be used with barrier methods or as stand-alone contraception. These include contraceptive foam,
     suppositories, film, and creams.

     Barrier and Chemical Methods of Contraception

     Barrier method contraceptives are inserted or placed prior to acts of intercourse and in some cases can be left in
     place for hours after. They can be used in conjunction with nonoxynol-9, a spermicide approved for use in the United
     States. A spermicide is a foam, gel, suppository, film, or cream inserted into the vagina that can be used alone or
     can act as an adjunct therapy when used with barrier methods; it destroys sperm by disrupting the cell membrane
     (Xu et al., 2022). Before insertion or placement of any barrier method of contraception, the person should wash
     their hands with soap and water to prevent the transmission of any bacteria.

     External Condom
     External condoms are placed on a penis or sex toy, providing both contraception and STI protection. They have a 98

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.3 · Barrier Methods of Contraception                                                                                                       211

percent perfect use effectiveness rate compared to an 82 percent typical use effectiveness rate (Hatcher, 2018). For
external condoms to be effective in preventing pregnancy and STIs, the person must use a new condom from start
to finish during every sexual act or penetration. Condoms can be purchased in drug stores, grocery stores, and
online and are even available for free in some clinics, bars, and clubs. External condoms are available in many
different shapes, sizes, flavors, materials, and textures, depending on the individual's and couple's preference. This
method of contraception is extremely cost-effective, ranging from free to approximately one dollar per condom. If a
person is allergic to latex, condom options are available in lambskin, polyurethane, and polyisoprene (Hatcher,
2018).

Nurses can provide education to patients not to use oil-based lubricant with external condoms, as oil breaks down
the latex, making the condom ineffective. Nurses also educate about the proper way to place condoms to improve
their effectiveness. The person using the condom will need to squeeze all the air out of its reservoir tip to ensure
that it is completely collapsed (Figure 5.3). Next, the person places the condom on the tip of the erect penis, rolling
the condom down toward the base of the penis. When the penis is withdrawn from the vagina, the used condom
should be removed immediately and discarded. Every time intercourse is desired, a new condom must be used. The
nurse must educate the condom-using person that care should be taken to keep the condom on the penis during
withdrawal from the vagina, ensuring no semen is spilled (CDC, 2022).

FIGURE 5.3 Placing an External Condom Nursing education about placing an external condom should be very specific. Patients need to
know how to remove air from the reservoir tip, avoid spillage of semen, and dispose of external condoms appropriately. (credit: "How To Put
On and Take Off a Male (External) Condom" by Center for Disease Control and Prevention/cdc.gov, Public Domain)

Internal Condom
An internal condom is a soft polyurethane sheath that is inserted into the vagina for contraception and STI
protection. It contains a closed end that is inside the vagina and an open end with a larger ring that remains outside
212  5 · Family Planning

     the vagina. Internal condoms work similarly to the external condom, except they are worn internally in the vagina.
     Both types of condoms keep sperm inside the condom and out of the vagina. Internal condoms have a perfect use
     rate of 95 percent, and a typical use rate of 79 percent (Hatcher, 2018). Like the external condom, a new internal
     condom needs to be used for every act of penetration. These condoms can be purchased at drug or convenience
     stores, online, or from clinics or health departments. While these condoms are not as cost-effective as external
     condoms, they are still minimally expensive at a price of around $2-$3 per condom (Planned Parenthood, n.d.-a).

     The benefits of using this type of contraception are that it offers greater protection from STIs because the external
     ring provides a barrier protection to the labia, it requires no health-care provider visits, it can be used with oil-based
     lubricant, and it is made of non-latex nitrile and polyurethane (CDC, 2022; Hatcher, 2018). Placement of the internal
     condom takes practice. The nurse educates the person to squeeze the sides of the closed-end ring together firmly
     and position themselves as though they are inserting a tampon. They then slide the internal condom into the vagina
     as far as it will go, aiming for the cervix. The external ring lies outside the vagina, partially covering the external
     genitalia (CDC, 2022). Figure 5.4 demonstrates insertion of the internal condom.

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.3 · Barrier Methods of Contraception                                                                                                          213

FIGURE 5.4 Placing an Internal Condom The person placing the internal condom uses their fingers to gently insert the closed-ring end of
the internal condom into the vagina as far as possible, with the external ring left outside the vagina covering the labia. (credit: "The Right
Way To Use A Female (Internal) Condom" by Center for Disease Control and Prevention/cdc.gov, Public Domain)
214  5 · Family Planning

             LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

     Discussing Condoms with Teens

     Exploration of sexual activity usually begins in the teen years. Nurses must know how to guide this special
     population. Nurses can discuss many topics, from sexuality to preventing STIs. Using direct and open language
     without judgment allows for the best educational opportunity with adolescents. Condoms come in both an external
     form, to be placed over a penis, and an internal form, to be used within a vagina or anus. They are not hard to use,
     but if you have never used one, it is worth talking about the differences and watching how they are properly placed.
     Follow this link to Planned Parenthood (https://openstax.org/r/77PlannedParthd) for teen-directed sex education.

     Noncontraceptive Uses of Condoms
     In addition to their contraceptive function, condoms offer protection from STIs. They do not provide 100 percent
     protection, but they are the most effective method for STI prevention. Condoms help prevent STIs by decreasing
     exposure to bodily fluids (WHO, 2023b). They cannot protect against infections occurring outside the coverage of
     the condom, such as genital warts or herpes (WHO, 2023b).

     Contraceptive Gel
     Contraceptive gel (Phexxi) contains lactic acid, citric acid, and potassium bitartrate and provides contraception by
     changing the pH of the vagina to a more acidic environment that inhibits sperm's motility and ability to swim to the
     fallopian tube to fertilize an ovum (Steinberg & Lynch, 2021). Contraceptive gel is inserted into the vagina through an
     applicator immediately before or up to 1 hour before coitus. The ideal use effectiveness is 95.9 percent, with typical
     use efficacy of 89 percent (Steinberg & Lynch, 2021). Contraceptive gel, available by prescription only, is used by
     persons desiring nonhormonal contraception.

     Diaphragm
     A diaphragm is a dome-shaped silicone cup that is inserted into the vagina to cover the cervix, preventing sperm
     from reaching the egg (Figure 5.5). To work effectively, spermicide must be used with the diaphragm for each sexual
     penetration. Perfect use effectiveness for the diaphragm is 92 percent to 96 percent, and typical use effectiveness
     is 84 percent (Diaphragm, 2021). A diaphragm is a good option for people seeking a nonhormonal contraceptive
     method.

     FIGURE 5.5 The Diaphragm The diaphragm is a dome-shaped silicone contraceptive barrier that is placed in the vagina and fits over the
     cervix, blocking sperm from reaching the egg. The diaphragm can be washed with mild soap and water, left to air dry, and placed back in its
     container until the next time it is needed. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Diaphragms can be placed hours before sex with minimal side effects and left in for up to 24 hours. After 24 hours,
     the patient is at risk for urinary tract infections and toxic shock syndrome. Spermicide is used with the diaphragm,
     and morel spermicide should be added with each sexual penetration or if the diaphragm is in place longer than 3
     hours (National Health Service, 2020). The diaphragm needs to be left in place for 6 to 8 hours. If removed earlier,

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.3 · Barrier Methods of Contraception                                                                                                          215

the risk of pregnancy increases. Additionally, the patient needs to be comfortable with their body and with inserting
fingers inside the vagina to place and remove the diaphragm. If they are not comfortable with that, this is likely not
the right contraceptive method for them. The nurse also needs to assess the patient's willingness to always carry
the diaphragm and spermicide with them. People must see a clinician for sizing and proper fitting of a diaphragm.

Insertion of the diaphragm is much like insertion of the internal condom. Before inserting the diaphragm, the patient
should inspect it for holes or imperfections that would allow semen to pass through. Next, a teaspoon of spermicide
should be added to the inner part of the diaphragm. The patient then pinches the diaphragm together, being careful
not to spill the spermicide, and inserts the diaphragm into the vagina, covering the cervix. After 6 hours or up to 24
hours, the patient puts an index finger inside the vagina, hooks the top rim of the diaphragm, and removes it. Proper
care of the diaphragm includes washing with warm water and mild soap and allowing it to air dry. Persons should
not use oil-based lubricants or vaginal medications while using the diaphragm, as these can alter its integrity.
Periodically, persons should assess for perforations or loss of integrity by filling the diaphragm with water. Consider
use of emergency contraception if the diaphragm is dislodged during sex or less than 6 hours post sex. It is
recommended the person be refitted for a diaphragm after each pregnancy and a weight gain or loss of more than 7
pounds (National Health Service, 2020).

        LINK TO LEARNING

Bedsider is an online birth control support network (https://openstax.org/r/77Bedsider) for women ages 18 to 29.
This website has information written in layperson's terms. The nurse can log in to this website in the office while
providing education to their patient. Then, this link can be provided on discharge papers to reinforce patient
education when they leave.

Cervical Cap
Although similar to a diaphragm, a cervical cap is smaller and made to be a barrier only covering the cervix,
blocking sperm from entering and fertilizing the egg (Figure 5.6). A visit to a health-care provider is required for
correct fitting. Cervical caps are available in three sizes: small for nulliparous persons, medium for persons having
had a cesarean birth or miscarriage, and large for persons who have had a full-term vaginal birth (Hatcher, 2018). As
with the diaphragm, spermicide should be used in conjunction with the cervical cap to increase its effectiveness.
The cervical cap is more effective for persons who have never had a vaginal birth. According to the National Health
Service (2022), perfect use effectiveness for the cervical cap is 92 percent to 96 percent. According to the CDC
(2023d), typical use effectiveness for the cervical cap is 83 percent.

FIGURE 5.6 The Cervical Cap The FemCap cervical cap is a firm piece of silicone that is inserted into the vagina and placed directly over
the cervix. The cap is measured and fitted to the person using it to create a firm seal over the cervix to ensure no sperm reaches the uterus.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The nurse should assess the person and provide education similar to that for the diaphragm. The benefit of the
216  5 · Family Planning

     cervical cap over the diaphragm is that the cervical cap can be left in place for up to 48 hours (National Health
     Service, 2020). The cap is placed directly over the cervix instead of just inside the vagina. The cap creates suction on
     the cervix, and the person should check that the entire cervix is covered. To remove the cap, the dome of the cap is
     pressed to release the suction and remove the cap from the vagina. After use, the patient should wash the cervical
     cap with soap and water and allow it to dry.

     Contraceptive Sponge
     According to the Food and Drug Administration, the contraceptive sponge is a small, round sponge impregnated
     with 1,000 mg of spermicide called nonoxynol-9 (Today vaginal contraceptive-nonoxynol-9 sponge, 2018) (Figure
     5.7). This contraceptive method is inserted into the vagina immediately before intercourse. The mechanism of
     action is three-fold: The sponge releases spermicide continuously while inserted in the vagina, acts as a barrier to
     the cervix when inserted, and traps and absorbs sperm. To use, the person wets the sponge with water, squeezing to
     make suds; folds the sponge with the dimple inside and the string on the outside; then inserts it into the vagina as
     deep as possible (Today vaginal contraceptive-nonoxynol-9 sponge, 2018). The contraceptive sponge works best for
     people who have not given birth. With perfect use, the sponge is 91 percent effective for nulliparous persons and 80
     percent effective for parous persons; typical use is 88 percent for nulliparous persons and 76 percent for parous
     persons (Hatcher, 2018).

     FIGURE 5.7 The Contraceptive Sponge The contraceptive sponge is a disposable circular sponge made of polyurethane foam that
     contains nonoxynol-9 spermicide. The spermicide is continuously released within the vagina while the sponge is in place, killing sperm
     while the sponge acts as a barrier to the cervix. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Contraceptive sponges are effective for 24 hours but can remain in the vagina for up to 30 hours (Today vaginal
     contraceptive-nonoxynol-9 sponge). After 30 hours, the risk for vaginal infection and toxic shock syndrome
     increases (Today vaginal contraceptive-nonoxynol-9 sponge, 2018). Like the diaphragm, the sponge cannot be
     removed until 6 hours after the last act of intercourse; however, the sponge can be used with multiple acts of
     intercourse. The sponge cannot be reused and should be discarded after use. Sponges also require the patient to be
     comfortable with their body because they will need to insert fingers into the vagina to place the sponge and remove
     it.
     Table 5.6 summarizes the information about barrier contraceptives presented in this chapter.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 5.3 · Barrier Methods of Contraception  217

Method         Pros                       Cons                                   Perfect Use     Typical Use
                                                                                 Efficacy (%     Efficacy (%
                                                                                 successful      successful
                                                                                 pregnancy       pregnancy
                                                                                 prevention)     prevention)

External       Cost-effective, protects Must be used with every sexual           98              82

condom         against STIs,              penetration

               nonhormonal

Internal       Cost-effective, protects More difficult to place than external 95                 79

condom         against STIs, protects condom; must be used with every

               the labia from STI         sexual penetration

               exposure, non-latex,

               nonhormonal

Diaphragm      Reusable,                  Requires a health-care provider        94              83

with           nonhormonal                visit and a prescription, must fit

spermicide                                properly and be in place both

                                          before and after intercourse for a

                                          set amount of time

Cervical cap Reusable,                    Requires a health-care provider        95              83

with           nonhormonal                visit and a prescription, must fit

spermicide                                properly, can be left in place for 48

                                          hours

Contraceptive  Nonhormonal; does not      Not as effective for parous persons    Nulliparous:    Nulliparous:
sponge         require a health-care      and can be associated with             91              88
               provider visit or          infections (Cleveland Clinical         Parous: 80      Parous: 76
               prescription, can be left  Professionals, 2022)
               in for 30 hours

TABLE 5.6 Comparing and Contrasting Barrier Methods of Contraception (CDC, 2022; Hatcher, 2018)

Populations for Whom Barrier Methods Are the Best Contraception

Some populations benefit from using barrier methods because they are safer than using hormonal contraception,
cheaper than some other methods, and do not require a prescription. They can be a good choice for those in
committed monogamous relationships in which the partner is supportive of the method of contraception even
though it takes time and adherence to placement and removal. Breast-feeding persons are good candidates for
barrier methods because estrogen-containing contraceptives can decrease milk supply. Persons who smoke,
especially those over 35 years, are at increased risk for blood clots and should not use estrogen-containing
contraceptives. Persons who are considering pregnancy can use a barrier method and not affect their menstrual
cycle or ability to conceive. They are a good short-term contraceptive that has no impact on return of normal
menstrual cycles.

Populations for Whom Barrier Methods Are Not the Best Primary Contraception

For several reasons, a barrier protection may not be the right contraceptive choice. To effectively use a barrier
method as primary contraception, the person should fully understand how to use the product, including insertion,
placement, and removal. Certain populations may not find barrier protection the best choice due to their age, the
ways in which they explore their sexuality, and their sexual health needs.
218  5 · Family Planning

     Adolescents
     Adolescents ages 10 to 19 who are exploring their sexual relationships may need more contraceptive management
     than a barrier method alone. The preceding barrier contraceptive devices discussed are great adjunctive choices to
     add to their contraceptive management plans, but most of the barrier methods covered in this chapter have lower
     effectiveness rates and require more responsibility for use. Using a barrier method as a primary method of
     contraception comes with the responsibility of remembering to use it every time from start to finish, following the
     education that was provided by the nurse regarding use of spermicide, and removing the barrier within the correct
     time frame to avoid pregnancy, infection, or toxic shock syndrome. Toxic shock syndrome is an illness that causes
     fever, hypotension, rash, and organ damage that was originally associated with the use of highly absorbent tampons;
     the organism causing the illness is most often Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus pyogenes (Ross & Shoff,
     2023). Persons with a history of toxic shock syndrome should not use diaphragms, cervical caps, or the
     contraceptive sponge. It is recommended that adolescents be advised to use contraceptive methods that have high
     efficacy and high adherence rates, which barrier methods lack (ACOG, 2022a). Through shared decision making, the
     nurse can assist the adolescent to choose a highly effective method of contraception used in conjunction with a
     barrier method to provide protection against STIs.

     LGBTQIA+ Patients
     For patients who are LGBTQIA+, the barrier method may be appropriate for some, but not for others. For
     transgender patients, this may be a perfect method of contraception for those who cannot or do not want to choose
     hormonal methods that may interfere with hormone therapy. Others in the LGBTQIA+ population may prefer the
     barrier method because it is convenient, cheap, easy, and effective. Lesbians typically do not use barrier methods of
     contraception unless one of them is transgender. As with any patient, the nurse should complete a full sexual history
     with LGBTQIA+ patients to identify contraceptive and STI protection needs.

             LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

     Teaching Consent in Adolescents

     Young people are learning about their bodies, their sexuality, and their sexual boundaries. Adolescents must be
     taught what touch is and is not acceptable. This a learning process that can be aided by parents, counselors, and
     nurses. At times, a person is unaware of a boundary until it is passed and does not feel appropriate. Adolescents
     must be taught they have a right to say "stop" or "no" when someone crosses that boundary.

     During clinic visits, it is important to screen all patients for intimate partner violence and unwanted sex and to
     discuss consent and boundaries.

     The best way to address consent is to define what consent is: Consent is agreement. If something sexual occurred
     that the patient did not want to occur, then that is sexual assault. After defining the topic, leave space for the patient
     to initiate conversation or ask questions. The most common questions that teens may have are: What if I didn't say
     no? What if I'm in a relationship with this person? What if I had been drinking? What if I changed my mind? What
     does it mean if there wasn't any violence?

     How the patient perceives the experience is entirely their own perception and story. Allow them to tell their story
     and connect them to supportive resources.

     (Bedsider, 2023)

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.4 · Short-Acting Reversible Hormonal Methods of Contraception                                                                            219

5.4 Short-Acting Reversible Hormonal Methods of Contraception

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Compare and contrast the different types, benefits, side effects, and risks of combined oral hormonal
        methods of contraception

    · Compare and contrast the different types, benefits, side effects, and risks of combined transdermal
        hormonal methods of contraception

    · Compare and contrast the different types, benefits, side effects, and risks of combined vaginal hormonal
        methods of contraception

    · Compare and contrast the different types, benefits, side effects, and risks of progestin-only hormonal
        methods of contraception

Hormonal contraceptives contain either estrogen and progesterone or progesterone only. They are highly effective
and are available in many forms, such as pills, patches, vaginal rings, intramuscular injections, arm implants, and
intrauterine device. Hormonal contraceptives are multifunctional, meaning they can be used as a contraceptive and
may also be used to control other conditions such as dysfunctional uterine bleeding and dysmenorrhea. The nurse
and health-care provider complete a thorough history and physical exam to identify any contraindications to
hormonal contraception. Because this method is available in many forms, the nurse explores the person's
understanding of the method, reason for desiring for that particular method, and goals associated with the
contraception to determine what method best meets their needs.

Combination Estrogen-Progestin Contraceptives

The estrogen-progesterone combination oral pill (combined oral contraceptive [COC]) is highly effective, with a
perfect use effectiveness rate of 99.7percent and a typical effectiveness rate of 93 percent (Dickey & Seymour,
2021). The mechanism of action is inhibiting the release of the ovum, creating an atrophic endometrium, and
maintaining thick cervical mucus that slows and prevents sperm transportation through the upper reproductive tract
(Vallerand & Sanoski, 2022). Reversibility is quick by simply stopping the medication. Most pill packets available on
the market contain approximately 3 weeks' worth of "active" pills and 2 to 7 days of placebos, which can be a sugar
tablet or more often an iron tablet (Figure 5.8). The placebo pills allow for a medically induced bleed, which can last
anywhere from 3 to 7 days. Generally, this bleed is lighter and of shorter duration than menses without hormonal
contraception. Persons with conditions improved by amenorrhea (e.g., iron deficiency anemia) can benefit from the
lighter, shorter bleed that accompanies the continuous use of COCs.

FIGURE 5.8 Combined Oral Contraceptive Pills Combined oral contraceptive pills are among the most popular contraceptive option
among young people because of their effectiveness, price, and ease of use. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY
4.0 license)

After a thorough history and physical, assessment of the patient's medications, and review of their last menstrual
period and last sexual encounter, the nurse will perform a point-of-care pregnancy test to rule out pregnancy prior
220  5 · Family Planning

     to starting the COCs (ACOG, 2022a). Additionally, the nurse will use the MEC Criteria (see 5.1 Contraception: The
     Nurse's Role to ensure the person has no contraindications to combination hormonal birth control. The nurse will
     then educate the person on how and when to start COCs (Table 5.7). The nurse also educates the person on taking
     their pill at approximately the same time every day. The nurse can provide examples of ways to make reminders to
     take their pill. When COCs are not taken every day, there is a risk for irregular bleeding and a higher risk for
     pregnancy (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). The nurse will educate the person on what to do if they miss a pill. Table 5.8
     provides instructions on missed COCs.

     Method Description

     Sunday     With the Sunday start method, the patient is educated to begin taking the COC pills on the Sunday
     start      that follows the first day of the next menstrual cycle. With this method, the patient will need to use
     method     a "backup method" (barrier method) for the first 7 days after starting the COC for additional
                protection against pregnancy.

     Quick      In the quick start method, the patient can begin taking the COC pills on the day of the appointment
     start      because they have been deemed "reasonably certain" of not being pregnant due to history taking
     method     and point-of-care pregnancy test; with this method, a "backup method" (barrier method) is
                necessary for the next 7 days. Interestingly, research suggests that when this method is used,
                patients are more likely to be using the COC pills 3 months later when compared to those who used
                other startup methods (Zeiman et al., 2015).

     Menstrual  In the menstrual start method, the patient begins taking the COC pills on the first day of their next
     start      menstrual cycle. With this method, the COC pills will prevent ovulation from occurring, so no
     method     "backup method" is necessary.
     or day
     one start
     method

     TABLE 5.7 Combined Oral Contraceptive Start Methods (Dickey & Seymour, 2021)

     Missed     Time in   Instructions to Patients
     Pills      Cycle

     1          Anytime Take missed OC immediately and next OC at regular time.

     2          First 2 Take two OCs daily for the next 2 consecutive days; then resume taking OCs on regular

                weeks schedule. Use additional contraception for the remainder of the cycle.

     2          3rd       Take two OCs daily until all active pills are taken. Restart OCs with one pill daily within 7

                week      days. Use additional contraception until OCs are restarted and for the first 7 days of OC

                          use.

     3 or       Anytime   Stop OCs; restart OCs within 7 days with one pill daily. Use additional contraception
     more                 through the first 7 days of the next pill cycle.

     TABLE 5.8 Instructions for When a Patient Misses a Dose of Oral Contraceptive (Dickey & Seymour, 2021)

     Noncontraceptive Benefits of COCs
     Combination oral contraceptives impact the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian (HPO) axis. Disruption of the HPO axis
     inhibits ovulation by interrupting the negative-positive feedback loop. causing a decrease in luteinizing hormone
     (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), thus preventing ovulation (Hatcher, 2018). Figure 5.9 demonstrates the
     process of the HPO axis.

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.4 · Short-Acting Reversible Hormonal Methods of Contraception                                                                              221

FIGURE 5.9 The Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Ovarian Axis Loop The HPO axis loop is the center of the endocrine system, delivering precise
signals to the pituitary gland. The pituitary in turn releases hormones influencing most of the endocrine organs in the body, including the
reproductive organs. (modification of work from Psychology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Risks and Side Effects of COCs
Combination oral contraceptives have been thoroughly studied and widely used in the United States for many years.
The risks involved with hormonal contraceptives are related to the use of ethinyl estradiol, a form of synthetic
estrogen (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). In the past, the high dose of estrogen (150 mcg/dose) increased risk for
myocardial infarction (MI); venous thromboembolism, or blood clots that form within veins; and strokes (Hatcher,
2018). Over the years, the estrogen dose has decreased to 10 to 35 mcg/dose, with COCs under 35 mcg/dose and
20 mcg being labeled as "low dose" (Hatcher, 2018; Allen, 2024).

The risk factors of COCs include venous thromboembolism (VTE), myocardial infarction, stroke, hypertension,
gallbladder disease, cholestatic jaundice, hepatic neoplasms, and melasma (Hatcher, 2018). People who smoke or
vape are at higher risk for VTE, especially those over the age of 35 years, and are not candidates for COCs. Other
confounding conditions include obesity and genetic clotting disorders like factor V Leiden. The nurse educates the
patient to call their health-care provider for signs of a possible VTE or other complication of COC use, including
abdominal pain, chest pain, headaches, eye problems, and severe leg pain (ACHES; Hatcher, 2018). Table 5.9
provides further discussion of these symptoms. The side effects that a person may experience from use of a COC are
listed in Table 5.10.
222  5 · Family Planning

     Symptom Diagnosis                       Location     Further Symptoms

     A:         Mesenteric vein thrombosis,  Intestines   Abdominal pain, vomiting, weakness
     Abdominal  pelvic vein thrombosis       Pelvis       Nausea, vomiting, weakness, jaundice
     pain
                Hepatic neoplasms            Liver

     C: Chest   Pulmonary embolism           Lungs        Cough, shortness of breath
     pain       Myocardial infarction        Heart
                                                          Crushing chest pain, left arm and shoulder pain,
                                                          weakness

                Cholelithiasis               Gallbladder  Nausea, pain radiating to upper back (especially
                                                          after meals)

     H:         Stroke                       Brain        Headache, weakness, numbness, visual
     Headache                                             problems, sudden intellectual impairment

                Hypertension                 Systemic     Headache, blurred vision

     E: Eye     Retinal vein thrombosis      Eye          Headache, complete or partial loss of vision

     problems

     S: Severe  Thrombophlebitis             Leg          Swelling, heat, redness, tenderness in thigh or
     leg pain
                                                          lower leg, calf pain

     TABLE 5.9 ACHES (Hatcher, 2018)

                              Symptom Due to Estrogen                                  Symptom Due to Progesterone

     Increased cholesterol levels (HDL, LDL, total lipids, triglycerides)              Increased insulin or insulin
                                                                                       resistance

     Increased prothrombin time (PT), clotting factors, partial thromboplastin         Flow length decrease (in progestin-
     (PTT), fibrinogen                                                                 only pills)

     Cystic breast changes                                                             Acne or oily skin

     Dysmenorrhea                                                                      Depression

     Increase in breast size                                                           Fatigue

     Uterine fibroid growth                                                            Increased appetite; weight gain

     Bloating                                                                          Pruritus

     Weight gain (cyclic)                                                              Decreased libido

     TABLE 5.10 Side Effects of Combined Oral Contraceptives (Dickey & Seymour, 2021)

     Positive Side Effects of COCs
     Hormonal contraception can be used to treat certain conditions. Noncontraceptive positive side effects of COCs
     include treating dysfunctional uterine bleeding, dysmenorrhea, endometriosis/adenomyosis, menstrual migraines,
     and polycystic ovaries (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). Persons with premenstrual dysphoric disorder can prevent mood

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.4 · Short-Acting Reversible Hormonal Methods of Contraception                                                                         223

changes and depression by using COCs. The nurse can educate the patient on the protective properties associated
with COCs, including decreasing the incidence of endometrial cancer, ovarian cancer, colorectal cancer, and iron
deficiency anemia (Hatcher, 2018). Other benefits include treating acne and hirsutism (ACOG, 2023b). COCs can
also be used for the perimenopausal age group who are experiencing vasomotor symptoms such as hot flushes but
who are too young for menopausal hormonal replacement therapy (Dickey & Seymour, 2021).

Transdermal Hormonal Contraception

The combined hormonal contraceptive patch is a small, thin piece of plastic that releases approximately 150 mcg of
progesterone and 20 mcg of estradiol daily (Figure 5.10). The nurse educates the person to place the patch on the
skin of the lower abdomen, buttocks, upper outer arm, or trunk, but never the breasts, and to rotate placement with
each replacement. The patch is changed weekly for 3 weeks. On the fourth week, the patch is left off to have a
menstrual-type bleed. When the patch is removed, it should be disposed of in a place where pets and young
children cannot reach it.

FIGURE 5.10 Contraceptive Patch Placement The contraceptive patch must be placed on large skin areas for proper hormone
absorption--for example, over the deltoid muscles in the upper outer arm, the upper buttocks, and the abdomen. It must never be placed
on breast tissue. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Risks and Side Effects of the Transdermal Patch
The contraceptive patch has the same mechanism of action, side effects, risk factors, and MEC criteria as all other
combined hormonal contraception. The patch should not be used in persons weighing more than 198 pounds (90
kilograms) as it is not as effective (Birth control patch, 2023). The nurse provides education about ACHES and how
to call the health-care provider if the patient experiences those side effects. The nurse should also explain that the
patch can cause a rash or skin irritation and that the patient should call the office for these symptoms.

Patient Education
If the patch loosens or falls off before the week is completed, the nurse should advise the patient to replace it and
use a backup method for pregnancy prevention for 7 days (Hatcher, 2018; Schuiling & Likis, 2016). The patch is as
safe and effective as combination oral contraceptive pills and has a better rate of patient compliance (Jakimiuk et al,
2011).

Vaginal Contraceptive Ring

Another hormonal contraceptive option is the vaginal ring. The contraceptive ring has the same mechanism of
action, side effects, risk factors, and MEC criteria as all other combined hormonal contraception, with the addition of
vaginitis as a side effect. As of 2018, two vaginal contraceptive rings are available. NuvaRing is a flexible ring
containing 2.7 mg of ethinyl estradiol and 11.7 mg of a progesterone and is 99 percent effective for perfect use and
97 percent effective for typical use (Dickey & Seymour, 2021) (Figure 5.11). This method is considered a safe,
224  5 · Family Planning

     effective, low-dose form of contraception lasting for 3 weeks (21 days; Dickey & Seymour, 2021). The nurse
     instructs the person to place the ring far into the vagina and not to remove it for 3 weeks. On week four, the ring is
     removed, and a bleed will occur. Once removed, the ring should be disposed of safely.

     FIGURE 5.11 Contraceptive Vaginal Ring The NuvaRing is a soft, flexible ring that is inserted into the vagina like a tampon and then left
     there for 3 weeks, where it gradually releases ethinyl estradiol. (credit: "Real nuvaring" by Sakky/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

     The new vaginal contraceptive ring Annovera is slightly different from the NuvaRing, as it is larger in diameter, lasts
     for 1 year, can be washed when removed, and is nondisposable for 13 cycles (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). Annovera is
     a flexible silicone ring that emits 150 mcg of progesterone and 13 mcg of estradiol daily (Dickey & Seymour, 2021)
     (Figure 5.12). The ring emits this dose for 1 year and is 97.5 percent effective in perfect use (Virro, 2020). Due to the
     newness of this product, no statistics for typical use effectiveness are available. The nurse educates the person to
     insert the ring far into the vagina and leave it for 21 days. The ring is then removed for a week and washed with
     warm water and mild soap. The nurse explains that the person will have a bleed during that week and will then
     return the ring to the vagina for another 21 days. The contraceptive ring is disposed of safely after 13 cycles, and a
     new ring can be obtained from the health-care provider.

     FIGURE 5.12 Annovera Contraceptive Vaginal Ring This contraceptive vaginal ring provides reliable contraception for 13 cycles, or one
     year. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Progesterone-Only Contraception

     Progesterone-only contraceptives do not contain estradiol. Instead, this form of contraception uses only
     progesterone, making it a safer option than estrogen-containing contraceptives. These methods of contraception
     are ideal for persons over the age of 35 who smoke, persons who are breast-feeding, and those at risk for
     cardiovascular disease (Hatcher, 2018). Progesterone-only contraception causes inhibition of ovulation, thickened

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.4 · Short-Acting Reversible Hormonal Methods of Contraception                                                          225

cervical mucus that blocks sperm from penetrating the cervix, and altered endometrium that inhibits implantation
(Hatcher, 2018). Progesterone also slows the activity of the cilia in the fallopian tubes, preventing sperm from
reaching the egg (Hatcher, 2018). If a person does become pregnant, they have a slightly higher risk of ectopic
pregnancy due to the slow movement of the cilia not pushing the fertilized ovum through the fallopian tube and into
the uterus.

The reported side effects of progesterone-only methods include irregular bleeding, headache, nausea, breast
tenderness, weight gain, and ovarian cysts (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). Adverse effects seen in progesterone-only
contraceptives include the possibility of VTE, depression, and loss of bone density (injection only). The MEC criteria
for progesterone-only methods include current breast cancer as the only absolute contraindication (Hatcher, 2018).
The nurse can recommend a progesterone-only method to most persons considering hormonal contraception who
need to avoid estrogen.

Progesterone Intramuscular Injection
Depo-Provera, or depot-medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA), is a long-acting, injectable, progestin-only
contraceptive method containing 150 mg of DMPA for intramuscular administration every 12 weeks (Hatcher, 2018).
DMPA has the same side effects, mechanism of action, and adverse effects as all progesterone methods, with the
addition of decreased bone density and increased time to return to fertility. DMPA suppresses production of
estradiol from the ovaries, and estradiol is a protector of bones by inhibiting bone resorption. Therefore, without the
production of estradiol, the person's bones are reabsorbed, causing decreased bone density (Hatcher, 2018). This
decrease in bone density occurs rapidly during the first 2 years of use (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). After discontinuing
DMPA, return to fertility can take 9 to 10 months, the longest of all contraceptive methods (Hatcher, 2018).

Patient Education
Patient education regarding DMPA should include the need to return to the clinic every 12 weeks for repeat
injections to ensure effective contraception. The nurse explains the possibility of irregular bleeding and weight gain,
encouraging the person to increase exercise and reduce calories if weight gain occurs. The nurse assesses the
person's desire for future pregnancies and explains the increased time needed to return to fertility (Hatcher, 2018).
Warning signs are reviewed: repeated, very painful headaches; heavy bleeding; depression; severe lower abdominal
pain (could be pregnant); and infection at the injection site (Hatcher, 2018). Education is also provided regarding
decreased bone density in the first 2 years of use. The nurse encourages the person to supplement their diet with
1,200 mg of calcium and 5,000 IU of vitamin D daily. In 2004, the FDA issued a black box warning on DMPA because
bone demineralization has been linked to the development of osteoporosis and recommended that persons
discontinue DMPA after 2 years of use (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). Further information regarding the black box
warning can be found on Pfizer's (https://openstax.org/r/77PfizerMedInfo) website.

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

Safety and DMPA Injection

Before administering DMPA, the nurse must confirm the patient is not pregnant. The following safety steps should
be taken:

  1. Ask if the patient has been using any contraception. If not, a pregnancy test should be performed.
  2. Ask if the patient is switching from another contraceptive method. Assess if the patient has used the method

        perfectly (missing pills, broken condoms, use of spermicide, etc.). If not, a pregnancy test should be
        performed.
  3. Ask if the patient has missed their 12-week dose of DMPA. If so, a pregnancy test should be performed.

Overall, the goal of performing a pregnancy test before giving Depo-Provera is to confirm that the patient is not
pregnant and to prevent inadvertent exposure to the medication during pregnancy. It is important to follow
protocols and guidelines regarding pregnancy testing before administering Depo-Provera.

Progestin-Only Oral Pills
Progestin-only birth control pills (POPs) are also known as the "mini-pill." POPs are found in medication packs
containing 28 progestin active pills with no placebos (Figure 5.13). POPs are taken daily without an "off week." POPs
226  5 · Family Planning

     have the same side effects, mechanism of action, and adverse effects as all other progesterone-only methods.
     According to the MEC criteria, POPs are safe for those who cannot take estrogen and those who are breast-feeding
     (Hatcher, 2018). Like other hormonal contraceptives, POPs aid in decreasing symptoms of menstrual complications
     (dysmenorrhea, endometriosis pain, etc.). POPs are 99 percent in perfect use effectiveness and 91 percent in
     typical use effectiveness (Hatcher, 2018). Some POPs must be taken at the same time every day within 3 hours of
     the 24-hour time period. Newer-generation POPs are not as sensitive to time restraints, providing better efficacy.
     Nursing education includes explaining the side effect of irregular bleeding and stressing the importance of taking
     the pill at the same time daily. The nurse explains that return to fertility is immediate after discontinuation of the pill.

     FIGURE 5.13 Progestin-Only Pills POP packs contain 28 pills that are taken daily. Some POPs have no placebo pills, while others contain
     some placebo pills during the last week of the pack. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Table 5.11 compares and contrasts the various hormonal contraceptive options, and Table 5.12 summarizes
     additional information about each.

     Method               Pros                      Cons                                     Perfect      Typical Use
                                                                                             Use          Efficacy (%
                                                                                             Efficacy (%  successful
                                                                                             successful   pregnancy
                                                                                             pregnancy    prevention)
                                                                                             prevention)

     COC                  Very effective; resolves Health-care provider visit required;      99.7         93

                          issues such as            prescription required; can be costly;

                          dysmenorrhea,             contraindications due to certain

                          menorrhagia,              disorders; must be taken daily; no

                          metrorrhagia,             protection against STIs

                          premenstrual dysphoric

                          disorder (PMDD), etc.;

                          quickly reversible;

                          prevents acne

     Contraceptive Only need to think               Health-care provider visit required;     99.7         93

     patch                about it weekly instead prescription required; can be costly;

                          of daily; very effective; contraindications due to certain

                          resolves issues such as disorders; no protection against STIs;

                          dysmenorrhea,             can come off skin if not placed

                          menorrhagia,              properly

                          metrorrhagia, PMDD,

                          etc.; quickly reversible

     TABLE 5.11 Comparing and Contrasting Hormonal Methods of Contraception (Hatcher, 2018)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       5.4 · Short-Acting Reversible Hormonal Methods of Contraception  227

Method         Pros                       Cons                                          Perfect      Typical Use
                                                                                        Use          Efficacy (%
                                                                                        Efficacy (%  successful
                                                                                        successful   pregnancy
                                                                                        pregnancy    prevention)
                                                                                        prevention)

Contraceptive  Very effective; resolves   Health-care provider visit required;          NuvaRing:    NuvaRing:
vaginal ring   issues such as             prescription required; can be costly;         99%          97%
               dysmenorrhea,              contraindications due to certain              Annovera:    Annovera:
               menorrhagia,               disorders; no protection against STIs;        97.5%        unknown
               metrorrhagia, PMDD,        can cause vaginitis, vaginal discharge,
               etc.; quickly reversible;  or itching
               prevents acne; can be
               used for 1 month
               (NuvaRing) or 13 cycles
               (Annovera)

Progesterone- Longer-term option;         Health-care provider visit required           98.8         94

only injection can be used while          initially and every 3 months; can be

(DMPA)         breast-feeding;            costly; decreases bone density;

               absence of menstrual       weight gain; longer time frame to

               bleeding; resolves         return to fertility; irregular bleeding

               issues such as             and no protection against STIs

               dysmenorrhea,

               menorrhagia,

               metrorrhagia, PMDD,

               etc.; very effective

Progesterone- Safe for those who          Health-care provider visit required;          99           91

only pill      cannot take estrogen; can be costly; lower efficacy than

               effective; resolves        with combined hormonal methods;

               issues such as             less popular than COCs and can be

               dysmenorrhea,              difficult to access; increased risk of

               menorrhagia,               ectopic pregnancy, and no protection

               metrorrhagia, PMDD,        against STIs; important to take the

               etc.; quickly reversible; pill around the same time of day for

               do not need to take a      best effect

               week-off pill for a bleed

TABLE 5.11 Comparing and Contrasting Hormonal Methods of Contraception (Hatcher, 2018)
228  5 · Family Planning

     Method               Mechanism      Side         Adverse Effects         Ideal              Education
                          of Action      Effects                              Candidate

     COC                  Prevents       Breast       ACHES, VTE,             Someone            If pill is missed, take

                          ovulation by tenderness, stroke, MI,                committed to       the missed pill as soon

                          suppressing nausea and gallbladder                  taking a pill      as it is remembered or,

                          gonadotropin- vomiting      disease,                daily, can afford if not remembered

                          releasing      (N&V),       cholestatic             the method, and until the next day, take

                          hormone        weight       jaundice, hepatic is healthy;              2 pills at that time.

                          (GnRH), LH     gain, mood neoplasms, and persons with

                          surge, FSH;    swings,      melasma                 disorders/pain

                          thickens       headache                             surrounding the

                          cervical                                            menstrual cycle

                          mucus; alters

                          endometrial

                          lining,

                          preventing

                          implantation

     Contraceptive        Prevents       Breast       ACHES, VTE,             Teenager or        Place patch on clean,
     patch                ovulation by   tenderness,  stroke, MI,             person unable      dry skin; can place on
                          suppressing    N&V,         gallbladder             or unwilling to    upper arm, buttocks,
                          GnRH, LH       weight       disease,                take something     lower abdomen, or
                          surge, FSH;    gain, mood   cholestatic             daily; can afford  upper torso, avoiding
                          thickens       swings,      jaundice, hepatic       the method and     breasts. Place one
                          cervical       headache     neoplasms, and          is healthy;        patch for 7 days,
                          mucus; alters               melasma                 persons with       dispose of the patch,
                          endometrial                                         disorders/pain     and replace with a
                          lining,                                             surrounding the    new patch for a total
                          preventing                                          menstrual cycle    of 3 weeks. Week 4,
                          implantation                                                           no patch is placed and
                                                                                                 a bleed will occur.

     Contraceptive        Prevents       Breast       Vaginitis, vaginal      Person looking     NuvaRing: Insert one
     vaginal ring         ovulation by   tenderness,  discharge, pain,        for a longer-      ring vaginally for 21
                          suppressing    increased    and itching;            lasting            days, then remove for
                          GnRH, LH       vaginal      ACHES; VTE,             contraception;     1 week; insert a new
                          surge, FSH;    discharge    stroke, MI;             person unable      ring.
                          thickens                    gallbladder             or unwilling to    Annovera: Insert one
                          cervical                    disease,                take something     ring vaginally for 21
                          mucus; alters               cholestatic             daily; can afford  days, then remove for
                          endometrial                 jaundice, hepatic       the method and     1 week, wash with
                          lining,                     neoplasms, and          is healthy;        soap and water;
                          preventing                  melasma                 persons with       reinsert.
                          implantation                                        disorders/pain
                                                                              surrounding the
                                                                              menstrual cycle

     TABLE 5.12 Components of Hormonal Contraceptive Methods (Hatcher, 2018)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         5.5 · Long-Acting Reversible Contraception      229

Method      Mechanism       Side         Adverse Effects                 Ideal               Education
            of Action       Effects                                      Candidate

DMPA        Inhibits        Weight       Bone                            Breast-feeding      Injections must be
            ovulation,      gain,        demineralization;               person, in need     repeated every 12
            thickens        headache,    delay of return to              of longer-term      weeks to ensure
            cervical        irregular    fertility; warning              method,             effective
            mucus, alters   bleeding,    signs of very                   persons not         contraception; be
            the             decreased    painful                         able or willing to  aware of irregular
            endometrium     libido,      headaches,                      take a pill daily,  bleeding; educate to
                            breast       heavy bleeding,                 persons with        increase exercise and
                            tenderness   depression,                     reliable            reduce calories if
                                         severe lower                    transportation      experiencing weight
                                         abdominal pain,                 to receive          gain; could take 10
                                         and infection at                injection every     months to return to
                                         the injection site              12 weeks            fertility.

Progestin-  Inhibits        Irregular    Possible VTE,                   Breast-feeding      Warn for irregular
only pill   ovulation,      bleeding,    ACHES,                          person, smoker      bleeding; take pill at
            thickens        headache,    increased risk of               over age 35         the same time every
            cervical        nausea,      ectopic                         years,              day (within 3 hours); if
            mucus, alters   breast       pregnancy                       responsible and     longer than 3 hours
            the             tenderness,                                  can remember        past 24-hour mark or
            endometrium,    weight                                       to take a pill at   missed a pill, use
            slows cilia in  gain, less                                   the same time       backup protection for
            fallopian tube  forgiving                                    every day           48 hours; do not stop
                            regarding                                                        the pill for a week for a
                            missing                                                          bleed; fertility returns
                            pills,                                                           immediately after
                            ovarian                                                          stopping pills
                            cysts

TABLE 5.12 Components of Hormonal Contraceptive Methods (Hatcher, 2018)

5.5 Long-Acting Reversible Contraception

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Compare and contrast the different types of intrauterine contraception devices
    · Compare and contrast the different types of contraceptive implant devices
    · Discuss the benefits and complications of LARC devices

A long-acting reversible contraception (LARC) option is the most effective form of contraception available (ACOG,
2024); LARCs include intrauterine contraception devices and contraceptive implants. The efficacy of these devices
is the same as or better than that of female sterilization. However, LARCs are easily placed in the office, and no
activity restrictions or downtime is necessary after insertion. Additionally, when the person desires to discontinue
this method, the return to fertility is immediate. LARCs are cost-effective and can be used for extended periods of
time, some for up to 10 years. They do not provide protection against STIs.

Long-Acting Reversible Contraception: Benefits and Complications

The major benefit to LARCs is their high degree of protection against unintended pregnancy, a pregnancy that is
unwanted or mistimed (Kopp Kallner, 2018). Research has consistently shown that LARCs are the most effective
choices for people in their childbearing years. Interestingly, LARC use is still very low among adolescents, a group at
high risk of unintended pregnancy and low adherence to contraception. Nurses in contraceptive clinics can advocate
for this high-risk group to choose LARC methods, highly effective contraception that is not dependent on teens
230  5 · Family Planning

     remembering to use it.

     Benefits
     The risks associated with LARC methods are very low and without the risks of blood clots, strokes, and myocardial
     infarction that are present with estrogen-containing methods. This benefit allows higher-risk persons the option of
     safe, reliable contraception. In addition, when using a LARC method, the occurrence of amenorrhea is high. The
     absence of menstruation in a person with ovaries and a uterus, who is of reproductive age is considered
     amenorrhea. Persons with anemia due to menorrhagia, very heavy or prolonged menstrual bleeding, will have
     minimal monthly bleeding, offering protection from anemia. Use of LARCs also greatly reduces the incidence of
     dysmenorrhea, especially related to endometriosis. The levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine contraception (LNG-
     IUC) reduces the risk for endometrial cancer by preventing thickening of the endometrium. Choosing to use LARCs
     offers persons privacy with their birth control choices. When using an intrauterine device or a contraceptive implant,
     the person has no packages of contraceptive pills and no tasks to do before acts of intercourse, and the device
     cannot be seen by others. The patient is in full control of their contraceptive choice, and that can feel very
     empowering. Another benefit to choosing a LARC is the immediate return to fertility once the implant or intrauterine
     device is removed. The nurse emphasizes this immediate return of fertility, as it can be a benefit for people wanting
     to conceive; it can be a drawback for others who are not seeking pregnancy.

     Complications
     Although they are not common, complications for a person choosing LARCs can arise. These complications will be
     discussed to ensure the person is a good candidate for this method. It is also important when considering use of a
     LARC that all persons be provided the information they need to give informed consent for it (ACOG, 2024).

     Pregnancy
     One complication that could occur with a LARC in place is pregnancy, and it must be managed as soon as it is
     confirmed. LARCs containing progesterone, which causes the cilia in the fallopian tubes to slow, increase the risk for
     ectopic pregnancy (Hatcher, 2018). The nurse educates the patient to monitor for symptoms of pregnancy, to check
     for IUC strings monthly, and to notify their provider immediately if they become pregnant (ACOG, 2024). Pregnancy
     means that the current LARC must be removed and a decision about the future of the pregnancy must be made.

     Expulsion or Misplacement of the IUC
     A complication that can occur with an IUC is expulsion or misplacement of the device. If the person finds the IUC in
     their cervix, internal os, or outside their body, they must contact their provider to have the device removed
     completely and replaced if they desire (ACOG, 2024). Expelled or misplaced IUCs have a very high rate of
     unintended pregnancies and must be managed immediately. Placement after delivery of the placenta has the
     highest expulsion rate.

     Contraceptive implants must be palpated monthly by the patient to ensure correct placement. If the person cannot
     feel the implant in the correct place, they must contact their provider to ensure correct placement and rule out
     unintended pregnancy. These patients should also be advised to use a backup method of contraception until
     placement can be confirmed and pregnancy can be ruled out (ACOG, 2024).

     Perforation
     Uterine perforation and extrusion of the IUC into the peritoneal cavity are very rare complications; however, they can
     occur with placement of the device (ACOG, 2024). The symptoms of perforation likely occur at time of placement,
     but the nurse educates the person to be aware of heavy vaginal bleeding, severe cramping, abdominal pain, and
     fever after IUC placement.

     Pelvic Inflammatory Disease
     The risk for pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), an infection of the female reproductive organs, when a person has
     intrauterine contraception is not necessarily increased overall, but it does increase in the first 3 weeks after
     placement (CDC, 2021). It most often occurs when sexually transmitted bacteria spread from the vagina to the
     uterus, fallopian tubes, or ovaries. Should the patient be diagnosed with PID while the IUC is in place, they should
     receive treatment according to the most recent CDC guidelines and have close clinic follow-up (CDC, 2021). The IUC
     can remain in place; however, if no clinical improvement is seen in 48 to 72 hours of initiating treatment, the
     clinician should remove the IUC. An unfortunate side effect of PID is the risk for infertility due to scarring of the

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    5.5 · Long-Acting Reversible Contraception        231

fallopian tubes. The nurse can provide emotional support, education about other contraceptive choices, and
information regarding the treatment and prevention of pelvic inflammatory disease.

Table 5.13 summarizes the pros, cons, and efficacy of the different LARCs.

Method         Pros                                                 Cons                           Perfect
                                                                                                   Use
                                                                                                   Efficacy
                                                                                                   (per 100
                                                                                                   couples
                                                                                                   per year)

LNG-IUC        Effective for 3 to 8 years, reversible, decrease     Irregular bleeding,            99.8%
               menstrual cramps and heavy bleeding, can cause       headache, ovarian cysts,
               person to become amenorrheic, excellent for          vulvovaginitis
               persons who cannot remember to take a pill,
               immediate return to fertility

Copper         Effective for 10 years, very few contraindications,  Heavier and more painful       99.8%
T380A          excellent for persons who cannot remember to take    menses
               a pill, immediate return to fertility

Contraceptive  Effective for 3 years, excellent for persons who     Irregular bleeding,            99%
implant        cannot remember to take a pill, immediate return to  possible pain at insertion
               fertility                                            site, headache,
                                                                    gastrointestinal (GI)
                                                                    difficulties, insertion site
                                                                    infection

TABLE 5.13 Comparing and Contrasting Long-Acting Reversible Contraception Methods (Hatcher, 2018)

Intrauterine Contraception Devices

An intrauterine contraception (IUC) device (IUD) is a small, plastic T-shaped contraceptive device that is placed
inside the uterus to prevent pregnancy. Use of the copper-containing IUC (Paragard) and the IUCs containing
levonorgestrel (LNG-IUC) has increased tremendously in the past 20 years, from 2.4 percent in 2002 to 14 percent
in 2017 (Daniels & Abma, 2020; KFF, 2020). The population with the highest use of IUCs are those aged 25 to 34
years, 60 percent higher than younger persons aged 20 to 24 years (KFF, 2020). Since LARC products came onto the
market, the number of unintended pregnancies and induced abortions has decreased (Espey & Hofler, 2017). One
research study in Colorado noted that as LARC use increased by 5 percent to 19 percent in low-income teenagers
and young persons, birth rates decreased by 29 percent, and abortion rates decreased by 34 percent (Espey &
Hofler, 2017). Nurses can educate persons at high risk for unintended pregnancies (adolescents and low-income
persons) and persons with little access to contraceptives (those who are homeless, of low socioeconomic status, or
rural) about the long-term value of LARCs. The cost-benefit ratio leans toward LARCs as opposed to unintended
pregnancies and abortions.

LNG-Intrauterine Contraception
LNG-IUCs are T-shaped intrauterine devices made of polydimethylsiloxane and containing levonorgestrel on the
stem of the device (Dickey & Seymour, 2021) (Figure 5.14). The mechanism of action for LNG-IUCs is slightly
different than for other progesterone-only methods, as the devices suppress ovulation in only 25 percent to 55
percent of cycles (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). The LNG-IUC alters the environment of the endometrium and prevents
fertilization of the ovum by changing the viscosity of cervical mucus, making an uninhabitable environment for
sperm and decreasing the motility and mobility of sperm (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). LNG-IUCs do not disrupt
already fertilized ova (Bayer Pharmaceuticals, 2023; Espey & Hofler, 2017). Side effects include irregular bleeding,
ovarian cysts, headache, and vulvovaginitis. Contraindications include pregnancy, uterine anomalies, pelvic
infection, or reproductive tract or breast cancers (Dickey & Seymour, 2021).
232  5 · Family Planning

     FIGURE 5.14 Intrauterine Device: Mirena The LNG-IUC Mirena sits in the center of the uterus with the wings near the fundus and the
     strings hanging just outside the cervical os. The strings are long enough for the patient to feel them monthly to ensure placement of the IUC
     and for the clinician to remove the IUC when it is time. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     The LNG-IUC has many advantages. Perfect and typical effectiveness are the same, 99.8 percent (Hatcher, 2018). It
     prevents proliferation of the endometrium, reduces menstrual pain, provides immediate return to fertility, and
     causes amenorrhea in 6 percent to 20 percent of users, depending on the amount of progesterone in the device
     (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). In persons who suffer from very heavy periods, many times a clinician will offer to place
     an LNG-IUC to thin the uterine lining and decrease menstrual bleeding (Hatcher, 2018). Levonorgestrel (Mirena and
     Liletta) can protect against pregnancy for up to 7 and 6 years, respectively, and can be used to treat menorrhagia for
     up to 5 years (Bayer Pharmaceuticals, 2023). Kyleena can stay in place and remain effective for pregnancy
     prevention for 5 years (Bayer Pharmaceuticals, 2023). Skyla, which is approved for up to 3 years of use, and Kyleena
     are excellent options for adolescents because the IUC frame is smaller than those of Mirena and Liletta (Bayer
     Pharmaceuticals, 2023).

             LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

     Using LNG-IUC during Perimenopause

     During perimenopause, many persons experience abnormal bleeding that can be light or very heavy and can be
     unexpected. Some perimenopausal persons carry extra clothes or pants with them because of unexpected very
     heavy bleeding. These persons can benefit from the LNG-IUC. The LNG-IUC causes a thin uterine lining, preventing
     heavy bleeding. The device is not contraindicated for use during perimenopause.

     Paragard Intrauterine Device
     Paragard, the copper T380A IUC, is a T-shaped device made of polyethylene with copper wire wrapped around the
     stem and arms of the device (Figure 5.15). Paragard has Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for 10
     continuous years of use with an effectiveness rate of 99.4 percent to 99.9 percent (Hatcher, 2018). The mechanism
     of action is two-fold: the plastic and metal frame acts as a foreign body and causes inflammation in the uterus, and
     the inflammation causes a toxic environment that decreases sperm mobility and survival (Hatcher, 2018). Because
     of this inflammation, however, menstrual bleeding is heavier than prior to insertion of the IUC. This bleeding and
     cramping are the most common complaints from patients who use this method. Abnormal bleeding after placement
     can last 2 to 6 weeks while the uterus adjusts to the device. The patient should never fill more than one pad an hour,
     and if bleeding continues past 6 weeks, the person should call the clinic.

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.5 · Long-Acting Reversible Contraception                                                                                       233

FIGURE 5.15 Intrauterine Device: Paragard The Paragard IUC is a 10-year contraceptive option that prevents pregnancy nearly 100
percent of the time. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Because this IUC is hormone-free, very few contraindications exist, but those that do include pregnancy, current
genital tract infection, uterine abnormalities, and copper allergy or Wilson's disease (Hatcher, 2018). The nurse
recommends Paragard to persons desiring a very effective, long-term contraceptive that is nonhormonal, such as
those who are breast-feeding, who have religious reasons for not desiring hormones, smokers, and those with risk
for thromboembolic disorders.

Patient Education for IUCs
After placement of the IUC, the nurse educates the person to check the IUC strings at the cervix monthly. If the
strings are not felt, the patient should call the clinic and be seen to verify placement. Rare complications associated
with IUC use include expulsion, method failure, and uterine perforation (Hatcher, 2018). Because of these
complications, the nurse educates the patient using the PAINS acronym and explains that if any of those symptoms
occur, the patient will need to get to an emergency department immediately for IUC placement check.

PAINS
The nurse educates the person to call the office with the following concerns:

P: Period late or missing; spotting after having stopped bleeding

A: Abdominal pain that is sharp and severe

I: Infection (vaginal discharge or smell)

N: Not feeling well (fever, tired, achy, chills)

S: Strings not being felt

If the patient experiences any of these symptoms, the nurse advises them to call the office immediately or go to the
closest emergency department for evaluation.

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Intrauterine Contraception: Mirena IUC

Nurses are often the gatekeepers in clinics, managing messages between clinicians and patients, especially after
visits. Having a good understanding of how the intrauterine device works, what side effects are expected versus
234  5 · Family Planning

     unexpected, and how long each device might last can help alleviate a lot of stress for both the nurse and the patient.
     Intrauterine contraceptive devices are gaining in popularity because this method of contraception can last as long as
     10 years with an effective rate as high as 99.9 percent (CDC, 2023d).

         · Generic Name: levonorgestrel
         · Trade Name: Mirena (Skyla, Liletta, or Kyleena)
         · Class/Action: hormonal contraceptive, progestin
         · Route/Dosage: intrauterine

               Kyleena: single dose 19.5 mg progesterone system intrauterine contraceptive
               Liletta: single dose 52 mg progesterone system intrauterine contraceptive
               Mirena: single dose 52 mg progesterone system intrauterine contraceptive
               Skyla: single dose 13.5 mg progesterone system intrauterine contraceptive
         · High Alert/ Black Box Warning: None
         · Indications: FDA approved for contraception, menorrhagia, emergency contraception.
               Non-FDA uses: endometrial hyperplasia (a condition in which the endometrium of the uterus becomes

                   very thick, causing unusual bleeding), endometriosis and perimenopausal symptoms.
         · Mechanism of Action: Levonorgestrel is a synthetic progesterone that sometimes inhibits ovulation and

             inhibits sperm from reaching the egg because of thickening of cervical mucus.
         · Contraindications: acute liver disease, acute history of pelvic inflammatory disease, known or suspected

             breast carcinoma, conditions associated with increased susceptibility to infections (e.g., leukemia, AIDS, IV
             drug abuse) including pelvic infections, congenital or acquired pelvic anomaly that distorts the uterine cavity,
             genital bleeding with unknown cause, infected abortion in the past 3 months, thrombophlebitis or
             thromboembolic disorders, untreated vaginitis or cervicitis, known or suspected progestin-sensitive cancer,
             known or suspected hormone-sensitive cancer and known or suspected uterine or cervical neoplasia, or
             unresolved, abnormal Pap smear.
         · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: The following adverse drug reactions and incidences are derived from
             product labeling unless otherwise specified:

               Cardiovascular: Myocardial infarction
               Neurologic: Dizziness, headache, migraine
               Dermatologic: Acne
               Gastrointestinal: Abdominal pain, nausea
               Reproductive: Abnormal vaginal bleeding, amenorrhea, breast tenderness, dysmenorrhea, vaginitis,

                   vulvovaginitis
         · Nursing Implications: Witness consent. Review patient education with the family. Remain in the room to

             assist while procedure is being completed. Document in the patient's chart.
         · Parent/Family Education: The nurse educates the patient that they should periodically place a clean finger

             into the vagina and check for IUC strings near the cervix. Some cramping and bleeding intermittently for 2 to 6
             weeks is normal after placement of an intrauterine contraception device (IUC), and irregular bleeding can be
             expected for 3 months. The patient may experience their normal menses or may not. The nurse provides
             education to the patient before they leave the office about calling to report heavy bleeding; pain with
             intercourse; abdominal pain; signs of infection including fever, chills, and malaise; and missing strings. If the
             person becomes pregnant while the IUC is in place, the nurse educates them to come back to the clinic
             immediately for an appointment.

     Contraceptive Implant: Nexplanon
     The contraceptive implant Nexplanon is a contraceptive device 4 cm in length and 2 mm in diameter, made of an
     ethylene vinyl acetate copolymer core containing etonogestrel surrounded by an ethylene vinyl copolymer skin
     (Dickey & Seymour, 2021) (Figure 5.16). The copolymer skin allows release of the etonogestrel over a 3-year period
     (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). The implant is very effective, with a perfect and typical effectiveness rate of 99 percent
     (Hatcher, 2021). It is inserted either in the hospital during the postpartum period or in the office; it is removed in the
     office by a trained clinician. The device lies subdermally on the underside of the arm above the medial epicondyle.
     The skin is injected with lidocaine for anesthesia, a small incision is made, and the device is placed by a disposable
     introducer. The arm is then wrapped to prevent bleeding. No sutures are necessary. The implant's mechanism of
     action is to suppress ovulation, thicken cervical mucus, and alter the endometrial lining (Dickey & Seymour, 2021).

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.6 · Emergency Contraception                                                                                                                 235

FIGURE 5.16 Contraceptive Implant: Nexplanon Nexplanon is a small device that is surgically implanted under the skin in the inner upper
arm. The device provides 99.9 percent effective protection against pregnancy for 3 years. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)

Side Effects of Nexplanon
Side effects include abnormal bleeding, changes in menstrual cycle, including amenorrhea, gastrointestinal
difficulties, headaches, vaginitis, and ovarian cysts (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). Some people experience increased
acne and weight gain. Complications related to the insertion of the device include pain at the insertion site,
hematoma formation, and incorrect insertion (Dickey & Seymour).

Patient Education
The nurse demonstrates how to palpate for the device and instructs the person to palpate it occasionally to ensure
correct placement. The person should be instructed to call the office if vaginal bleeding exceeds one pad an hour, or,
if they experience any of the PAINS symptoms listed earlier. The nurse also stresses the importance of having the
device removed after 3 years.

5.6 Emergency Contraception

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Compare and contrast the available methods of emergency contraception
    · Explain the education a nurse would provide to a patient seeking emergency contraception

If administered within a specific time after sexual intercourse, emergency contraception (EC) is a form of
contraception that is effective in interrupting a pregnancy before it begins. A person may choose to use emergency
contraception because of condomless sex, a sexual assault, a faulty contraceptive method such as broken condom,
missed or late DMPA injection, missed combination oral contraception pills, or expired diaphragm use. Emergency
contraception must be initiated within 72 hours of intercourse, or 120 hours if using ulipristal acetate (Ella), to be
effective at preventing pregnancy (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). Taken within 72 hours, emergency contraception is
between 85 percent and 99 percent effective according to research (Hatcher, 2018). Emergency contraception
prevents pregnancy; it does not abort or remove a pregnancy.
236  5 · Family Planning

     Forms of Emergency Contraception

     Forms of EC that will be discussed in this section include high-dose levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol (Yuzpe),
     high-dose levonorgestrel (Plan B; Plan B One-Step), ulipristal acetate (Ella), and the Paragard IUC. Ella, Yuzpe, and
     the IUC all require a visit with a health-care provider and a prescription; Plan B One-Step can be purchased without
     a prescription over the counter at most pharmacies (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). All clinicians who care for
     reproductive-age patients should have knowledge about EC; however, a recent study revealed that only 64 percent
     of clinicians in emergency departments knew about EC (ACOG, 2015).

     Emergency contraception pills include Yuzpe regimen, Plan B/Plan B One-Step, and Ella (ACOG, 2015). Yuzpe is a
     combined progestin-estrogen pill that is available by prescription only and must be taken within 72 hours after
     intercourse. This method has many side effects such as cramping and nausea and is therefore no longer widely used
     (Gragnolati, 2022). Its mechanism of action is to prevent ovulation. Levonorgestrel EC (Plan B/Plan B One-Step) is a
     progesterone-only tablet that is available over the counter. The mechanism of action is to prevent ovulation and
     disrupt luteal function (Hatcher, 2018). It should be taken as soon as possible after unprotected intercourse but can
     be taken up to 72 hours after the act; however, effectiveness decreases each day during those 3 days (Hatcher,
     2018). The newest form of EC in the United States is the progesterone agonist/antagonist pill known as Ella. Ella is a
     single pill containing 30 mg of ulipristal (progesterone agonist/antagonist), which prevents follicular rupture and
     delays proliferation of the endometrium if ovulation has occurred (Dickey & Seymour, 2021). Ella works best within
     72 hours, but unlike the other EC pills, Ella can be effective up to 120 hours, and its effectiveness does not decrease
     during those 5 days (Dickey & Seymour, 2021).

     Although not FDA approved for this indication, the most effective form of EC is insertion of a Paragard IUC. Research
     from clinical trials indicates that EC pills used within 24 hours prevent around 67 percent of pregnancies. In
     contrast, insertion of the copper intrauterine contraceptive Paragard prevents 99 percent of pregnancies if inserted
     within 120 hours of unprotected intercourse (Dickey & Seymour, 2021; Hatcher, 2018). The mechanism of action for
     the Paragard IUC is prevention of fertilization by affecting sperm viability and function, disrupting the endometrial
     environment, and preventing implantation (Hatcher, 2018).

     Table 5.14 summarizes the pros, cons, and efficacy of different methods of EC.

     Method               Pros                                      Cons                              Typical
                                                                                                      Use
                                                                                                      Efficacy

     Yuzpe (estrogen/     Effective                                 Side effects of estrogen          62%-85%
     progesterone)                                                  (ACHES), effective up to 72
                                                                    hours

     Ella (progesterone   Effective, can be effective up to 120     Must have a provider visit and a  62%-85%
     agonist/             hours                                     prescription
     antagonist)

     Plan B               Effective, available over the counter     Effective only up to 72 hours     62%-85%

     Progesterone=only    Effective, single pill, over the counter  Effective up to 72 hours and      62%-85%
     EC                                                             moderately effective up to 5
                                                                    days after

     Copper IUC           Very effective, can be used for ongoing   Must see a provider to have it    99%
                          contraception, can be used up to 120      placed
                          hours

     TABLE 5.14 Comparing and Contrasting Methods of Emergency Contraception (Hatcher, 2018)

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.6 · Emergency Contraception                                                                                             237

Nurse-Provided Education

Emergency contraception can be a very personal, private issue that some people are uncomfortable discussing. The
nurse can discuss EC with patients in a way that helps the person feel empowered to make decisions, especially in a
situation where they may have been victimized. Framing nurse education to ensure that the patient does not feel
judged, devalued, or revictimized is important to building a healthy, trusting relationship. After explaining the use of
EC, the nurse will discuss beginning a routine contraceptive method and ways to improve safe sex. The nurse will
also screen for intimate partner violence (IPV) in the relationship. Establishing trust is vital for these conversations
so that the patient can make effective, informed decisions. See Chapter 3 Health Promotion, Disease and Injury
Prevention, and Well-Person Care for screening tools for IPV.

        REAL RN STORIES

Nurse: Joy, RN, BSN
Clinical setting: Planned Parenthood
Geographic location: Plano, Texas

As an RN, I recently had a heartwarming interaction with a young patient who visited our clinic asking about
emergency contraception. I could feel her anxiety and uncertainty as she voiced her concerns about what it would
mean to get pregnant and how she felt about stopping or preventing a pregnancy. She was a college student and
wanted to graduate before thinking about starting a family. I explained what emergency contraception options were
available. I explained the morning after pill and the IUD and answered her questions. She wanted to know how each
option worked and if it would affect her future chance of having children. As I explained more, I saw the relief in her
eyes to know it would not cause problems getting pregnant in the future. She decided on the morning after pill and
thanked me for all the education I provided. She told me no one had ever spent that much time with her at a clinic
and she was so grateful for my kindness. I handed her additional resources and wished her luck with graduation. As
she walked out the door, I couldn't help but feel proud of being a nurse and helping this person. It was a really
amazing moment.

Warning Signs and When to Follow Up
Anytime a patient has unplanned, unprotected sexual intercourse and uses EC, the nurse will educate the person on
warning signs that pregnancy has occurred or warning signs of complications from the EC. The risks are mostly short
term, but they still warrant careful attention. No scheduled follow-up is required for a patient using EC unless
menstruation is delayed by more than 1 week or if abdominal pain, irregular bleeding, or fever occurs, suggesting a
possible ectopic pregnancy (ACOG, 2015). Side effects from use of EC include change in menstrual cycle, nausea
and vomiting, fatigue, headaches and dizziness, and cramping (Hatcher, 2018).

ACHES
For EC containing estrogen and progesterone, such as Yuzpe, this is a one-time high dose of hormones. The nurse
provides education about when to return to the office or the emergency department if the patient begins to feel any
symptoms of ACHES (see Table 5.9). If the person experiences any of these symptoms, the nurse should advise
them to call the office immediately or go to the emergency department to check for blood clots, stroke, and
cardiovascular involvement.

Return of Regular Menses
A person using emergency contraception can expect their menstrual period to return around 7 to 10 days after the
dose. If menstruation does not occur, the patient should take a pregnancy test to determine if the EC was effective.
If a positive test is confirmed, the person should make an appointment to see their health-care provider
immediately.

Sexually Transmitted Infections
When a patient presents to a nurse with concerns about possible pregnancy from unprotected intercourse, an
assessment should be completed for exposure to sexually transmitted infections (STIs). For more about STIs,
diagnostic tests, and treatment, see Chapter 7 Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System
Infections.
238  5 · Family Planning

     Use of Contraception
     Emergency contraception should not be used as a form of ongoing contraception. The nurse will have a conversation
     with the patient about what form of ongoing contraception will be used in the future. The nurse evaluates what
     occurred that caused unprotected intercourse to determine if the contraceptive method the patient was using failed
     and if a different method would give better protection. If the patient decides to choose a new method of
     contraception, COCs can be started after menstruation returns and pregnancy is ruled out. In the meantime, the
     nurse should recommend a barrier method for pregnancy prevention. Because EC works by delaying ovulation,
     persons need to be cautioned that pregnancy can occur in the same menstrual cycle (ACOG, 2015). By choosing the
     Paragard IUC for EC, the patient has the benefit of ongoing contraception being in place. The nurse will provide
     education about the PAINS warning signs discussed earlier in the chapter and educate the patient to call the office if
     any symptoms arise.

     5.7 Sterilization

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the female sterilization procedures, their efficacy, and their reversibility
         · Explain the male sterilization procedure, its efficacy, and its reversibility

     Sterilization, the permanent removal of the ability to become pregnant, is one of the most effective methods of
     contraception. Female sterilization is used by 18.6 percent of persons aged 15 to 49 years (ACOG, 2021). Male
     sterilization is used by only 4.5 percent of U.S. men (CDC, 2017). Sterilization is 99 percent effective for both males
     and females. The choice of sterilization should not be taken lightly, nor should one make this decision assuming that
     it can be reversed.

     Female Sterilization

     The term female sterilization used to describe a surgical procedure that permanently terminates fertility in a
     person with a uterus. Before the person chooses sterilization, education about the procedure and its permanent
     nature should be provided. During times of psychologic stress, such as after a difficult birth or during a divorce or
     separation, a person may not think clearly and should not make permanent decisions regarding their health. The
     nurse and health-care provider should provide clear, factual information that allows the person to truly give
     informed consent.

     Essure
     Essure was a device introduced in 2002 for permanent sterilization. Coils (Figure 5.17) were inserted into the
     fallopian tubes that caused scarring of the tubes, not allowing sperm to reach the ova (U.S. Food and Drug
     Administration [FDA], 2022). Essure was marketed as a minimally invasive office procedure that was permanent,
     nonhormonal, highly effective, and took only 45 minutes to place (FDA, 2022). According to the U.S. Food and Drug
     Administration (2022), adverse effects of Essure were reported, with 69,249 reports from 2002 to 2022. The most
     common reported symptoms were pain, abdominal pain, heavier menses, hemorrhage, foreign body or fragments
     found in patient, perforation, headaches, fatigue, weight fluctuations, depression, anxiety, hypersensitivity, rash,
     and hair loss (FDA, 2022). Other adverse events consisted of possible nickel allergy, migration of the device, device
     breakage, dislodged device, implant failure (4,578 reported pregnancies, with half ending in pregnancy losses,
     occurred with Essure in 20 years), difficulty with removal, and difficulty with insertion (FDA, 2022). Essure was
     removed from the market in Europe in 2017 and in the United States in 2019 (FDA, 2022). Bayer, the company that
     sold Essure, settled a $1.6 billion lawsuit in 2020; the FDA mandated that post market studies continue to monitor
     the safety of those persons who had the Essure device implanted (FDA, 2023).

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.7 · Sterilization                                                                                                                           239

FIGURE 5.17 Essure Permanent Birth Control Essure coils placed into the fallopian tubes stopped sperm from fertilizing an egg.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Tubal Ligation
Voluntary female sterilization is done by tubal ligation (Figure 5.18), a surgical procedure in which the fallopian
tubes are permanently blocked, clipped, or removed. This procedure can be done anytime a person with a uterus is
not pregnant, but most often is performed in the hospital after birth because the uterus is already enlarged, and the
tubes are easy to locate. During this procedure, the tubes are located, ligated, and clipped (Mills et al., 2021).
Complications of tubal ligation can include bowel perforation, pain, infection, hemorrhage, and adverse anesthesia
effects (ACOG, 2023c).

FIGURE 5.18 Tubal Ligation The fallopian tubes connect the ovaries to the uterus. A person whose fallopian tubes are ligated can no
longer get pregnant because the egg cannot travel to the uterus. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Consent and When It Is Needed
The decision for a tubal ligation is a permanent one. Many health-care providers will ask if a patient desires
permanent sterilization during the first pregnancy visit. This allows the person and provider plenty of time to discuss
the tubal ligation procedure and its permanence. Informed consent is then obtained. Patients with Medicaid
insurance are required to consent 30 days prior to the procedure to give the person choosing permanent
sterilization time to consider the permanence of their decision.
240  5 · Family Planning

       CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

       Evaluate Outcomes of Tubal Ligation

       The nurse will evaluate the outcomes of the education provided regarding tubal ligation. The following are
       questions the nurse can ask to determine if the education was successful:

          1. How are you feeling about no longer having children in the future?
          2. Do you have someone available to help you while you are recovering from your surgery?
          3. Did you inform your job of how long you would be off work?

       By asking these questions, the nurse can determine that the patient understands they will no longer be able to
       get pregnant, will need assistance after the surgery, and will need to take a few days off work.

     Efficacy
     Female sterilization is more than 99 percent effective at preventing pregnancy. Because a person with a uterus still
     has fallopian tubes in place, there is an increased risk of ectopic pregnancies if the procedure fails (ACOG, 2023c).
     Tubal ligation is effective immediately after the surgical procedure, and there is no need for a backup method of
     contraception.

     Postoperative Care
     Postoperative care for tubal ligation consists of keeping incisions clean and dry to avoid wound infection. The nurse
     provides patient education consisting of avoiding baths, swimming pools, or hot tubs until wounds have healed;
     avoiding lifting more than 10 pounds until follow-up with provider; returning to work in several days, depending on
     the provider's instructions; and returning to a regular diet (Jacobson et al., 2022). Nurses give anticipatory guidance
     noting that patients will likely feel shoulder pain, abdominal bloating and cramping, and possible bleeding from the
     vagina. Nurses instruct patients to call the provider if they experience severe abdominal pain, heavy vaginal
     bleeding, fever, chills, shortness of breath, or incisions that are red, swollen, and painful with a discharge (Jacobson
     et al., 2022).

     Male Sterilization

     Permanently blocking the small tubes in the scrotum that carry sperm to prevent pregnancy in a surgical procedure
     called a vasectomy is called male sterilization. Besides the external condom, this is the only other male
     contraceptive method. In the United States, 4.5 percent of women 15 to 44 years of age utilize male sterilization as
     their contraceptive method (CDC, 2017). Ideally, both partners will discuss the procedure and give consent;
     however, only the male is required to sign a consent. The health-care provider will counsel the couple on the
     permanence of the procedure and stress that it should not be thought of as reversible.

     A vasectomy is a relatively minor procedure often done with the patient under local anesthesia in an outpatient
     setting, in which a small opening is made in each side of the scrotum to sever the vas deferens. Ligation or cautery
     of the vas deferens prevents sperm from reaching the ejaculate (Figure 5.19). Postprocedure care includes resting
     for 2 to 3 days and applying a cold pack to the scrotum to reduce swelling. Sperm remains in the ejaculate for
     approximately 3 months, or 15 to 20 ejaculations. Sperm must be absent from the ejaculate for sterilization to be
     achieved (Zeitler & Rayala, 2021). The patient should be advised to use a barrier method of contraception until
     sterilization is confirmed. The person will return to the clinic for a sperm count to verify that no sperm are present in
     the ejaculate. Side effects of vasectomies include pain, infection, hematomas, and spontaneous reanastomosis
     (reconnecting of the vas deferens) (Zeitler & Rayala, 2021).

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.8 · Induced Abortion                                                                                                                  241

FIGURE 5.19 Vasectomy During a vasectomy, the vasa deferentia are cut and sealed to prevent sperm from passing through and fertilizing
an egg during intercourse. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Informed Consent
The decision for a vasectomy is a permanent one. Many health-care providers will discuss the desire for permanent
sterilization during the first pregnancy visit, and most health-care providers will discuss both tubal ligation and
vasectomy. For couples desiring vasectomy, they are provided with referrals for health-care providers proficient in
that procedure. Informed consent is similar to tubal ligation in which the couple understands the vasectomy is a
permanent sterilization and should not be considered reversible.

Efficacy
The failure rate of vasectomies is between zero and 2 percent (Zeitler & Rayala, 2021). Failure can be caused by
surgical errors, unprotected intercourse before zero sperm count has been verified, or reconnection of the vas
deferens. The nurse will provide education regarding the importance of returning for follow-up and a postprocedure
sperm count. Vasectomy is a safe and cost-effective option for permanent contraception in people with male
anatomy (Zeitler & Rayala, 2021).

Postoperative Care
The nurse educates the person to rest for several days after vasectomy and use an ice pack to reduce pain and
swelling. A mild analgesic such as ibuprofen (Motrin) or acetaminophen (Tylenol) can also be taken to reduce pain.
The nurse instructs the person to call the office for extreme pain, fever, discharge from the incision, or other signs of
infection.

5.8 Induced Abortion

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Discuss medically induced abortion
    · Discuss surgically induced abortion
    · Discuss the role of the nurse when providing education and referral for an induced abortion

A person deciding to end a pregnancy may do so for many reasons. The person may be choosing to end this
pregnancy because it was unplanned or unwanted, was the result of a sexual assault, or is likely to impact their
health negatively. In some cases, the fetus has a condition incompatible with life. Other reasons can be financial,
relationship problems, and other family responsibilities (Hatcher, 2018). Regardless of the reason, each person
should be respected and supported throughout the process. The nurse will assess the person's need for emotional
and mental health support, counseling, and social support resources. Many hospitals and clinics have resources
242  5 · Family Planning

     available such as postpartum depression assistance from social work, follow-up appointments for postpartum
     contraception, and mental health and support services. Each state in the United States now has specific laws on the
     legality of abortion, and nurses are responsible for knowing the laws in the state or states they practice in.

     The nurse will assess the person by reviewing a health history and obtaining a last menstrual period (LMP). If the
     LMP is unknown, an ultrasound might be performed. The nurse will also draw blood for lab work to determine the
     person's blood type, hemoglobin or hematocrit, and possibly STI status. The health-care provider and nurse will
     provide education and obtain informed consent. Two types of abortions are available and will be discussed in this
     module: medically induced abortion and surgically induced abortion.

     Medically Induced Abortions

     A medically induced abortion is a termination of pregnancy induced by medications. According to the American
     College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2022b), 25 percent of women in the United States will have an abortion
     by the age of 45 years. In 2000, the FDA approved a combination of mifepristone (Mifeprex) and misoprostol
     (Cytotec) for people seeking medically induced abortions but has since restricted access to mifepristone (Hatcher,
     2018). Mifepristone, a selective progesterone receptor modulator, acts as an antiprogestin, which causes uterine
     lining necrosis, softening of the cervix, and contractility of the uterus (ACOG, 2020). Misoprostol, a prostaglandin E1,
     softens the cervix and induces uterine contractions (ACOG, 2020). The two-medication regimen of mifepristone
     followed by misoprostol has a 95 percent to 98 percent effectiveness rate when used by people whose gestation is
     63 days or less from their LMP (Osuga et al., 2023). If the medications do not induce abortion or the abortion is not
     complete, an aspiration abortion should be advised (Hatcher, 2018). Side effects reported during medically induced
     abortions include intense nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and cramping especially after the misoprostol is taken,
     and bleeding through fewer than two pads in an hour, with small clots after the products of conception have passed
     (Osuga et al., 2023).

     Time Frames
     If the gestational age is less than 70 days, oral mifepristone will be given as a 200-mg dose in the office; 24 to 48
     hours later, 800 mcg of misoprostol will be taken at home (ACOG, 2020). Cramping and bleeding will occur and
     evacuate the uterus of the products of conception. At 7 to 14 days, the person will return to the office for a follow-up
     to ensure that the uterus is empty and that bleeding is not excessive, and to discuss contraceptive choices for future
     planning.

     Who to See and Who Is Eligible
     A person desiring a medically induced abortion will need to see a medical doctor, certified nurse-midwife, or nurse
     practitioner. The pregnancy is confirmed and gestational age is estimated. Patients who are eligible for medically
     induced abortions are those who are no more than 63 days post LMP, or 9 weeks; contraindications are suspected
     ectopic pregnancy, long-term use of corticosteroids, and severe anemia (Hatcher, 2018).

     Surgically Induced Abortions

     If the patient is more than 9 weeks past the first day of their LMP, they are no longer eligible for a medically induced
     abortion and will require a surgically induced abortion. A surgically induced abortion is a procedure in which
     manual dilation of the cervix occurs, followed by emptying of the uterine cavity. Aspiration abortion, done with the
     patient under local anesthesia, consists of dilating the cervix with a dilator and evacuating the uterine contents
     using a vacuum aspirator (Brown & Shvartsman, 2023). This procedure can be done up to 13 weeks' gestation
     (ACOG, 2022b). Side effects of an aspiration abortion include retained products of conception, undiagnosed ectopic
     pregnancy, and uterine perforation; emergent symptoms are fever, severe abdominal pain, and bleeding that soaks a
     pad in an hour (Brown & Shvartsman, 2023). Second trimester abortions (14 weeks' gestation and greater) can
     occur due to delayed pregnancy testing, inability to obtain funding, inability to find a provider or clinic that performs
     abortion services, or diagnosis of major fetal anomalies detected in the second trimester (ACOG, 2013). Other
     reasons for second trimester abortions consist of preeclampsia, preterm premature rupture of membranes, and
     fetal demise (ACOG, 2013). From 14 weeks to 20 weeks' gestation, a dilation and evacuation (D&E) is conducted.
     The D&E procedure requires a preprocedure cervical prep of osmotic dilators or misoprostol to soften and dilate the
     cervix (ACOG, 2013). During the D&E procedure, the provider aspirates the amniotic fluid and removes the fetus
     through the cervix, using forceps (ACOG, 2013). Dismemberment usually occurs as the fetus is being pulled through

     Access for free at openstax.org
5.8 · Induced Abortion                                                                                                      243

the cervix; therefore, a suction curettage should be performed to ensure all products of conception are removed
(ACOG, 2013). According to ACOG (2013) after 20 weeks' gestation, induction of labor is usually preferred, using
misoprostol, mifepristone, manual cervical dilators (balloon, osmotic dilators), and/or oxytocin (Pitocin).
Complications of surgically induced abortions consist of hemorrhage; incomplete abortion, where tissue remains in
the uterus; intrauterine blood clots; cervical, uterine, or abdominal trauma; uterine perforation; and infection (ACOG,
2013; Hatcher, 2018).

Nurse's Role in Induced Abortion

Trained counselors meet with pregnant persons to provide all the options (abortion, parenting, and adoption) prior
to deciding on abortion. The counselors also provide education, support, and referral for counseling for the person
and their partner because of emotional and mental health needs after the procedure. Once the person has made an
informed decision, they meet with the nurse. The nurse provides education prior to the abortion. For a medical
abortion, the nurse explains the action of the medications, how to take them, what to expect, and how to follow up.
For surgical abortion, the nurse explains the sedation to be used, dilation of the cervix, removal of the products of
conception, and the need to return for a follow-up appointment. The nurse recommends taking ibuprofen (Motrin) or
acetaminophen (Tylenol) for cramping pain. Consent forms are also reviewed.

Postprocedure education is provided by the nurse, including emergency contact information and instructions to call
if bleeding has soaked two or more large pads per hour for 2 hours, if the temperature is greater than 100.4° F (38°
C), and if abdominal pain with nausea or vomiting is present more than 24 hours after misoprostol (Hatcher, 2018).
A discussion of hormonal withdrawal and the effect on the emotions of the patient should take place to prevent any
psychologic issues after abortion (Coleman, 2018) The administration of Rho(D) immune globulin (RhoGAM) to the
patient, if they have an Rh-negative blood type, is required, along with education regarding the use of RhoGAM. Any
time RhoGAM is given, a copy of the administration card with date and dose given is provided to the patient for their
medical record keeping at home. The nurse also reviews that the patient should refrain from vaginal coitus, inserting
a tampon, or using a douche for 2 weeks. Last, the nurse instructs when the patient should return for contraception
counseling.

Nurses working in abortion care can experience many emotions. According to research by Qian et al. (2021), many
nurses and providers of abortion care experience burnout and emotional trauma. This research noted that providing
abortion care caused many negative and positive emotions for nurses, and many nurses felt they lacked support
from family, friends, and nurse colleagues due to the mixed emotions surrounding abortion. This research noted that
nurses created coping strategies to support their patients but had to learn to conceal their own emotions. This study
suggested the development of employee assistance programs to include psychologic care, cognitive behavior
therapy, and professional support for nurses working to provide abortion care.

Some nurses feel a moral responsibility to refuse to provide abortion care. According to the American Nurses
Association's Code of Ethics (2015), in times of moral distress, nurses must express their moral concerns to the
appropriate authority. This conscientious objection to being a part of the situation must be communicated in a
timely and appropriate manner. Nurses are to maintain patient safety, avoid abandonment of the patient, and leave
the patient only when nursing care is continued by others. Nurses must use self-evaluation to determine their moral
limits and must follow this code to protect themselves and their patients.

        LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

Contraception as a Basic Human Right

Recently, two judges in the United States issued contradictory decisions that have the potential to impact access to
medically induced abortions for people who are requesting them. In Texas, Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk ruled that
the Food and Drug Administration improperly approved the use of mifepristone (Mifeprex) more than 20 years ago.
This ruling made it illegal for clinicians to prescribe the drug for patients requesting early term abortions (prior to 10
weeks pregnant) (Savage & Belluck, 2023). Within hours of that decision, U.S. District Judge Thomas O. Rice issued
a ruling in Washington State seeking to block the FDA from removing the drug from the market. Abortions became
illegal in 14 states in 2022 after the Supreme Court ruling on Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, nearly
244  5 · Family Planning

     50 years after Roe v. Wade. Other states in the United States allow abortion but have limits of 12 weeks' gestation or
     less.

     The United Nations Population Fund (UNPFA) believes that the consequences of these decisions are serious, and
     that contraception is in fact a basic human right. According to the 2023 UNPFA Annual Report, the world population
     recently reached 8 billion lives. They write, "It is the basic right of every individual to decide freely the number,
     spacing and timing of their children" (Garbett, 2023). The report states that it is the job of our society to advocate to
     guarantee the ability of persons to make reproductive and sexual decisions free of discrimination, coercion and
     violence and to provide access to contraception methods that are affordable, accessible, and meet international
     standards of quality (Garbett, 2023).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                5 · Summary 245

Summary

5.1 Contraception: The Nurse's Role

Contraceptive education and access empower persons to plan for education, create a career, become healthy prior
to pregnancy, and choose when to start a family. The nurse aids in this process by providing education on different
methods of contraception that are individualized, safe, and affordable. A history and physical exam is performed.
Contraindications, side effects, and effectiveness of different methods are discussed, and shared decision making
concludes with the person choosing a method they are confident in using.

5.2 Natural Methods of Contraception

Natural methods of contraception are one way for a person to take control of their sexual health and their fertility.
The cost of FAM, coitus interruptus, or abstinence is minimal to zero, and there is no need to obtain a prescription.
However, the risk of pregnancy with these methods, except for abstinence, is higher than with pharmacologic
methods. Both partners need to agree to use any of these methods, and it takes planning and self-control. A bonus
of FAM is that when the individual/couple decides to conceive, they are aware of when they are most likely to be
ovulating. FAM offer no protection against sexually transmitted infections.

5.3 Barrier Methods of Contraception

Barrier methods of contraception provide protection from pregnancy and STIs. These methods can empower people
to be in control of their sexuality and fertility. Some barrier methods are cost-effective and do not need a
prescription and health-care visit. The nurse can help educate persons on each barrier method, stressing the
importance of using that method with each act of intercourse.

5.4 Short-Acting Reversible Hormonal Methods of Contraception

Choosing a hormonal contraceptive method for pregnancy prevention or menstruation management is a very big
decision. The nurse can be an active member in the health-care team providing evidence-based education, using
informed decision making, and performing high-level assessments to ensure patient safety throughout the process.
All hormonal contraceptive options should be discussed, including mechanism of action, side effects, adverse
effects, effectiveness, education on use, and contraindications to aid in decision making. Hormonal contraceptives
do not protect against sexually transmitted infections.

5.5 Long-Acting Reversible Contraception

LARCs are the most effective contraception choices available. There are many benefits, including pregnancy
prevention, menstrual relief, cancer prevention, and relief from symptoms associated with migraines or other issues
that worsen around menses. Although uncommon, there are complications associated with LARC placement and
use, and nurses provide education about these complications. LARCs do not protect against sexually transmitted
infections. Additionally, nurses teach about the side effects after placement, including what is expected and not
expected, when to call the office, when to go to the emergency department, and when to return for follow-up visits.

5.6 Emergency Contraception

Emergency contraception can be used to prevent pregnancy when contraception was not used or failed. There are
oral EC options, one being over the counter, as well as an intrauterine contraceptive option that also offers long term
contraception. EC is unique because it is used after sex, rather than before, to prevent a pregnancy. Having this type
of contraception can empower people to take control of their sexual health. The nurse is a key health partner
providing education and advocating for the person. The nurse can teach about EC options, timing of EC, its side
effects, and what is expected and not expected. The nurse also encourages persons to have a form of EC available at
all times.

5.7 Sterilization

Permanent sterilization is one of the most effective contraceptive methods. Female sterilization can be performed in
the hospital after birth or at a later date as an outpatient procedure most often under general anesthesia. Male
sterilization is performed under local anesthesia and is completed in an outpatient setting. Both procedures are safe
and permanent. The nurse can provide education about permanent sterilization to patients to ensure they are fully
246 5 · Key Terms

aware of the permanence of their contraceptive decision.

5.8 Induced Abortion

Abortion care is a sensitive topic. Anticipatory guidance from the nurse to the patient about what to expect is
essential. The person deciding to have a medically induced abortion needs to understand that this is a 48- to
72-hour procedure and that follow-up will be necessary to be sure all products of conceptions have been expelled.
Additionally, the person needs to understand that they may experience intense nausea, cramping, bleeding, and will
experience passage of tissue so that they are prepared to deal with the discomfort and sight of blood and tissue
contents.

Key Terms

amenorrhea absence of menstruation in a person with ovaries and a uterus, who is of reproductive age
barrier method contraceptive method that prevents pregnancy by blocking the passage of sperm through the

    reproductive tract, which prevents sperm from reaching the egg for fertilization
cervical cap small cup made of silicone that fits snugly over the cervix, blocking sperm from entering and reaching

    the ovum
coitus interruptus method of contraception, called withdrawal or pulling out, when the penis is withdrawn from

    the vagina prior to ejaculation
contraceptive abstinence abstaining from vaginal intercourse, with avoidance of semen entering the vagina to

    fertilize an ovum, preventing pregnancy
contraceptive implant contraceptive device that is placed subdermally, releasing etonogestrel over a 3-year

    period to prevent pregnancy
contraceptive sponge small, round sponge, with indents on one side and a loop on the other side, that releases a

    continuous flow of nonoxynol-9 spermicide
diaphragm dome-shaped silicone cup that is inserted into the vagina to cover the cervix, preventing sperm from

    reaching the uterus
dysmenorrhea very painful menstrual cramping that interferes with the person's daily living
emergency contraception (EC) form of contraception that is effective in interrupting a pregnancy before it begins

    if administered within a specific time frame after sexual intercourse
endometrial hyperplasia condition in which the endometrium of the uterus becomes very thick, causing unusual

    bleeding
external condom sheath placed on a penis or sex toy, providing both contraception and STI protection
female sterilization term used to describe a surgical procedure that permanently terminates fertility and

    pregnancy in a person with a uterus
ferning pattern cervical mucus makes when placed on a glass slide under a microscope
fertility awareness methods (FAM) methods requiring the person who is menstruating to monitor the

    menstruation cycle and fertile window and to avoid vaginal coitus intimate contact during the fertile window
internal condom soft polyurethane sheath that is inserted into the vagina for contraception and STI protection
intrauterine contraception (IUC) device (IUD) small, plastic T-shaped contraceptive device that is placed inside

    the uterus to prevent pregnancy
long-acting reversible contraception (LARC) long-lasting and easily reversible birth control, including intrauterine

    contraception devices and contraceptive implants
male sterilization term used to describe a surgical procedure that permanently blocks the small tubes in the

    scrotum that carry sperm so they cannot be ejaculated and cause pregnancy
medically induced abortion termination of pregnancy induced by medications
menstrual start method method in which the patient begins taking COC pills on the first day of their next

    menstrual cycle
mittelschmerz midcycle abdominal pain related to ovulation
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) infection of the female reproductive organs, most often occurring when

    sexually transmitted bacteria spread from the vagina to the uterus, fallopian tubes, or ovaries
perfect use effectiveness rate of effectiveness of a contraceptive method measured in clinical trial
quick start method method in which the patient begins taking COC pills on the day of the appointment because

    they have been deemed "reasonably certain" of not being pregnant due to history taking and point-of-care

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           5 · Assessments 247

    pregnancy test; with this method, a "backup method" (barrier method) is necessary for the next 7 days.
reanastomosis reconnecting of the vas deferens (or any tissue) after it has been surgically opened
spermicide cream, foam, gel, suppository, or vaginal film that acts as an adjunct therapy when used with barrier

    methods, destroying sperm by disrupting the cell membrane
spinnbarkeit cervical mucus that is more estrogen dominant, presents as clear, stretchable, and much more

    amenable to sperm mobility, occurring at ovulation
Sunday start method in which the patient is educated to begin taking COC pills on the Sunday that follows the first

    day of the next menstrual cycle
surgically induced abortion procedure in which manual dilation of the cervix occurs, followed by emptying of the

    uterine cavity using a suction curettage
tubal ligation surgical procedure for female sterilization in which the fallopian tubes are permanently blocked,

    clipped, or removed
typical use effectiveness rate of effectiveness of a contraceptive method when used in real life over a year,

    impacted by persons not following instructions for use every time
U.S. Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use (US MEC) tool developed by the Centers for Disease

    Control and Prevention to assess if a patient is eligible for a type of contraception based on medical conditions or
    previous medical conditions
unintended pregnancy unwanted or mistimed pregnancy
vaginal coitus penile-vaginal intercourse
vasectomy procedure in which a small opening is made in the scrotum to sever the vas deferens by ligation or
    cautery, preventing sperm from being ejaculated
venous thromboembolism blood clot that forms within a vein

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. One goal of Healthy People 2030 is to improve pregnancy planning and prevent unintended pregnancy. What
        is a negative outcome related to unintended pregnancy that is related to this HP goal?
           a. lost jobs related to inabilities to continue to work
           b. depression and anxiety
           c. increased BMI and unintentional weight gain
           d. increased health-care costs in the United States

    2. When the nurse is assisting a person desiring contraception, a history and physical is done. What is an
        important question the nurse should ask?
           a. What is your education level?
           b. Have you ever been pregnant?
           c. Are you married?
           d. What is your exercise routine?

    3. The nurse assesses a patient for medical eligibility for contraceptive use. What is the meaning of an MEC
        score of 1?
           a. There is no restriction for the use of the contraceptive method.
           b. There is an unacceptable health risk if the contraceptive method is used.
           c. There is a risk that outweighs the advantages of the contraceptive method.
           d. There is an advantage of using a contraceptive method that outweighs any risk.

    4. The nurse assesses a patient for medical eligibility for contraceptive use. What is the meaning of an MEC
        score of 2?
           a. There is no restriction for the use of the contraceptive method.
           b. There is an unacceptable health risk if the contraceptive method is used.
           c. There is a risk that outweighs the advantages of the contraceptive method.
           d. There is an advantage of using a contraceptive method that outweighs any risk.
248 5 · Assessments

    5. When evaluating cervical mucus, what is the quality of spinnbarkeit?
           a. elasticity
           b. amount
           c. clarity
           d. color

    6. A patient would like to use the calendar method for contraception. She has charted her menstrual cycles for
        several months. Her longest menstrual cycle was 39 days long, and her shortest period was 29 days long. The
        nurse educates the patient to avoid condomless intercourse during what range of days of the cycle?
           a. day 9 through day 19
           b. day 10 through day 15
           c. day 12 through day 16
           d. day 11 through day 28

    7. Why would FAM not be appropriate for the nurse to recommend to a perimenopausal person?
           a. At that age, people do not have intercourse on a regular basis.
           b. They are married and do not need contraception.
           c. They have irregular menstrual periods.
           d. Pregnancy is not a concern when a person is perimenopausal.

    8. A patient asks the nurse about using the basal body temperature method as contraception. What statement
        made by the patient indicates that the patient needs further teaching?
           a. "I need to take my temperature before I even sit up in bed."
           b. "A rise of 0.4° F above my baseline temperatures for 3 days indicates it is safe to have condomless
                sex."
           c. "I need to use a special thermometer to take my basal body temperature."
           d. "I know I am about to ovulate when my temperature rises at least 0.4° F."

    9. The nurse provides counseling on coitus interruptus. What important counseling should be included?
           a. The partners must communicate well to use this method.
           b. This method is 100 percent effective because semen does not enter the vagina.
           c. BBT must be used with this method.
           d. All persons are able to control ejaculate in time to withdraw.

  10. What is contraceptive abstinence?
           a. mutual masturbation
           b. individual masturbation
           c. oral stimulation of the genitals
           d. avoiding penis-in-vagina intercourse

  11. What is an advantage of the cervical cap over the diaphragm?
           a. a lower failure rate
           b. its ease of insertion
           c. that it can remain in place for 48 hours
           d. that spermicide is not needed

  12. What is an advantage of the internal condom?
           a. It can be used by those who have a latex allergy.
           b. It can be used for repeated acts of intercourse.
           c. It has a lower failure rate than external condoms.
           d. It can be used for pleasure purposes.

  13. A patient calls and says she used her diaphragm on Saturday night at 8:00 p.m., again on Sunday morning at

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        5 · Assessments 249

      2:00 a.m., and again at 8:00 a.m. She is wondering when she can safely remove it while still having effective
      contraception. What is the nurse's best response?

         a. 10:00 a.m. Sunday
         b. 2:00 p.m. Sunday
         c. 10:00 p.m. Sunday
         d. 8:00 a.m. Monday

14. What must instructions for use of nonoxynol-9 spermicide include?
         a. Nononxynol-9 used with barrier methods increases their efficacy.
         b. When spermicide is used with condoms, it will further decrease the risk of STIs.
         c. Remove excess spermicide from the vagina within 6 hours to reduce vaginal irritation.
         d. Place the spermicide close to the opening of the vagina for maximal effectiveness.

15. A patient has had four vaginal deliveries. What barrier contraceptive method's efficacy is affected by this
      history?
         a. internal condom
         b. external condom
         c. cervical cap
         d. contraceptive gel

16. How does estrogen work in COC pills?
         a. inhibits ovulation through suppression of LH hormone
         b. provides most of the contraceptive effect of the COC
         c. stabilizes the endometrium for less unscheduled bleeding
         d. inhibits sperm penetration by thickening cervical mucus

17. Which is a disadvantage of the progesterone-only contraception pill?
         a. Side effects could be increased for persons who are underweight.
         b. There could be a decrease in bone mineral density over time.
         c. They may cause irregular bleeding and spotting.
         d. Return to fertility after discontinuing the pill may take several months.

18. An adolescent patient calls the office and asks to speak with the nurse. The patient cannot remember where
      she can place her contraceptive patch. What area of the body should the nurse tell her to avoid?
         a. breasts
         b. abdomen
         c. buttocks
         d. arm

19. The nurse is discussing contraceptive options with a patient who states they want to become pregnant in 1
      year. Which contraception choice would be appropriate for them? Select all that apply.
         a. progestin-only contraceptive injections like DMPA
         b. progestin-only oral contraceptive pills
         c. fertility awareness methods
         d. COCs

20. The patient asks the nurse when her Nexplanon can be inserted. How does the nurse respond?
         a. after the delivery of your placenta
         b. only during your period
         c. while you are in labor
         d. during the delivery

21. A patient who has an LNG-IUC in place calls the office and states she just took a pregnancy test, and it is
250 5 · Assessments

        positive. She comes in for a visit, and the nurse does another pregnancy test, which is positive. What does the
        nurse know that the clinician will inform the patient regarding the IUC?

           a. Removing the IUC may increase the chance of infertility.
           b. The fetus is at risk for congenital defects.
           c. The IUC needs to be removed regardless of the plans for this pregnancy.
           d. There is no risk to the fetus if the IUC is left in place.

  22. What is the LNG-IUC mechanism of action?
           a. disruption of fertilization of the egg and sperm
           b. termination of a pregnancy
           c. creation of a hostile uterine environment
           d. thickening cervical mucus, atrophic endometrium

  23. What is one difference between the copper IUC and the LNG-IUC?
           a. efficacy
           b. placement in the uterus
           c. presence of a normal period
           d. shape

  24. What education does the nurse provide to a person taking Ella for emergency contraception?
           a. abstain from sex or use a barrier method for 5 days and then restart their COCs
           b. abstain from sex or use a barrier method until their menses occur and then restart their COCs
           c. restart their COCs the next day; no backup method is needed
           d. restart their COCs the next day and use a backup method for 7 days

  25. A patient calls the clinic Monday morning. She had condomless sex Friday night and is interested in
        emergency contraception. What should the nurse tell this patient?
           a. Emergency contraception pills are very effective for medically induced abortions early in pregnancy.
           b. If she is not midcycle when she had sex, she does not need emergency contraception.
           c. It is too late for her to use emergency contraceptive pills, but she can come in for placement of a
                copper IUD.
           d. She can use emergency contraceptive pills, even if she has had other condomless sex since the Friday
                night event.

  26. What emergency contraception has the best efficacy for prevention of pregnancy?
           a. Plan B
           b. Yuzpe
           c. copper IUC
           d. progesterone-only EC

  27. The nurse provides education regarding female sterilization. What important information is provided?
           a. "You will need to wait 3 months before you are sterile."
           b. "You can have this procedure in the hospital after you give birth."
           c. "Fertilization will affect your milk supply for breast-feeding."
           d. "Tubal ligation is reversible."

  28. The nurse provides education regarding male sterilization. What important information is provided?
           a. "Many people have vasectomies reversed."
           b. "You will need to return to the office to check for sperm in your ejaculate."
           c. "You will be sterile after 3 months."
           d. "Vasectomy consent forms must have both partners' consent."

  29. The nurse is providing education on a medical abortion. How would she describe the action of the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           5 · Assessments 251

        medications?
           a. Medications thicken the lining of the uterus and decrease uterine contractions.
           b. Medications stop the fetal heart and induce contractions.
           c. Medications soften the cervix, cause uterine lining necrosis, and induce contractions.
           d. Medications thicken the cervix and the uterine lining.

  30. The nurse provides education to the person undergoing a surgical abortion. What response by the person
        shows an understanding of the education?
           a. "It's good I won't have any pain after the procedure."
           b. "I think I'm sure about my decision."
           c. "I should call if I soak a pad in 2 hours."
           d. "I should follow up for contraception counseling at my annual exam in 6 months."

  31. A nurse is giving post-op teaching to a person after a surgical abortion. What education should be provided?
           a. Report bleeding that is heavy, soaks more than two pads per hour for 2 hours.
           b. You can resume vaginal coitus the next day.
           c. You do not need to return to the clinic for follow-up.
           d. You should use tampons if your bleeding is heavy.

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. When performing a history and physical on a person desiring contraception, what information is important to
        assess?

    2. Discuss how helping a patient pick an appropriate method of contraception is an important part of nursing.

    3. What questions should the nurse ask prior to counseling about contraceptive methods?

    4. Compare the external condom to the internal condom.

    5. What population of patients are good candidates for barrier methods of contraception?

    6. Explain the difference between the NuvaRing and Annovera.

    7. Explain the acronym ACHES regarding combined hormone contraceptives.

    8. List the mechanism of action of the copper-containing IUC.

    9. Explain the mechanism of action for the contraceptive implant.

  10. What warning signs should the nurse explain to the person choosing an estrogen and progesterone EC, such
        as Yuzpe?

  11. What is the mechanism of action of Plan B?

Reflection Questions

    1. How can the nurse develop trust with the person prior to providing contraceptive counseling?

    2. What education must the nurse provide a lactating person who is interested in using the lactational
        amenorrhea method as their only form of contraception?

    3. An adolescent patient is insistent about using abstinence as their form of birth control. What education must
        the nurse provide very clearly?

    4. What education should the nurse provide to someone who just received a diaphragm?

    5. You are on the phone with a patient who tells you that she has a 6-month-old baby at home whom she is
        breast-feeding exclusively. She would like to start thinking about contraceptive options. Before she comes in
        to see the clinician, she wants to know what her options might be to take while breast-feeding so that she can
        do some research on her own. She has a BMI of 35 (obese) and is a current smoker with a history of
        migraines. What do you tell her? And why?
252 5 · Assessments

    6. What patient education would you provide to someone who is getting an IUC placed?

    7. What education would you provide to a patient who just had a Nexplanon implant placed?

    8. Discuss how emergency contraception works.

    9. Explain the instructions the nurse should give to a patient over the phone who calls and says they got Plan B
        over the counter, but they are unsure how to use it.

  10. Describe the postprocedure after-care instructions the nurse provides after a vasectomy.

  11. Describe the postprocedure after-care instructions the nurse provides after a tubal ligation.

  12. What is the role of the nurse in an induced abortion?

What Should the Nurse Do?

Farah is a 28-year-old female who has presented to the women's health clinic seeking contraception. During the
history and physical examination, Farah reports a history of irregular menstrual cycles and expresses concerns
about heavy flow and discomfort during her periods. Her medical history includes a diagnosis of polycystic ovary
syndrome (PCOS) in her early 20s. Farah does not have any significant psychiatric history, and her vital signs,
including blood pressure, heart rate, and body mass index (BMI), fall within normal ranges. She is here to explore
contraception options that can help manage her menstrual symptoms and provide effective birth control.

    1. What specific questions should the nurse ask Farah during the history and physical examination to gather
        relevant information about her reproductive history and health, considering her concerns about irregular
        menstrual cycles and discomfort during periods?

    2. How can the nurse ensure that Farah fully understands the information provided during contraception
        counseling and feels empowered to make an informed decision about the most suitable contraceptive
        method for her?

    3. How can the nurse use the U.S. Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use (US MEC) to assess Farah's
        eligibility for different contraceptive methods based on her medical history, including the diagnosis of
        polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)?

Minh is a 24-year-old male who visits the local sexual health clinic seeking information on contraception methods.
His girlfriend is working and unable to attend the clinic appointment. Minh is in a committed relationship and is
exploring different options with his partner to prevent unintended pregnancies. During the consultation, Minh
explains that his partner has expressed concerns about hormonal methods and is interested in nonhormonal and
natural alternatives. They are curious about fertility awareness methods and want to understand the differences
between them. Minh also inquires about coitus interruptus as a potential method and expresses an understanding
of the abstinence method. His medical history is unremarkable, and vital signs fall within normal ranges. He states
his partner is healthy and has never had any problems with her menstrual cycle.

    4. They are interested in nonhormonal alternatives and specifically in fertility awareness methods. Compare and
        contrast at least three fertility awareness methods mentioned in the chapter. How might their effectiveness
        differ, and what considerations should Minh and his partner be aware of when choosing one?

    5. Minh is curious about coitus interruptus as a potential method. Explain coitus interruptus, its mechanism of
        action, and its effectiveness. What key information should the nurse provide to Minh if he is considering this
        method?

    6. Minh expresses an understanding of the abstinence method. Describe contraceptive abstinence and sexual
        abstinence. What considerations should the nurse keep in mind when discussing abstinence with Minh, and
        how can the nurse empower Minh in making informed decisions?

    7. Given the couple's concerns about hormonal methods, discuss how the nurse can guide Minh in explaining to
        his partner the differences between fertility awareness methods, coitus interruptus, and abstinence. What
        factors should the couple consider in aligning the chosen method with their preferences and lifestyle?

Anya is a 28-year-old female who presents at the local community health clinic seeking guidance on contraception
methods. Anya is in a long-term relationship and is exploring barrier methods for family planning. She mentions
concerns about hormonal methods due to potential side effects and is specifically interested in comparing and
contrasting different barrier options. Anya has a history of mild latex allergies. She reports regular menstrual cycles,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           5 · Assessments 253

with no significant pelvic pain or discomfort. Anya has a history of anxiety but is not currently on any psychiatric
medications. Vital signs are stable.

    8. Compare and contrast external condoms, internal condoms, and diaphragms in terms of their effectiveness,
        cost, and suitability for someone with latex allergies. What considerations should Anya keep in mind when
        choosing a barrier method?

    9. Given Anya's latex allergy, explore and discuss alternative materials for barrier methods. How might the nurse
        guide Anya in selecting a suitable non-latex option based on her preferences and needs?

  10. Discuss the populations for whom barrier methods are particularly beneficial. How might the nurse tailor
        contraceptive counseling for LGBTQIA+ persons, considering the diversity within this population?

Rebecca, a 23-year-old female, arrives at the women's health clinic seeking guidance on contraceptive options. She
is in a committed relationship and is exploring suitable hormonal contraceptive methods. Rebecca provides more
details about her menstrual history, mentioning that her cycles are irregular, with variations in the length and flow.
She expresses concerns about heavy menstrual bleeding, describing instances of needing to change sanitary
products frequently and experiencing discomfort associated with dysmenorrhea. During the consultation, Rebecca
discloses that her periods often last longer than a week, causing disruptions to her work and social activities. She
also notes that the dysmenorrhea is occasionally severe, affecting her overall well-being. Rebecca insists that she
maintains a consistent exercise routine and has a balanced diet. She is a nonsmoker, consumes alcohol
occasionally, is not currently taking any medications, has no known allergies, and has never been pregnant.

  11. Considering Rebecca's irregular menstrual cycles, how might the use of combined hormonal contraceptives
        (COCs) benefit her in addition to contraception? What are the potential advantages and disadvantages of
        COCs in managing her irregular bleeding and dysmenorrhea symptoms?

  12. Given Rebecca's concerns about heavy menstrual bleeding and the disruptions it causes, discuss alternative
        hormonal contraceptive options, such as the contraceptive patch or vaginal ring. What are the similarities and
        differences between these methods, and how might they address Rebecca's specific concerns?

  13. Discuss the benefits and considerations of progestin-only hormonal methods, such as the mini-pill or Depo-
        Provera, for someone in Rebecca's situation. How might these methods impact her menstrual patterns and
        overall contraceptive experience?

  14. Discuss the benefits and drawbacks of combined vaginal hormonal methods, like NuvaRing or Annovera, for
        Rebecca. Compare their ease of use, effectiveness, and impact on irregular bleeding and dysmenorrhea in
        relation to other hormonal contraceptives.

Clara is a 30-year-old female who visits the women's health clinic seeking information on long-acting reversible
contraception (LARC) options. Clara is interested in exploring reliable contraceptive methods that offer extended
coverage without daily maintenance. In discussing her contraceptive needs further, Clara reveals that her irregular
menstrual cycles have been a source of frustration, causing occasional disruptions to her daily activities. She
expresses concerns about unpredictable bleeding patterns and severe dysmenorrhea during her periods, impacting
her overall quality of life. Clara, otherwise healthy, maintains an active lifestyle and is not currently taking any
medications.

  15. Clara is considering intrauterine contraception and wants to understand her options. Compare the
        mechanisms of action, duration of effectiveness, and potential side effects of LNG-IUCs (e.g., Mirena) and
        copper-containing IUCs (e.g., Paragard). How might the differences in these devices align with Clara's
        contraceptive needs and concerns about irregular bleeding?

  16. Clara is also considering contraceptive implants. Compare the mechanism of action, duration of effectiveness,
        and potential side effects of Nexplanon with those of intrauterine contraception devices. How might these
        differences influence Clara's decision-making process, given her concerns about menstrual irregularities?

  17. Discuss the major benefits and complications associated with LARCs, emphasizing how these align with
        Clara's desire for reliable contraception without daily maintenance and concerns about menstrual
        disruptions.

Sofia is a 19-year-old female who arrives at the urgent care clinic seeking guidance on emergency contraception
options. Sofia reports having unprotected intercourse with her partner 2 days ago and is concerned about the risk of
unintended pregnancy. She describes her menstrual history, mentioning that her last menstrual period occurred
approximately 14 days ago, and she is currently at the midpoint of her menstrual cycle. Sofia provides additional
details about her menstrual regularity, expressing that her cycles are typically irregular, varying between 30 and 40
254 5 · Assessments

days. She notes occasional dysmenorrhea but denies any other gynecologic issues. Sofia has a history of migraine
headaches and mentions that she occasionally takes over-the-counter pain relievers to manage them. She denies
any psychiatric history, allergies, or chronic medical conditions. Sofia's vital signs, including blood pressure, heart
rate, respiratory rate, and temperature, fall within normal ranges. She reports no current use of contraception and
emphasizes her immediate concern about potential pregnancy.

  18. Compare Plan B/Plan B One-Step, Ella, and the Paragard IUC in terms of mechanism, effectiveness, and
        accessibility. Considering Sofia's situation, discuss the pros and cons of each option.

  19. As a nurse, educate Sofia on emergency contraception, including effectiveness time frame, side effects, and
        follow-up. How would you ensure Sofia feels supported and empowered in her decision making?

  20. Sofia mentions dysmenorrhea and migraines. How might her medical history influence emergency
        contraception choice? What guidance would you give regarding her irregular cycles, and how might it impact
        the choice of emergency contraception?

Daniel is a 35-year-old male residing in a suburban neighborhood, who presents at the urology clinic for a
consultation on permanent sterilization options. Daniel works as a software engineer and has been married to his
wife, Sarah, for 7 years. They have two children, a 6-year-old daughter named Emma and a 4-year-old son named
Liam. Daniel and Sarah have recently concluded that their family is complete, prompting their exploration of long-
term contraceptive solutions. Daniel provides additional details about his health during the consultation. He
mentions that he occasionally experiences seasonal allergies, especially during spring, which he manages with over-
the-counter antihistamines. He has a history of a sports-related ankle sprain, which was treated conservatively with
rest and physical therapy. Otherwise, Daniel maintains an active lifestyle and enjoys participating in recreational
soccer games on weekends. Daniel, a non-smoker, reports occasional social alcohol consumption, typically during
social gatherings or celebrations. Daniel expresses a keen interest in understanding the male sterilization
procedures, emphasizing the importance of learning about their efficacy and potential reversibility.

  21. Daniel's wife, Sarah, is considering female sterilization. Discuss the historical context of Essure and why it
        was withdrawn from the market. What alternative procedure, mentioned in the chapter, is more common and
        considered safer for females? How does the efficacy of female sterilization compare to that of male
        sterilization?

  22. Compare the vasectomy procedure to female tubal ligation. What precautions should Daniel take after
        vasectomy, and why is a follow-up sperm count crucial? How does the efficacy of vasectomy compare to that
        of female sterilization?

  23. Discuss the informed consent process for both female sterilization (tubal ligation) and male sterilization
        (vasectomy). How does the permanence of these procedures influence the counseling provided by health-
        care providers?

Aino is a 28-year-old female who arrives at the women's health clinic seeking guidance on options for induced
abortion. Aino has been experiencing unintended pregnancy symptoms, including nausea, breast tenderness, and
missed menstrual periods. She has a medical history of asthma, managed with an albuterol inhaler as needed, and
reports no significant psychiatric issues. Aino, accompanied by her supportive partner, expresses concern about the
emotional and physical aspects of induced abortion. During the initial assessment, Aino's vital signs are within
normal ranges, with a blood pressure of 110/70 mm Hg, heart rate of 78 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18
breaths per minute, and normal body temperature.

  24. Aino is considering a medically induced abortion. Explain the medications involved in this process and their
        mechanisms of action. What are the eligibility criteria for a medically induced abortion, and what
        complications or side effects should the nurse educate Aino about?

  25. If Aino exceeds the gestational limit for a medically induced abortion, she may opt for a surgically induced
        abortion. Describe the two types of surgical abortion methods discussed in the chapter. What complications
        might arise from a surgical abortion, and how does gestational age impact the choice between methods?

  26. What key information should the nurse provide during the pre-abortion education session for both medical
        and surgical options? How can the nurse support Aino emotionally and ensure her informed decision-making
        process?

  27. After the abortion procedure, what specific postprocedure education should the nurse provide to Aino? How
        can the nurse address Aino's concerns and potential complications? What are the recommended follow-up
        steps, and why is contraception counseling essential in the postabortion period?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              5 · References 255

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. A 24-year-old patient desiring a contraceptive method is in clinic. This will be the first contraceptive method
        used besides external condom use. The partner is at the clinic and is supportive. The nurse begins the
        reproductive history assessment.

        What questions does the nurse ask? Why?

    2. Develop a patient handout providing a two- to three-sentence description of each method of FAM.

    3. Construct a pamphlet discussing patient education for the vaginal ring.

    4. Develop a patient handout comparing tubal ligation and vasectomy.

References

Alberta Health Services. (2024). Lactation amenorrhea (LAM). Section 5, Bullets 1-4, https://myhealth.alberta.ca/
    sexual-reproductive-health/birth-control/natural-methods/lactation-amenorrhea

Allen, R. H. (2024). Combined estrogen-progestin oral contraceptives: Patient selection, counseling, and use.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/combined-estrogen-progestin-oral-contraceptives-patient-selection-
    counseling-and-use

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2013). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 135: Second trimester
   abortion. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 121(6), 1394-1406. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    01.AOG.0000431056.79334.cc.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2015). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 152: Emergency
   contraception. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 126(3):e1-e11. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/
    practice-bulletin/articles/2015/09/emergency-contraception

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 225: Medication abortion
   up to 70 days of gestation. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 136(4), e31-e47. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000004082

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021). ACOG Committee Opinion No. 827: Access to
   postpartum sterilization. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 137(6), e169-e176. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000004381

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022a, February). Patient-centered contraceptive
   counseling. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 139(2), 350-353.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022b, August). Abortion care. https://www.acog.org/
    womens-health/faqs/induced-abortion

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022c, August). Fertility awareness-based methods of family
   planning. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/Fertility-Awareness-Based-Methods-of-Family-
    Planning?utm_source=redirect&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=otn

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023a, January). Progestin-only hormonal birth control: Pill
   and injection. FAQ186. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/progestin-only-hormonal-birth-control-pill-
    and-injection

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023b). Combined hormonal birth control: Pill, patch, and
    ring. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/combined-hormonal-birth-control-pill-patch-ring

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023c). Sterilization for women and men.
    https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/sterilization-for-women-and-men

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2024). Long-acting reversible contraception (LARC):
   Intrauterine device (IUD) and implant, FAQ. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 672, 1-9. https://www.acog.org/womens-
    health/faqs/long-acting-reversible-contraception-iud-and-implant
256 5 · References

American Nurses Association. (2015). Code of ethics for nurses with interpretive statements.
    https://www.nursingworld.org/practice-policy/nursing-excellence/ethics/code-of-ethics-for-nurses/

Ayala-Ramirez, M., Grewe, M. E., Kaiser, J., Kennedy, E., Winn, M., & Urrutia, R. P. (2023). Understanding the
   perspective of women who use the Billings Ovulation Method®: A focus group study. BMC Women's Health, 23(1),
    251. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12905-023-02398-w

Bapolisi, W. A., Makelele, J., Ferrari, G., Kono-Tange, L., Bisimwa, G., Schindler, C., & Merten, S. (2024). Engaging
    men in women's empowerment: Impact of a complex gender transformative intervention on household socio-
   economic and health outcomes in the eastern democratic republic of the Congo using a longitudinal survey. BMC
   Public Health, 24(1), 443. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-024-17717-5

Bayer Pharmaceuticals. (2023). Bayer: Mirena levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system 52 mg.

Bedsider. (2023). Was it rape? Thinking about consent and unwanted sex. https://www.bedsider.org/features/
    1080-was-it-rape-thinking-about-consent-and-unwanted-sex

Birth control patch. (2023, February). Mayo Clinic. https://www.mayoclinic.org/tests-procedures/birth-control-
    patch/about/pac-20384553

Brown, J., & Shvartsman, K. (2023). Contraception & family planning. In M. A. Papadakis, S. J. McPhee, M. W.
   Rabow, & K. R. McQuaid (Eds.), Current medical diagnosis and treatment 2023. McGraw Hill.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016). Reproductive health: US medical eligibility criteria for
   contraceptive use, 2016. https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/contraception/mmwr/mec/summary.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2017). National Center for Health Statistics: Key statistics from the
   National Survey of Family Growth-V listing. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nsfg/key_statistics/v.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021). Pelvic inflammatory disease. Sexually Transmitted Infections
   Guidelines, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-guidelines/pid.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022, February). Condom effectiveness. https://www.cdc.gov/
    condomeffectiveness/external-condom-use.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023a, March 27). Reproductive health: Effectiveness of family
   planning methods (Figure). https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/contraception/mmwr/mec/
    intro.html#Figure

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023b, March 27). Reproductive health: Lactational amenorrhea
   method. https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/contraception/mmwr/mec/appendixg.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023c, April). Sexually Transmitted Infections Treatment Guidelines,
   2021: Primary prevention methods. https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-guidelines/clinical-
    primary.htm#anchor_1613585941545

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023d, May). Contraception. https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/
    contraception/index.htm

Cleveland Clinic Medical Professionals. (2022). Birth control sponge. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/articles/
    24324-birth-control-sponge

Coleman, P. K. (2018). Negative abortion experiences: Predictors and development of the post-abortion
   psychological and relational adjustment scale. Issues in Law and Medicine, 33(2), 133-162.

Curtis, K. M., Tepper, N. K., Jatlaoui, T. C., Berry-Bibee, E., Horton, L. G., Zapata, L. B., Simmons, K. B., Pagano, H. P.,
   Jamieson, D. J., Whiteman, M. K. (2016). U.S. medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use. Morbidity and
   Mortality Weekly Report Recommendations and Reports, 65(3), 1-103.

Daniels, K., & Abma, J. C. (2020, October). NCHS Data Brief No. 388: Current contraceptive status among women
   aged 15-49: United States, 2017-2019. In National Survey of Family Growth. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
    products/index.htm

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              5 · References 257

Diaphragm. (2021). National Health Service. https://www.nhsinform.scot/healthy-living/contraception/diaphragm

Dickey, R. P., & Seymour, M. L. (2021). Managing contraceptive pill patients (17th ed.). Emis Medical Publishing.

Espey, E., & Hofler, L. (2017). Long-acting reversible contraception: Implants and intrauterine devices. Obstetrics &
   Gynecology, 130(5), 251-269.

Garbett, A. (2023). 8 billion lives, infinite possibilities: The case for rights and choices. United Nations Population
    Fund. https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/swop23/SWOP2023-ENGLISH-230329-web.pdf

Gragnolati, A. (2022) Is the Yuzpe method a safe and effective form of emergency contraception? GoodRx Health.
    https://www.goodrx.com/conditions/emergency-contraceptive/yuzpe-method

Hatcher, R. A. (2018). Contraceptive technology (21st ed.). Managing Contraception, LLC.

Jacobson, J. D., Dugdale, D. C., & Conaway, B. (2022, April 19). Tubal ligation--discharge. Medline Plus.
    https://medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/000288.htm

Jakimiuk, A. J., Crosignani, P. G., Chernev, T., Prilepskaya, V., Bergmans, P., Von Poncet, M., Marelli, S., & Lee, E.J.
    High levels of women's satisfaction and compliance with transdermal contraception: results from a European
   multinational, 6-month study. Gynecological endocrinology: the official journal of the International Society of
   Gynecological Endocrinology, 27(10), 849-856. https://doi.org/10.3109/09513590.2010.538095

KFF. (2020, September 9). Women's health policy: Intrauterine devices (IUDs): Access for women in the US.
    https://www.kff.org/womens-health-policy/fact-sheet/intrauterine-devices-iuds-access-for-women-in-the-u-s/

Killick, S. R., Leary, C., Trussell, J., & Guthrie, K. A. (2011, March). Sperm content of pre-ejaculatory fluid. Human
   Fertility (Cambridge, England), 14(1):48-52. https://doi.org/10.3109/14647273.2010.520798. Epub 2010 Dec
    15.

Kopp Kallner, H. (2018). Benefits of reversible contraception [version 1; referees: 3 approved]. In F1000Research
    (Vol. 7). F1000 Research. https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.14370.1

Lindberg, L. D., Firestein, L., & Beavin, C. (2021). Trends in U.S. adolescent sexual behavior and contraceptive use,
   2006-2019. Contraception: X, 3, 100064. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conx.2021.100064

Mills, K., Marchand, G., Sainz, K., Azadi, A., Ware, K., Vallejo, J., Anderson, S., King, A., Osborn, A., Ruther, S., Brazil,
    G., Cieminski, K., Hopewell, S., Rials, L., & Klipp, A. (2021). Salpingectomy vs tubal ligation for sterilization: A
   systematic review and meta-analysis. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 224(3), 258-265.e4.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AJOG.2020.09.011

Namasivayam, A., Schluter, P. J., Namutamba, S., & Lovell, S. (2022). Understanding the contextual and cultural
   influences on women's modern contraceptive use in East Uganda: A qualitative study. PLOS Global Public Health,
   2(8), e000055. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0000545

National Health Service. (2020, December). Diaphragm or cap. https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/contraception/
    contraceptive-diaphragm-or-cap/

Natural family planning (fertility awareness). (2022, December). National Health Service Inform.
    https://www.nhsinform.scot/healthy-living/contraception/natural-family-planning-fertility-awareness

Nguyen, T., Blum, J., Raghavan, S., Nguyen, T., Dabash, R., Diop, A., & Winikoff, B. (2011). Comparing two early
   medical abortion regimens: mifepristone + misoprostol alone. Contraception, 83(5), 410-417.

Nwadike, V. R. (2021a, March 24). Why ovulation pain shouldn't be ignored. Healthline. https://www.healthline.com/
    health/pregnancy/ovulation-pain

Nwadike, V. R. (2021b, September 28). The symptothermal method. Healthline. https://www.healthline.com/health/
    birth-control/symptothermal-method

Osuga, Y., Shirasu, K., Tsushima, R., & Ishitani, K. (2023). Short-term efficacy and safety of early medical abortion in
   Japan: A multicenter prospective study. Reproductive Medical Biology, 22(1).
258 5 · References

Pavlovic, J., & Sheikh, H. (2022). Migraine and contraceptives. American Headache Society.
    https://americanheadachesociety.org/news/migraine-contraceptives/

Planned Parenthood. (n.d.-a). How do I buy internal condoms? https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/birth-
    control/internal-condom/how-do-i-buy-internal-condoms

Planned Parenthood. (n.d.-b). How effective is pulling out? https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/birth-control/
    withdrawal-pull-out-method/how-effective-is-withdrawal-method-pulling-out

Qian, J., Pan, P., Wu, M., Zheng, Q., Sun, S., Liu, L., Sun, Y., & Yu, X. (2021). The experiences of nurses and midwives
   who provide surgical abortion care: A qualitative systematic review. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 77(9),
    3644-3656. https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.14853

Ross, A., & Shoff, H. W. (2023). Toxic shock syndrome StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK459345/

Rushlow, A., & Cassoobhoy, M. (reviewer). (2023). Birth control methods and the risk of blood clots. WebMD.
    https://www.webmd.com/sex/birth-control/birth-control-methods-blood-clot-risk

Santa Maria, D., Guilamo-Ramos, V., Jemmott, L. S., Derouin, A., & Villarruel, A. (2017). Nurses on the front lines:
   Improving adolescent sexual and reproductive health across health care settings. American Journal of Nursing,
   117(1), 42-51. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.NAJ.0000511566.12446.45

Sarder, A., Islam, S. M. S., Maniruzzaman, Talukder, A., & Ahammed, B. (2021). Prevalence of unintended pregnancy
   and its associated factors: Evidence from six south Asian countries. PloS One, 16(2), e0245923. https://doi.org/
    10.1371/journal.pone.0245923

Savage, C., & Belluck, P. (2023, April 11). Judge's ruling against abortion pill is filled with activists' language. New
   York Times

Schuiling, K., & Likis, F. E. (2016). Women's gynecologic health (3rd ed.). Jones & Bartlett.

Solanke, B. L., Banjo, O. O., Oyinloye, B. O., & Asa, S. S. (2018). Maternal grand multiparity and intention to use
   modern contraceptives in Nigeria. BMC Public Health, 18(1), 1207-1207. https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s12889-018-6130-1

Steinberg, J., & Lynch, S. E. (2021). Lactic acid, citric acid, and potassium bitartrate (Phexxi) vaginal gel for
   contraception. American Family Physician, 103(10), 628-629. https://www.aafp.org/pubs/afp/issues/2021/
    0515/p628.html

Today vaginal contraceptive-nonoxynol-9 sponge. (2018). Mayer Laboratories, Inc. https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/
    dailymed/fda/fdaDrugXsl.cfm?setid=6b4e54d7-6ba8-4400-bd52-75d112e6fe50&type=display

Turner, J. V. (2021). Misrepresentation of contraceptive effectiveness rates for fertility awareness methods of family
   planning. The Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Research, 47(7), 2271-2277. https://doi.org/10.1111/
    jog.14593

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2023). Healthy People 2030: Family Planning. https://health.gov/
    healthypeople/objectives-and-data/browse-objectives/family-planning

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2022). Essure permanent birth control. https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/
    implants-and-prosthetics/essure-permanent-birth-control

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2023, March 31). Problems reported with Essure. https://www.fda.gov/medical-
    devices/essure-permanent-birth-control/problems-reported-essure

Vallerand, A. H., & Sanoski, C. A. (2022). Davis's drug guide (18th ed.). F.A. Davis.

Virro, J. J., Besinque, K., Carney, C. E., Gross, D., Bernick, B., & Mirkin, S. (2020). Long-lasting, patient-controlled,
   procedure-free contraception: A review of Annovera with a pharmacist perspective. Pharmacy (Basel,
   Switzerland), 8(3), 156. https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmacy8030156

Weis, W., & Festin, M. (2020). Implementation and scale-up of the standard days method of family planning: A

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              5 · References 259

   landscape analysis. Global Health Science and Practice, 8(1), 114-124. https://doi.org/10.9745/GHSP-
    D-19-00287

World Health Organization. (2023a, June). Adolescent pregnancy. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
    detail/adolescent-pregnancy

World Health Organization. (2023b, July). Global sexually transmitted infections programme: Condoms.
    https://www.who.int/teams/global-hiv-hepatitis-and-stis-programmes/stis/prevention/condoms

World Health Organization. (2023c). Maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health and ageing.
    https://platform.who.int/data/maternal-newborn-child-adolescent-ageing

World Health Organization. (2023d). Trends in maternal mortality 2000 to 2020: Estimates by WHO, UNICEF,
   UNFPA, World Bank Group and UNDESA/Population Division. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/
    9789240068759

Xu, M., Zhau, M., Li, R. H. W., Lin, Z., Chung, J. P. W., Li, T. C., Lee, T.-L., Chan, D. Y. L. Effects of nonoxynol-9 (n-9) on
   sperm functions: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Reproduction and Fertility, 3(1), R19-R33.
    https://doi.org/10.1530%2FRAF-21-0024

Zeitler, M., & Rayala, B. (2021). Outpatient vasectomy: Safe, reliable, and cost-effective. Primary Care: Clinics in
   Office Practice, 48(4), 613-625. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.POP.2021.08.001

Zieman, M., Hatcher, R. A., Allen, A. Z. (2015). Managing Contraception. Ardnet Media, Inc.
260 5 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 6

Structural and Tissue Disorders of the
Reproductive System

FIGURE 6.1 Nursing Care and Education Nurses play an important role in providing education and support to persons with gynecologic
conditions throughout their lifespan. The actions of the nurse increase health literacy and decrease morbidity and mortality for their
patients. (credit: U.S. Navy photo by Deidre Smith, Naval Hospital/Tricare Newsroom, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
6.1 Functional Disorders
6.2 Structural Disorders
6.3 Benign Growths
6.4 Malignant Neoplasms
INTRODUCTION The nurse is working in the private practice of a health-care provider who specializes in obstetrics
and gynecology. After greeting the patient, a 38-year-old person assigned female at birth (AFAB) who identifies as
female, the nurse asks why she is seeking care. She replies that she has always had menstrual cramps, but they've
been significantly worse lately, even causing her to frequently miss work and social outings. These cramps often last
at least 2 to 3 days every menstrual cycle, often requiring ibuprofen (Motrin), 600 mg three to four times a day, to
manage. She also uses hot water bottles and gentle exercise, neither of which provides much relief. Upon further
assessment, the patient appears very distressed about the pain and how it affects her life. The nurse's thorough
assessment of the patient's symptoms is important in determining if the symptoms fall within the expected range or
if another cause like a structural or tissue disorder is present.
262  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     6.1 Functional Disorders

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the different disorders, treatment, and nursing interventions affecting menstruation
         · Explain the disorders, treatment, and nursing interventions associated with menopause
         · Describe the pathophysiology, symptoms, treatment, and nursing interventions associated with

             polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
         · Describe the symptoms, treatment, and nursing interventions associated with endometriosis
         · Explain the risk factors, treatment, and patient education associated with chronic pelvic pain

     This module focuses on key functional reproductive health disorders that can affect any person AFAB at some point
     in their life. The underlying mechanisms, clinical manifestations, diagnostic approaches, and evidence-based
     medical and nursing interventions for these conditions will be discussed. Menstrual abnormalities, the transitional
     phases of perimenopause and menopause, the complexities of endometriosis and polycystic ovary syndrome
     (PCOS), and the multidimensional aspects of chronic pelvic pain will also be reviewed. Nurses provide education on
     these conditions and how they relate to their patients' pain. Nurses also provide holistic care and support to persons
     experiencing functional reproductive health issues.

     Menstrual Disorders

     The average age for menarche in the United States is approximately 12 years of age (Gruber & Modan-Moses, 2021).
     A normal menstrual cycle is approximately 21 to 34 days in length, with the menses lasting less than 7 days
     (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists [ACOG], 2015). Abnormal menstrual cycles can occur for
     many reasons. Understanding menstrual disorders is important, as these disorders can significantly impact a
     person's physical and emotional well-being. Menstrual disorders encompass a wide range of conditions that affect
     the regularity, intensity, and duration of the menstrual cycle. From heavy or prolonged menstrual bleeding to
     irregular or absent periods, these disorders can present complex challenges for both patients and health-care
     providers.

     Amenorrhea
     The absence of menstruation in people who have ovaries and a uterus, who are of reproductive age, is called
     amenorrhea. There are two types of amenorrhea: primary and secondary amenorrhea. The absence of menarche by
     the age of 16 years is called primary amenorrhea, and the absence of menstruation for a duration of three or more
     consecutive cycles in people who reported previously experiencing regular menstrual cycles secondary
     amenorrhea (Nawaz & Rogol, 2022). Table 6.1 lists the most common causes of primary and secondary
     amenorrhea.

     Primary Amenorrhea                                              Secondary Amenorrhea

     · pregnancy                                                     · pregnancy
     · endocrine tumors or lesions                                   · weight loss
     · congenital abnormalities (Turner syndrome)                    · anovulation
     · hypogonadotropic hypogonadism                                 · pituitary or ovarian tumors
                                                                     · hormonal abnormalities like Cushing syndrome

          TABLE 6.1 Causes of Amenorrhea (Nawaz & Rogol, 2022)

     In addition to the absence of menstrual bleeding, common signs and symptoms associated with amenorrhea may
     include signs of underlying hormonal imbalances, such as:

         · hirsutism (excessive hair growth on unexpected areas)
         · hair loss
         · headache
         · galactorrhea (milk production not related to pregnancy or breast-feeding)
         · visual changes

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 · Functional Disorders                                                                                              263

Care of the patient with amenorrhea starts with a detailed history and physical examination, with the provider first
determining whether the patient has primary or secondary amenorrhea. If primary amenorrhea is confirmed, the
provider will assess for chromosomal abnormalities. If the patient has secondary amenorrhea, the nurse will ask
focused assessment questions about menstrual and reproductive history and symptoms of hormonal changes.
Diagnostic testing will vary depending on the suspected etiology and may include hormone-level assessments, such
as:

    · beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG) to rule out pregnancy;
    · testosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) to look for hyperandrogenism;
    · follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), estrogen, thyroid function, and prolactin, to

        evaluate for hormonal imbalances;
    · imaging tests, such as pelvic ultrasound or computed tomography (CT), to evaluate the patient for adrenal

        tumors, pituitary tumors, anatomic variants (transverse vaginal septum or absence of ovaries, uterus, or
        cervix); and
    · karyotyping (Nawaz & Rogol, 2022).

Treatment of amenorrhea focuses on addressing the underlying cause. Medical management can include hormonal
therapies such as combined oral contraceptives or progestin therapy to induce withdrawal bleeding, regulate
menstrual cycles, and correct hormonal imbalances. For specific medical causes of amenorrhea like
hyperprolactinemia, targeted medications like dopamine agonists may be used (Nawaz & Rogol, 2022). Patients
with ongoing amenorrhea, particularly those with hypothalamic amenorrhea, may be at risk for osteoporosis due to
bone loss associated with estrogen deficiency. Hypothalamic amenorrhea can be caused by weight loss, stress, or
increased physical exercise. Some patients may require bone density monitoring or treatment with bisphosphonates
to reduce bone loss; patients not desiring pregnancy will improve bone loss by taking estrogen and progesterone
(Altayar et al., 2017).

Nonpharmacologic approaches to managing amenorrhea include lifestyle modifications, such as maintaining a
healthy weight, managing stress levels, and ensuring adequate nutrition and exercise (Nawaz & Rogol, 2022). For
persons with eating disorders or excessive exercise-induced amenorrhea, a multidisciplinary approach involving
dieticians, therapists, and exercise specialists is crucial (Nawaz & Rogol, 2022).

Nurses play a vital role in the care of persons with amenorrhea. They should prioritize patient education, explaining
the etiology and treatment options, as well as discussing potential long-term implications such as infertility or bone
health concerns. Nurses can offer emotional support, addressing any concerns or anxieties related to the condition.
They should also collaborate with other health-care providers to ensure comprehensive care, monitor treatment
responses, and assess for potential complications or side effects of medications.

Dysmenorrhea
Painful menstruation that occurs in the absence of a physiologic cause is called dysmenorrhea. While many people
have some cramping and pain during menstruation, people with dysmenorrhea have pain so severe that it interferes
with their daily life. The condition is further classified as either primary dysmenorrhea, which is typical menstrual
pain that occurs before or during a period, or secondary dysmenorrhea, which is menstrual pain caused by an
underlying condition (ACOG, 2022a). Common signs and symptoms of dysmenorrhea include cramping abdominal
pain that may radiate to the lower back and thighs, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, headache, and diarrhea (ACOG,
2022a). Dysmenorrhea is more prevalent in younger people, smokers, people with early menarche or a family
history, and people who have never been pregnant or given birth (Hickey et al., 2023).

Evaluating a patient for dysmenorrhea starts with a thorough medical history and a physical exam. In most cases,
diagnostic testing is warranted only when medication is not effective at managing menstrual pain. Pelvic ultrasound
is a noninvasive option to visualize the pelvic anatomy. Other options may include hysteroscopy or laparoscopy to
get a better view of the reproductive structures (ACOG, 2022a).

The goals of medical management are to alleviate pain and improve quality of life. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen (Motrin) or naproxen (Aleve), are commonly used as first-line pharmacologic
treatment to inhibit prostaglandin synthesis and reduce pain (Smith & Kaunitz, 2022). Hormonal therapies, such as
combined oral contraceptives or progestins, may also be prescribed to reduce menstrual pain by suppressing
ovulation and reducing endometrial proliferation (Smith & Kaunitz, 2022). If these medications do not sufficiently
264  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     relieve pain, diagnostic laparoscopy can be considered if it has not already been performed. Other surgical
     procedures may include hysterectomy (removal of the uterus) or endometrial ablation (destruction of the
     endometrial lining). A hysterectomy is a major surgery that requires general anesthesia and significant time to heal.
     Endometrial ablation is performed in the office under sedation and does not require extended healing time. Both
     procedures are appropriate only in people no longer considering having children (Smith & Kaunitz, 2022).

     Nonpharmacologic approaches can complement medical treatment and include heat therapy (e.g., hot water bottle,
     warm bath), relaxation techniques (e.g., deep breathing, guided imagery), regular exercise, and dietary
     modifications (McKenna & Fogleman, 2021). Applying heat to the lower abdomen can help relax uterine muscles
     and reduce pain, and relaxation techniques can help manage stress and promote overall well-being. Many people
     also report that the use of acupuncture and transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation (TENS) are helpful in reducing
     dysmenorrhea (ACOG, 2022a; and Smith & Kaunitz, 2022).

     Nurses play a crucial role in managing dysmenorrhea. Nursing activities for the patient with dysmenorrhea may
     include:

         · providing education about the condition, including its causes, common symptoms, and available treatment
             options

         · assessing pain levels, using validated pain scales, and monitoring the effectiveness of interventions
         · providing emotional support and addressing any anxiety or distress associated with dysmenorrhea
         · encouraging self-care practices, such as heat therapy, relaxation techniques, and exercise

       CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

       Evaluate Outcomes

       Nurses provide a great deal of education for patients with dysmenorrhea. In order to evaluate the success of the
       education, nurses must consider evaluation outcomes.

       The nurse provides education on nonpharmacologic pain relief. To evaluate the outcomes, the nurse can ask the
       following questions:

           · What relaxation technique would work best for you?
           · What kind of exercise could you do during your period?
           · Can you think of ways to relax your uterus?
           · Do you remember where to apply the TENS pads?

       By asking these questions, the nurse can determine if the education was successful or if further education is
       warranted.

     Premenstrual Syndrome
     The common, cyclic, and multifaceted disorder that occurs during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle in people
     who menstruate is called premenstrual syndrome (PMS). It typically occurs 1 to 2 weeks before menstruation and
     is characterized by a combination of physical, emotional, and behavioral symptoms that significantly impact a
     person's daily life and functioning (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [HHS] Office on Women's Health,
     2021b)., 2021b). A rare type of PMS is premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), which is similar to PMS but has a
     more extreme presentation, causing extreme depression and anxiety in the luteal phase of the cycle (Mishra et al.,
     2021).

     The signs and symptoms of PMS can vary widely among people but commonly include mood swings, irritability,
     anxiety, fatigue, breast tenderness, bloating, and changes in appetite or sleep patterns (HHS Office on Women's
     Health, 2021b). Emotional symptoms can include feelings of sadness, tension, or difficulty in concentrating, while
     physical symptoms may manifest as headache, joint or muscle pain, and gastrointestinal disturbances (HHS Office
     on Women's Health, 2021b). It is possible for people to have only physical symptoms, only emotional symptoms, or
     both. Symptoms may also change throughout a person's reproductive lifespan.

     PMS is primarily diagnosed based on the presence of characteristic symptoms during the luteal phase of the
     menstrual cycle. However, to establish a definitive diagnosis and rule out other underlying conditions, health-care

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 · Functional Disorders                                                                                              265

providers should conduct a thorough medical history and evaluation of symptoms along with a thorough menstrual
cycle history. Laboratory tests, such as thyroid function or complete blood count, may be performed to screen for
other medical conditions such as hyper- or hypothyroidism and anemia (Casper, 2023).

The management of PMS often involves a multimodal approach. Pharmacologic interventions may be considered for
severe cases and can include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) or hormonal contraceptives to regulate
hormone levels and alleviate symptoms (HHS Office on Women's Health, 2021b). Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) may be prescribed for pain relief, and diuretics can be used to help relieve bloating and water
retention (HHS Office on Women's Health, 2021b). Some people have found that certain supplements, particularly
magnesium, vitamin B6, calcium, and omega-3 fatty acids, may be effective in relieving symptoms (HHS Office on
Women's Health, 2021b). It is important for the nurse to discuss any potential interactions or side effects of these
supplements.

Nonpharmacologic measures play a significant role in PMS management. Helpful lifestyle modifications may
include:

    · regular exercise
    · cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
    · a balanced diet rich in complex carbohydrates, decreased salt, and decreased refined sugars
    · sleeping 7 to 8 hours each night
    · stress-reduction techniques, such as relaxation exercises, journaling, and meditation (HHS Office on Women's

        Health, 2021b)

Nurses play a vital role in caring for persons experiencing PMS. Assessment of symptoms, menstrual history, and
psychosocial factors can aid in identifying the severity of the condition and its impact on the patient's life. Nurses
must also collaborate with health-care providers and advocate for their patients when necessary to develop
personalized care plans that incorporate pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic interventions. Patient education on
symptom management, healthy lifestyle practices, and coping strategies helps patients to better manage PMS and
improve their quality of life.

Abnormal Uterine Bleeding
The common gynecologic condition characterized by atypical bleeding patterns is called abnormal uterine bleeding
(AUB). It encompasses various menstrual irregularities, including heavy menstrual bleeding (menorrhagia),
prolonged menstrual bleeding (hypermenorrhea), irregular menstrual cycles (metrorrhagia), bleeding or spotting
after sex, irregular periods that vary in length by more than 7 to 9 days, menstrual cycles longer than 35 days or
shorter than 21 days, intermenstrual bleeding (between periods), and bleeding after menopause (ACOG, 2023b).

There are two types of AUB: acute and chronic. Acute AUB is a sudden onset of abnormal bleeding that lasts for 2
hours or longer and requires treatment to prevent excessive blood loss and other complications (ACOG, 2023b;
Davis & Sparzak, 2022). Chronic AUB is bleeding that deviates from the normal pattern and has occurred for the
past 6 months.

Potential causes of AUB include:

    · trauma
    · ovulatory dysfunction
    · neoplasms
    · malignant lesions
    · reproductive tract infections
    · the presence of uterine fibroids or polyps
    · adenomyosis or endometriosis
    · blood clotting disorders
    · certain medications, such as hormonal birth control
    · ectopic pregnancy or miscarriage
    · pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) (ACOG, 2023b)

The hallmark sign of AUB is changes in menstrual bleeding patterns (Davis & Sparzak, 2022). People may
experience excessively heavy or prolonged periods that require frequent tampon or pad changes, defined as more
266  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     than once per hour (ACOG, 2023b). Other signs may include fatigue, anemia, and menstrual pain.

     Diagnosing AUB begins with a comprehensive assessment of the patient's medical history, menstrual patterns, and
     related symptoms. A physical examination, including pelvic examination, is essential to rule out other gynecologic
     conditions. Laboratory tests, such as complete blood count (CBC) to assess for anemia and thyroid function, can
     help identify potential underlying causes. A pregnancy test may be needed to rule out pregnancy as a potential
     cause for the bleeding. Imaging tests like transvaginal ultrasound, hysteroscopy, or sonohysterography may be
     performed to evaluate the uterine cavity, while endometrial biopsy can be used to test for endometrial hyperplasia
     in people at high risk (Davis & Sparzak, 2022). Postmenopausal patients with AUB are at high risk for endometrial
     hyperplasia and endometrial cancer. Therefore, any postmenopausal person who presents with uterine bleeding
     should be evaluated.

     The management of AUB consists of identifying and addressing the underlying cause, alleviating symptoms, and
     improving the patient's quality of life. In most cases, medical treatment is preferred to surgical options (Davis &
     Sparzak, 2022). Medical treatment options often include hormonal therapy, which helps to regulate menstrual
     cycles and reduce menstrual flow. In cases where AUB is caused by structural abnormalities like polyps or fibroids,
     surgical interventions, like hysteroscopic polypectomy or myomectomy, or pharmacologic treatments, such as
     combined birth control pills, might be necessary.

     Nonpharmacologic interventions are often recommended and can complement medical treatment to improve
     outcomes. Lifestyle modifications, such as regular exercise and a well-balanced diet, can promote hormonal
     balance and overall health. Managing stress and practicing relaxation techniques may also help reduce menstrual
     symptoms and restore regular menstrual patterns.

     Nurses play a crucial role in providing comprehensive care to patients with AUB. A thorough assessment of the
     patient's menstrual history, symptoms, and concerns can aid in identifying potential contributing factors and
     underlying causes. Nurses can educate patients about AUB, its potential impact on health, and the importance of
     seeking timely medical attention. Patient education on the appropriate use of prescribed medications, potential side
     effects, and expected outcomes is vital. Nurses can also assist in coordinating further diagnostic tests, providing
     pre- and postprocedural care, and ensuring patients understand treatment plans. Empowering patients to track
     their menstrual cycles and symptoms using calendars or apps can facilitate better communication with health-care
     providers.

     Perimenopause and Menopause

     The phase of menstrual irregularities called perimenopause is attributed to fluctuating hormone levels that last for
     months up to several years and ends when menses has ceased for 12 months (North American Menopause Society,
     n.d.-a; Smuskiewicz, 2019). Twelve months of amenorrhea is considered menopause, which represents the
     culmination of this transition (World Health Organization, 2022). Menopause typically occurs between ages 40 and
     59, though the average age is 51 years old (North American Menopause Society, n.d.-a). In addition to the natural
     transition that occurs with advancing age, menopause can also occur in some patients due to surgical removal of the
     ovaries or some medications that affect ovarian or hormonal function, or chemotherapy and radiation therapy to the
     reproductive organs (North American Menopause Society, n.d.-a). People who undergo induced menopause have
     the same signs and symptoms as people who go through this transition naturally.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Menopause and Perimenopause

     Perimenopause and menopause are very much cultural phenomena (Women's Health Network, 2023).

     Japan

     The concept of "hot flashes" is relatively new in Japan. This could be due to the high-soy diet of Japanese persons
     AFAB. Fewer people in Japan report having hot flashes and other vasomotor symptoms than people in the West (Rei
     Otsuka et al., 2020). In fact, the word for menopause in Japanese translates to "a period of renewal and
     regeneration" (Women's Health Network, 2023).

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 · Functional Disorders                                                                                              267

Mayan Descendants

Descendants of the ancient Mayan civilization still live in pockets of rural Guatemala and Mexico and have been
interviewed about their view of menopause. Many said they do not experience any of the typical menopausal
symptoms (such as hot flashes and insomnia), despite having FSH levels similar to those of Western people
(Women's Health Network, 2023). In addition, many of these Mayan people look forward to this transition to the
next stage in their life (Women's Health Network, 2023). These differences could be explained by diet and other
health-related behaviors; attitudes about aging and perceptions about age may play a major role (Marloff, 2021).

Western Society

Western societies often revere youth and attractiveness, leading to differing views on aging and menopause (Marloff,
2021; Women's Health Network, 2023).

Changes in Menstruation
Changes in menstruation are often the hallmark of perimenopause and can vary significantly among people. During
perimenopause, the ovaries start making less estrogen and progesterone, which can cause anovulation and missed
periods (ACOG, 2022b). See Chapter 4 Influences on Fertility for a review of reproductive hormones and the
menstrual cycle. These changing hormones can cause cycles to become longer or shorter, menstrual flow to be
heavier or lighter, or bleeding/spotting to occur between periods (Eisenberg, 2022). It is not unusual for people in
perimenopause to skip periods for several months and then resume a regular pattern of menstruation.

Vasomotor Symptoms
More commonly known as hot flashes and night sweats, vasomotor symptoms (VMS) are cardinal symptoms of
perimenopause and menopause. These episodes of sudden and intense heat are accompanied by skin flushing,
perspiration, palpitations, and an acute feeling of discomfort and can last for several minutes (World Health
Organization, 2022). Vasomotor symptoms often disturb sleep patterns and impact daily activities, making their
management crucial for people experiencing this transition. Hot flashes that occur at night are known as night
flushes or night sweats and can lead to insomnia and other sleep disturbances.

The pathophysiology of vasomotor symptoms is not well understood, but it is believed that persons experience a
reduction in thermoregulation, which may be attributed to a reduction in several hypothalamic hormones and a
narrowing of the thermoneutral zone (Jina et al., 2022). Although vasomotor symptoms have long been thought of
as uncomfortable without a physiologic effect, growing research is showing that they may be associated with
negative cardiovascular risk factors, including insulin resistance, diabetes, and hypertension (Jina et al., 2022).
However, further research is needed to determine the actual clinical impact of VMS on cardiovascular health.

Vaginal Dryness
Declining estrogen levels during perimenopause and menopause can affect the vagina and external genitalia (the
vulva). This reduction of estrogen weakens the vulvovaginal epithelium, causing it to be thinner and less elastic (The
North American Menopause Society, n.d.-b). Lower estrogen levels can also cause a reduction in lubrication and an
increase in vaginal pH (The North American Menopause Society, n.d.-b), This can result in discomfort, pain during
intercourse (dyspareunia), and increased vulnerability to infections.

A reduction in sexual activity after menopause can cause the vagina to shorten and narrow, worsening symptoms,
such as pain, tearing, and injury if sexual activity is resumed. The nurse should advise patients to continue having
regular sexual activity through menopause to help reduce vulvovaginal atrophy (thinning of the skin of the vulva and
vagina) and to use lubrication during intercourse to reduce pain and injury to the vagina (The North American
Menopause Society, n.d.-b).

Changes in Metabolism
Metabolic shifts occur as estrogen levels decline and androgen levels increase during perimenopause and
menopause, making people more likely to gain weight, particularly around the abdomen, and muscle loss (Ko &
Jung, 2021). These changes affect overall metabolism and potentially increase the risk of cardiovascular disease
and metabolic disorders (Ko & Jung, 2021). People often also experience increased blood pressure, blood glucose,
lipid levels, and inflammatory markers, increasing their risk for metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular disease
(Hyvärinen et al., 2022). Therefore, these patients should be monitored for these chronic diseases.
268  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     Some of these metabolic shifts may mimic hypothyroidism or decreased thyroid function. This is one of the most
     common diseases in humans, particularly in older adults (Han et al., 2022), with many people dealing with both
     subclinical hypothyroidism and menopausal symptoms (Xu et al., 2023). Many of the clinical manifestations of
     hypothyroidism are similar to those experienced during menopause, including fatigue, weight gain, and anxiety. Like
     menopause, hypothyroidism is associated with negative changes in the lipid profile (Han et al., 2022) and requires
     ongoing monitoring.

     Emotional Changes
     Emotional well-being can be significantly impacted during perimenopause and menopause due to hormonal
     fluctuations and psychosocial factors. Mood swings, irritability, and episodes of depression may occur. Many people
     report feeling similar to the way they feel during premenstrual syndrome: moody, low energy, tearful, easily
     distracted, or irritable (Silver, 2023). However, unlike PMS, these symptoms have no relationship to the menstrual
     cycle and may occur for a long period of time without any discernible pattern (Silver, 2023). In addition to mood
     swings, many people report depression and anxiety, even if they have never had them before. Potential causes may
     include:

         · hormonal changes
         · dealing with physical symptoms associated with menopause
         · increased life pressures and stress (Silver, 2023)

     These emotional changes can affect a person's quality of life and interpersonal relationships, highlighting the
     importance of emotional support and holistic care from the entire health-care team and especially the nurse.

     Management
     Diagnostic testing involves assessing hormone levels, especially follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing
     hormone (LH), and estradiol. During perimenopause and menopause, the ovaries are less responsive to these
     hormones, requiring increased levels to activate follicular growth (Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
     Health and Human Development, 2021). Elevated FSH levels and decreased estradiol levels are indicative of
     perimenopause and menopause. However, it is important to recognize that these hormones do vary throughout the
     cycle, and a single elevated FSH level is not enough to definitively tell that someone is in perimenopause (Endocrine
     Society, n.d.). An additional test is the anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) level. Anti-Müllerian hormone is produced by
     the ovarian follicles. When there are a lot of follicles (high ovarian function), the AMH level is high; when ovarian
     function starts to decline, the AMH level drops as well (Endocrine Society, n.d.). If a patient presents with symptoms
     of perimenopause, the provider may order additional testing to determine if the symptoms could be attributed to a
     different cause, such as thyroid dysfunction, pituitary tumor, or even possible pregnancy.

     The primary medical intervention for perimenopause and menopause includes hormone replacement therapy (HRT).
     HRT is the administration of estrogen, progesterone, or a combination of both hormones to effectively alleviate
     menopausal symptoms, such as vasomotor symptoms and vaginal dryness. In the past, the use of HRT was
     controversial due to a study that suggested significant health risks associated with its use; however, ongoing
     research has shown that HRT is a safe option for most healthy, menopausal people. Some populations of people
     should not use hormonal therapy, including people with a history of

         · breast cancer,
         · uterine cancer,
         · deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism,
         · blood clotting disorder,
         · migraine with aura,
         · liver disease, and
         · arterial thrombotic disease (heart attack or stroke) (Harper-Harrison & Shanahan, 2023).

     Patients who are not eligible for HRT have had success in reducing vasomotor symptoms using serotonin receptor
     reuptake inhibitors.

     There are two types of HRT: estrogen only and combination estrogen/progesterone therapy. People with an intact
     uterus must take both estrogen and progesterone because estrogen alone can cause endometrial hyperplasia and
     increase the risk for uterine cancer (Harper-Harrison & Shanahan, 2023). Progesterone opposes estrogen and

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 · Functional Disorders                                                                                              269

reduces that risk by keeping the uterine lining from uncontrolled proliferation (Harper-Harrison & Shanahan, 2023).
In addition, progesterone may relieve other symptoms not affected by estrogen, such as insomnia and mood swings
(Harper-Harrison & Shanahan, 2023). Estrogen and progesterone can be administered via patches, creams, pills,
vaginal inserts, or subdermal pellets, depending on patient preference and clinical status. It is important for the
patient to be aware of the risks of HRT, including deep vein thrombosis, strokes, and pulmonary embolism, similar to
the risk of birth control pills.

Nonpharmacologic approaches can be used in lieu of or to complement medical treatments. Some lifestyle
modifications may contribute to overall well-being and wellness, including:

    · maintaining a balanced diet rich in calcium and vitamin D
    · engaging in regular physical activity
    · practicing stress reduction techniques
    · quitting smoking
    · reducing alcohol consumption
    · managing weight (Endocrine Society, 2022a).

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and mindfulness practices aid in managing mood swings and emotional changes.

Nurses play a pivotal role in supporting people through perimenopause and menopause. Providing patient education
about the physical and emotional changes, available treatment options, and self-care strategies empowers patients
to actively participate in their health-care decisions. Creating a safe space for open discussions, offering emotional
support, and assisting in symptom management are central to nursing care during this transitional phase.

        LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

Nonpharmacologic Measures for Menopause

The use of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) for menopausal symptoms is a personal decision. Many people are
either uncomfortable with or unable to take these drugs and must treat their menopausal symptoms using
nonpharmacologic options. The nurse plays an instrumental role in helping the patient find options that work for
them. These may include:

    · using a fan or wearing lightweight pajamas
    · wearing layers
    · stress reduction
    · acupuncture
    · yoga to reduce hot flashes
    · mind-body therapies
    · biofeedback
    · meditation
    · cognitive behavioral therapy (Johnson et al., 2019)

In addition to discussing these different options, the nurse may help the patient find a qualified practitioner to
administer these treatments.

Endometriosis

The chronic and often painfully debilitating gynecologic disorder characterized by the presence of endometrial-like
tissue outside the uterus is called endometriosis (World Health Organization, 2023). This tissue (Figure 6.2) can
develop on various pelvic structures, such as the ovaries, bladder, rectovaginal septum, fallopian tubes, and the
peritoneal lining (World Health Organization, 2023). Rarely, endometrial implants have been found outside the
pelvis on other structures. It is believed that at least 11 percent of persons assigned female at birth in the United
States have endometriosis (HHS Office on Women's Health, 2021a). It is most common in a person's 30s or 40s, but
endometriosis can occur in anyone having menstrual periods (HHS Office on Women's Health, 2021a). Researchers
are unsure about the cause of endometriosis but suspect that it may be related to problems with retrograde
menstrual flow, hormonal or immune system abnormalities, genetic factors, or previous surgery on the uterus or
270  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     abdominal area (HHS Office on Women's Health, 2021a).

     FIGURE 6.2 Endometriosis Endometriosis is a condition that causes endometrial tissue to grow outside the uterus. (attribution: Copyright
     Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     The hallmark symptoms of endometriosis include pelvic pain, dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and infertility. Patients
     may experience pain that varies in intensity and duration, often worsening during menstruation. If implants are
     found on the bowel or bladder, patients can have urinary or gastrointestinal symptoms as well, such as diarrhea,
     bloating, constipation, painful bowel movements during menstruation, or pain while passing urine (World Health
     Organization, 2023). Sometimes, people have pain during or after sex or spotting between menstrual periods (HHS
     Office on Women's Health, 2021a). Additionally, some patients may have asymptomatic endometriosis, highlighting
     the variability in symptom expression.

     Diagnosing endometriosis starts with taking a detailed patient history, including information about symptoms, such
     as menstrual changes and pelvic pain. The provider should perform a physical assessment, including a pelvic exam,
     to evaluate for endometrial cysts or scars on the pelvic organs (HHS Office on Women's Health, 2021a). Diagnostic
     testing, such as pelvic ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), can be used to visualize the pelvic
     anatomy. Laparoscopic surgery for direct visualization of endometrial implants and histologic confirmation remains
     the gold standard for definitive diagnosis. However, laparoscopic surgery is highly invasive and not necessary for
     providers to initiate treatment options to relieve pain and improve quality of life (World Health Organization, 2023).

     The management of endometriosis focuses on alleviating pain, improving quality of life, and addressing fertility
     concerns. Pharmacologic options include:

         · NSAIDs for pain relief
         · hormonal therapies such as oral contraceptives, progestins, and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)

             agonists to suppress endometrial growth

     In cases of severe pain or refractory symptoms, laparoscopic excision surgery can be considered to remove
     endometriotic lesions and improve fertility prospects (HHS Office on Women's Health, 2021a). In many cases, the
     discomfort associated with endometriosis goes away during menopause, when estrogen levels decline and the
     endometrial lining shrinks (HHS Office on Women's Health, 2021a). See Chapter 4 Influences on Fertility for
     additional information about managing endometriosis-related infertility.

     Nonpharmacologic measures play a complementary role in managing endometriosis. Lifestyle modifications,
     including a balanced diet and regular exercise, can help manage inflammation and improve overall well-being. Some
     people find success from other therapies, such as:

         · chiropractic care
         · acupuncture
         · certain herbal medications (cinnamon twig, licorice root)
         · vitamin supplements (vitamin B1, magnesium, omega-3 fatty acids) (HHS Office on Women's Health, 2021a)

     Nurses play a pivotal role in caring for persons with endometriosis. Patient education is very important when caring
     for patients with this condition to ensure that they understand their condition, treatment options, and potential

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 · Functional Disorders                                                                                           271

outcomes. Nurses can provide information on medication management, potential side effects, and self-care
strategies.

Patient-centered care involves active listening and acknowledging the physical and emotional impact of
endometriosis. Nurses can offer coping strategies, facilitate support groups, and connect patients with relevant
resources. When surgery is part of the treatment plan, nurses provide preoperative education, offer emotional
support, and guide patients through postoperative recovery.

Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS)

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine disorder found in approximately 6 percent to 12 percent
of American persons assigned female at birth who are of childbearing age (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention [CDC], 2022b). PCOS is characterized by hormonal imbalances that lead to a variety of reproductive,
metabolic, and cardiovascular disturbances (Figure 6.3) that present as a combination of multiple symptoms,
affecting various aspects of a person's health beyond their reproductive years (CDC, 2022b). Patients of every race
and ethnicity suffer from PCOS. The cause of PCOS is not fully understood, but researchers have observed a pattern
of elevated androgen levels and insulin resistance in people with the condition (CDC, 2022b). Researchers are also
investigating how genetics may contribute to developing this disease, as many people with PCOS have relatives with
this disorder (CDC, 2022b).

The symptoms of PCOS are diverse and vary significantly from person to person. Many people do not realize they
have the condition until they struggle to conceive. Other people have the full spectrum of clinical manifestations,
which can include:

    · irregular menstrual cycles
    · hyperandrogenism, causing hirsutism (excessive hair growth), acne, and alopecia
    · polycystic ovaries seen on ultrasound
    · obesity

People with PCOS are also at higher risk for several serious complications, including:

    · insulin resistance and diabetes
    · metabolic syndrome
    · hypertension
    · high cholesterol and triglycerides
    · endometrial cancer due to excessive endometrial growth from irregular menstrual cycles
    · depression and anxiety
    · obstructive sleep apnea related to being overweight
    · cardiovascular disease
    · non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
    · infertility (Endocrine Society, 2022b)

People with PCOS who become pregnant are at higher risk for complications such as gestational diabetes,
preeclampsia, and preterm birth (Endocrine Society, 2022b).
272  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     FIGURE 6.3 Polycystic Ovary Syndrome PCOS is a common endocrine disorder found in around 6 percent to 12 percent of American
     persons assigned female at birth who are of childbearing age. The condition is characterized by hormonal imbalances that lead to a variety
     of symptoms, including acne, hirsutism, male pattern baldness, and acanthosis nigricans, a sign of insulin resistance. (attribution: Copyright
     Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Diagnosing PCOS involves a thorough assessment of a patient's medical history and clinical symptoms, as well as
     diagnostic testing when necessary. The diagnostic tool for PCOS is the Rotterdam criteria, which require the
     presence of two out of three factors: menstrual irregularity, evidence of hyperandrogenism (by either clinical
     symptoms or laboratory testing), and polycystic ovaries visualized on ultrasound (Christ & Cedars, 2023). To be
     diagnostic of PCOS, these symptoms must also occur without any other clinical cause. Blood tests can be used to
     rule out other diagnoses, including pregnancy, elevated prolactin levels, and abnormal levels of thyroid hormones
     and follicle-stimulating hormone. Testing of androgen levels, such as testosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone
     sulfate (DHEAS), may also aid in the diagnosis (Barbieri & Ehrmann, 2023). After diagnosis of PCOS, patients may
     undergo testing for insulin resistance, diabetes, and cholesterol/triglyceride levels to determine if other
     complications are present (Barbieri & Ehrmann, 2023).

     The management of PCOS is multifaceted, focusing on alleviating symptoms, improving metabolic outcomes, and
     addressing reproductive concerns. Combined oral contraceptives (COCs), in the form of pills, patches, or the vaginal
     ring, are frequently used to help regulate menstrual cycles, lower the risk of endometrial hyperplasia, and reduce
     hyperandrogenism (Barbieri & Ehrmann, 2023). COCs can be used in combination with antiandrogens, such as
     spironolactone (Aldactone), to help further reduce symptoms of hyperandrogenism, like hirsutism and acne. Hair
     removal therapies, such as depilatories, laser therapy, waxing or shaving, and electrolysis, are also effective in
     removing excess hair. Hair loss, on the other hand, can be treated with medications or hair replacement therapies.
     Weight loss is a common concern for people with PCOS and should be approached with reducing insulin resistance
     in mind. While diet and exercise are key, weight loss medication or surgery may also be necessary due to the
     complicated metabolic disturbances that may be present. Metformin (Glucophage), an insulin-sensitizing
     medication, can be effective in improving insulin resistance and may help to restore ovulation in people with
     abnormal menstrual cycles. See Chapter 4 Influences on Fertility for additional information about addressing
     fertility concerns for people with PCOS.

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 · Functional Disorders                                                                                                   273

Lifestyle modifications are essential in managing PCOS, particularly for improving metabolic health and fertility
outcomes. Regular physical activity and a balanced diet can help manage weight, reduce insulin resistance, and
promote overall well-being. Weight loss, even modest, can lead to improvements in menstrual regularity, hormonal
profiles, and fertility (Barbieri & Ehrmann, 2023). Nurses play a vital role in supporting patients with PCOS through
education, counseling, and emotional support. Patient education is crucial in helping persons understand their
condition, treatment options, and potential long-term health implications. Nurses can offer guidance on lifestyle
modifications, emphasizing the importance of regular exercise, balanced nutrition, and weight management.

For people experiencing infertility due to PCOS, nurses can provide emotional support during fertility treatments and
assist in coordinating care with fertility specialists. Educating patients about potential fertility interventions, such as
ovulation induction and in vitro fertilization (IVF), enables informed decision making. Chapter 4 Influences on
Fertility provides additional information about nursing care for the patient undergoing diagnostic testing or
treatment for infertility. Furthermore, nurses collaborate with multidisciplinary health-care teams, including
endocrinologists, dieticians, and mental health professionals, to ensure comprehensive care.

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Metformin

Metformin is a medication commonly prescribed for people with PCOS to help improve insulin sensitivity. It can also
help restore ovulation in PCOS with insulin resistance and is sometimes used in the infertility setting for that
purpose.

    · Generic Name: metformin
    · Trade Name: Fortamet, Glucophage, Glumetza
    · Class/Action: biguanide drug
    · Route/Dosage: Oral medication prescribed at daily doses between 500 and 2,550 mg. Immediate-release

        formulations are administered twice daily, preferably with a meal, and extended-release formulas are taken
        once a day with the evening meal. Dosages typically start at 500 mg once or twice each day and are titrated
        each week in increments of 500 mg (Corcoran & Jacobs, 2023).
    · High Alert/Black Box Warning: Lactic acidosis is a rare complication that can occur in some people with
        metformin use. It is characterized by elevated lactate levels, decreased pH, and other electrolyte
        abnormalities. This complication occurs rarely, at approximately 0.03 cases per 1,000 patient-years (Crowley
        et al., 2016).
    · Indications: Indicated for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. It is used off-label to manage gestational
        diabetes, weight gain from antipsychotic medication, and polycystic ovary syndrome (Corcoran & Jacobs,
        2023).
    · Mechanism of Action: Biguanides lower blood glucose levels by three mechanisms: (1) improving insulin
        sensitivity, (2) reducing absorption of glucose in the gut, and (3) lowering glucose production in the liver
        (Corcoran & Jacobs, 2023). In people with PCOS, metformin reduces insulin levels, which normalizes
        luteinizing hormone (LH) and androgens, which helps in restoring regular ovulation (Corcoran & Jacobs, 2023).
    · Contraindications: Metformin is contraindicated in patients with renal disease, people with hypersensitivity
        to metformin, or people with metabolic acidosis.
    · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: The most common adverse effects with metformin use are gastrointestinal
        effects, including diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. This is mitigated by having patients take the medication with
        food and titrating doses slowly. Other side effects may include headache, hypoglycemia, weakness, and
        rhinitis.
    · Nursing Implications: It is important for the nurse to educate the patient about this drug, especially about
        the signs and symptoms of lactic acidosis, and the expected side effects. The nurse should also warn the
        patient about the potential GI side effects and offer advice on how to reduce these. The nurse should also
        review lifestyle modifications that can be helpful in people with PCOS and insulin resistance.

Chronic Pelvic Pain

Chronic pelvic pain (CPP) is a condition characterized by persistent or recurrent pain in the pelvic region lasting for
274  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     at least 6 months. This type of pain can come and go over that 6-month period or occur at regular intervals, such as
     during particular events of the menstrual cycle or with certain activities, such as during sex (ACOG, 2022c). The
     diversity of symptoms highlights the complexity of CPP and its potential underlying causes. CPP can be related to
     disorders of the reproductive organs, bladder or urinary tract, or the bowel and can be caused by conditions such as:

         · endometriosis
         · fibroids
         · irritable bowel syndrome
         · interstitial cystitis
         · urinary tract infection
         · dysmenorrhea
         · pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)
         · cancer of the urinary or gastrointestinal tract
         · poor posture
         · strain of the structures in the low back related to pregnancy
         · musculoskeletal problems or low back pain and disc injuries (ACOG, 2022c)

     CPP can significantly impact a person's physical, emotional, and social well-being. In many cases, up to 50 percent,
     the cause of CPP is never diagnosed (Dydyk & Gupta, 2023).

     Diagnosing CPP requires a comprehensive evaluation involving medical history, physical examination, and targeted
     diagnostic tests. The provider will explore the patient's symptoms and their relationship with precipitating and
     alleviating factors, such as menses, urination, sexual activity, and bowel movements (Dydyk & Gupta, 2023). If
     connections are found, they should be explored further. For example, if the patient experiences pain related to
     urination, diagnostic testing for urinary tract infection, interstitial cystitis, and other urinary abnormalities should be
     the next step. Most importantly, the provider should also ask about symptoms that may signal systemic disease,
     such as unexplained weight loss, bleeding in the urine or stool, bleeding after sex, or bleeding between periods or
     after menopause. The physical exam should include assessment of the abdomen and reproductive structures,
     including a gynecologic exam (Dydyk & Gupta, 2023). Pelvic ultrasound, computed tomography (CT) scans, and
     magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can help identify structural abnormalities, such as ovarian cysts, fibroids, or
     endometriosis. Diagnostic laparoscopy, a minimally invasive surgical procedure, can provide direct visualization and
     potential treatment of underlying conditions.

     The management of CPP focuses on addressing the underlying cause:

         · antibiotics for pelvic inflammatory disease or urinary tract infection
         · hormonal contraceptives for dysmenorrhea or endometriosis
         · surgical removal of cysts and fibroids
         · physical therapy for musculoskeletal issues
         · medication for irritable bowel disease or interstitial cystitis

     If no specific cause for the pain is found, treatment shifts to managing the pain and improving quality of life. This
     may include the use of NSAIDs for pain relief or gabapentin (Neurontin) or pregabalin (Lyrica) for neuropathic pain
     (ACOG, 2022c). In some cases, surgical interventions may be considered to address structural issues contributing to
     CPP.

     Nonpharmacologic measures play a pivotal role in managing CPP and can be used to complement other medical
     treatments. Strategies such as physical therapy, pelvic floor exercises, and relaxation techniques can help improve
     muscular function, alleviate pain, and reduce stress. Regular exercise and weight loss can improve posture and
     some musculoskeletal issues contributing to CPP (ACOG, 2022c). Nutritional interventions and dietary
     modifications can contribute to managing bowel and urinary symptoms associated with CPP. Other pain
     management strategies, such as acupuncture, acupressure, nerve stimulation, biofeedback therapy, and even nerve
     blocks can also be helpful in some cases (ACOG, 2022c).

     Nurses play a vital role in providing comprehensive care and support to persons with CPP. Assessment is key,
     involving a thorough evaluation of the patient's pain history, symptoms, and psychosocial factors contributing to
     pain perception. Fifty-three percent of patients with CPP experience moderate to severe depression and anxiety

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.2 · Structural Disorders                                                                                                              275

(Bryant et al., 2016). Empathetic listening and effective communication are essential to understanding the impact of
CPP on the patient's daily life. Patient education is a cornerstone of nursing interventions. Nurses can educate
patients about their condition, potential treatment options, and strategies for managing pain and associated
symptoms. Teaching relaxation techniques, guiding patients through pelvic exercises, and providing information
about available resources empower persons to actively participate in their care. Furthermore, nurses collaborate
with interdisciplinary teams, including physicians, physical therapists, psychologists, and pain specialists, to
develop comprehensive treatment plans tailored to the patient's needs. Emotional support, counseling, and
facilitating support groups can help address the psychologic impact of CPP.

6.2 Structural Disorders

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Examine the risk factors, assessment data, medical treatment, and nursing interventions for pelvic floor
        disorders

    · Categorize the assessment data, medical treatment, and complications of congenital reproductive
        malformations

This module explores the structural disorders of the reproductive system of persons assigned female at birth. The
nature of the female reproductive system makes it susceptible to various structural abnormalities that can
significantly impact a person's health and well-being. Structural disorders can be acquired or congenital.
Foundational knowledge in pathophysiology is essential to the nurse caring for patients with these conditions.
Patient education surrounding the prevention and treatment of these conditions can improve the quality of life and
empower patients to make informed decisions about their reproductive health.

Pelvic Floor Disorders

The pelvic floor is the term applied to the group of muscles that provide support to the organs located in the pelvis.
These organs include the uterus, urinary bladder, and bowel. Relaxation of the pelvic floor muscles and connective
tissue can cause the organs to sag (pelvic organ prolapse) and can interfere with their function, causing pain, leaking
of urine or stool, constipation, feelings of fullness in the vagina, and difficulty in defecating. Conditions that decrease
the integrity of the pelvic muscular structures are then called pelvic floor disorders.

These disorders can influence the quality of a person's daily life by interfering with social interactions and affecting
the person emotionally. These conditions may also interfere with intimacy and sexual pleasure (ACOG, 2019).

Factors that increase the incidence of pelvic floor disorders include pregnancy, increased parity (the number of
deliveries), vaginal delivery, connective tissue disorders, and health conditions that cause chronic coughing (ACOG,
2019). Obesity, chronic constipation, and previous surgeries, such as a hysterectomy, increase the incidence for
pelvic floor dysfunction. Weight reduction and constipation mitigation are topics that can be included in the wellness
plan and may decrease the risk of these conditions (Phillippi & Kantrowitz-Gordon, 2024)

Many pelvic floor disorders go undiagnosed and untreated. Some people do not seek treatment because they are
embarrassed to discuss their symptoms with a provider. Others may mistakenly believe their symptoms are a
normal part of aging. Figure 6.4 shows the different types of pelvic organ prolapse.

FIGURE 6.4 Types of Pelvic Organ Prolapse Pelvic organ prolapse occurs when one of the organs (uterus, bladder, or bowel) relaxes from
276  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     the normal position in the pelvis and bulges into the vagina. This condition can cause pain and other functional difficulties but is not
     considered life-threatening. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Cystocele, Rectocele, and Uterine Prolapse
     A cystocele occurs when the bladder bulges into the anterior wall of the vagina. Signs may include vaginal pressure
     or a feeling of fullness. The patient may experience lower back pain and decreased sexual satisfaction. Urinary
     dysfunction in the form of the need to urinate often and urgently may be present in varying degrees. The patient may
     also have trouble emptying the bladder completely. All of these conditions may lead to frequent urinary tract
     infections.

     A rectocele occurs when the rectum bulges into the posterior wall of the vagina. Signs are similar to those of a
     cystocele. Signs may include vaginal pressure, a feeling of fullness, the feeling that something is falling down or out
     of the pelvis. Lower back pain, decreased sexual satisfaction or pain, constipation, trouble with stool becoming
     trapped in the rectocele, and urinary and bowel dysfunction may also be present in varying degrees.

     When the pelvic floor weakens, it can no longer support the uterus, and the uterus descends into the vagina, a
     condition called uterine prolapse. Symptoms of uterine prolapse include urinary incontinence, feeling of fullness in
     the vagina, bulging of the vagina, constipation, and back pain. The symptoms of cystocele, rectocele, and uterine
     prolapse are all caused by pelvic floor relaxation.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     The National Association for Continence has created exercise videos (https://openstax.org/r/77pelvicexerciz) that
     may help patients strengthen their pelvic floor.

     Diagnosis and Treatment of Cystocele, Rectocele, and Uterine Prolapse
     Diagnosis of these conditions is based on a physical examination and review of symptoms from the patient. The first
     step is to rule out any infectious process. Once it has been determined that the problem is functional, the provider
     will assess the impact the condition has on the patient's emotional, physical, and social life. One method of
     assessment is administering a pelvic floor questionnaire. Pelvic floor questionnaires evaluate feelings of pressure,
     bulging, difficulty in passing stool, incontinence of urine or stool, and pain. These self-scoring tools assist the
     provider in understanding the goals of the patient and can help to guide the treatment. Diagnostic testing, such as
     cystoscopy, urodynamics, and colonoscopy, can also assist in diagnosing severity of the issue.

     Medical management of cystocele, rectocele, and uterine prolapse has many similarities. Surgical intervention can
     be performed to reconstruct or reinforce the bladder or rectum or to remove the uterus. Management of modifiable
     risk factors is an important adjunct to any other therapy for pelvic floor disorders. Other potential treatments
     include pelvic floor strengthening exercises, bladder training, hormone replacement therapy, wearing a pessary, or
     surgical repair.

     Pelvic floor therapy can be accomplished at home with proper instruction by the health-care provider and has been
     shown to improve the quality of a patient's life (Torres-Lacomba et al., 2022). In some cases, patients may find it
     useful to work with a pelvic floor therapist. Pelvic floor strengthening has been shown to improve symptoms for
     many people (Basnet, 2021).

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Kegel exercises are very effective at strengthening the pelvic floor. This video breaks down the steps involved in
     Kegel exercises (https://openstax.org/r/77kegels) with a detailed explanation.

     Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is another potential treatment that may contribute to increased muscle tone,
     vaginal elasticity, and integrity. Replacing these hormones can increase blood flow to the vagina and other pelvic
     structures, adding to tissue integrity and strength.
     A pessary is a device worn inside the vagina to provide support to the pelvic floor muscles and organs. Pessaries

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.2 · Structural Disorders                                                                                                          277

(Figure 6.5) are made of medical-grade silicone and come in many different sizes and shapes. It is not uncommon
for a patient to be fitted for multiple sizes and shapes of pessaries before finding the most comfortable and effective
fit.

FIGURE 6.5 Vaginal Pessaries Pessaries come in a range of shapes and sizes. (credit: "Pessaries" by "Huckfinne"/Wikimedia Commons,
Public Domain)

        LINK TO LEARNING

The American Urogynecologic Society Vaginal Pessaries Patient Education Guide (https://openstax.org/r/
77pessaries) can provide education on the use and types of pessaries.

Fistulas
A fistula is an abnormal connection between two surfaces in the body that are not meant to be connected. A
vaginal fistula is one type of fistula that is an opening from the vagina to another anatomical structure. A
rectovaginal fistula is an opening from the rectum to the vagina, a vesicovaginal fistula is an opening between the
bladder and the vagina, and a urethrovaginal fistula is an opening between the urethra and the vagina. Signs of these
conditions can include leaking of urine or stool from the vagina, frequent urinary and vaginal infections, and a foul
odor. Very small fistulas may heal on their own, but most will require surgical intervention. Figure 6.6 shows the
common areas where fistulas form.

FIGURE 6.6 Common Sites of Fistulas Fistulas (abnormal openings) commonly occur between the vagina and bladder and between the
vagina and rectum. Pressure from the fetus can cause soft tissues to become ischemic and cause tissue breakdown and malfunction,
278  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     leading to fistula formation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     The most common reason for fistula formation is obstetric trauma. This can happen because of the pressure applied
     to the bladder and pelvic floor muscles during childbirth, causing an opening to form. Fistulas can also result from
     episiotomy or laceration repairs that transcend two structures, such as the vagina and rectum. These complications
     are more prevalent in low-resource countries where nutrition is poor, labor or pushing is allowed to continue for
     extended periods, or cesarean birth is not readily available. Operative vaginal deliveries (the use of vacuum or
     forceps) can increase the risk of this complication. Other potential causes are congenital malformations, a
     gynecologic surgical complication, or the practice of female genital mutilation (FGM) (United Nations Population
     Fund, 2022a).

     Female genital mutilation is the nonmedical partial or total removal of external female genitalia (United Nations
     Population Fund, 2022a). This cultural practice is routinely performed in communities around the world. This
     practice is not promoted or endorsed by any religious group and is recognized as a human rights violation
     internationally. (United Nations Population Fund, 2022b). It is important that nurses caring for persons assigned
     female at birth be aware of these practices and the lasting physical and emotional complications that accompany
     them.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Female Genital Mutilation

     Injuries inflicted on female genitalia for nonmedical reasons are considered female genital mutilation. These
     practices still exist in more than 30 countries in Africa and the Middle East and some countries in Asia and Latin
     America. The practice is also found in some immigrant populations residing in Western Europe, North America,
     Australia, and New Zealand. This is a cultural practice and is not supported or endorsed by any specific religion.

     The United Nations (UN) has partnered with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the United Nations
     Children's Fund (UNICEF) to provide education to the most at-risk communities around the world. Their goal is to
     eradicate the practice of female genital mutilation by 2030 through outreach and support. To bring awareness to the
     problem, these organizations have created the International Day of Zero Tolerance for Female Genital Mutilation,
     which is on February 6.

     (United Nations, n.d.)

     Congenital Malformations

     An abnormality of a structure that develops during formation of the embryo and presents with a wide variety of
     symptoms is called a congenital malformation. When it involves the uterus and vagina, it is called a Müllerian
     anomaly. Early in development, the Müllerian ducts divide to form the uterus, cervix, vagina, and ovaries. When this
     development is interrupted, several variations in formation can occur. Many of these conditions often go
     undiagnosed until the patient presents with an issue of infertility, recurrent miscarriages, or ectopic pregnancy.
     Other symptoms a patient may present with are pelvic pain and discomfort with penetrative vaginal intercourse.
     Diagnosis of a congenital malformation can be confirmed through a pelvic exam, ultrasound, or surgical procedure.

     Uterine Malformations
     A congenital malformation that includes changes to the shape of the uterus is a uterine malformation (American
     Society of Reproductive Medicine, 2012). Examples of these malformations are shown in Figure 4.14. Some of the
     different shapes include a didelphys shape, which includes two separate cavities and two cervixes, and a bicornuate
     uterus, which is two separate cavities with one cervix. A unicornuate shape is defined as a single horn to the uterus.
     Other uterine shapes include arcuate or concave (instead of straight) and a septate uterus with a septum that
     separates the two cavities.

     These variations of the uterine shape may lead to symptoms such as painful periods, miscarriages, and preterm
     birth. Some of these conditions can be corrected with surgical intervention. In other situations, such as with an
     arcuate shape, conception and pregnancy may not be affected, and the shape is considered a variation of normal
     (Garcia, 2023).

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.3 · Benign Growths                                                                                                       279

Vaginal Malformations
Vaginal malformations include a septum forming in the vagina. Variations on this malformation are shown in Figure
6.7. This condition is usually not discovered until the patient becomes sexually active and experiences pain with an
attempt at vaginal penetration. Patients with vaginal malformations may also have uterine and bladder
malformations because these organs develop during the same time frame in utero. A comprehensive evaluation
should be completed by a urogynecologist. Painful menstruation may be present if the septum prevents blood from
leaving the body. A simple surgical procedure to remove the septum can be done to relieve the symptoms.

FIGURE 6.7 Vaginal Septum Variations Patients with vaginal malformations may also have uterine and bladder malformations.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

        REAL RN STORIES

Name: Hannah B., RN, BSN
Clinical Setting: Obstetric Office Nurse
Geographic Location: Allen, Texas

One time, a mother brought in her 14-year-old who was having so much pain every month but had never started her
period. I did a thorough history and really could not figure out what was happening. As the provider was examining
the patient, she found an imperforate hymen. So the patient was actually having a period, but the hymen was not
allowing the discharge to leave her vagina. The provider did an outpatient procedure to open the hymen. I saw the
patient a few months after her procedure, and she was feeling great and having normal periods without so much
pain. It was really interesting.

6.3 Benign Growths

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Appraise the incidence, signs and symptoms, diagnostic procedures and treatment, and nursing care for
        benign uterine growths

    · Differentiate the incidence, risk factors, signs and symptoms, diagnostic procedures and treatment, and
        nursing care for benign cervical growths

    · Categorize the incidence, risk factors, signs and symptoms, diagnostic procedures and treatment, and
        nursing care for benign ovarian growths

    · Examine the incidence, risk factors, signs and symptoms, diagnostic procedures and treatment, and
        nursing care for benign vulvar and vaginal growths

This module focuses on the range of conditions related to benign growths in the female reproductive system.
Though benign (not cancerous), these conditions can interfere in the lives of patients. The nurse, as a health-care
professional, should have a good foundation of knowledge in the cause, clinical manifestations, diagnostic
approaches, and management strategies related to benign growths in the female reproductive organs to provide
care and education to patients living with these conditions.
280  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     Benign Uterine Growths

     Benign uterine growths consist of fibroids and polyps. These growths can cause minor complications but are not
     concerning for neoplasms. If these growths are not causing discomfort or complications, they do not need to be
     removed.

     Fibroids
     A fibroid, or a leiomyoma, is a benign solid tumor that develops from the smooth muscle tissue of the uterus.
     Fibroids can be identified via sonography and can occur in the uterus as shown in Figure 4.13. Although not fully
     understood, fibroid growth appears to be encouraged by the hormones estrogen and progesterone. Approximately
     50 percent of people with uterine fibroids have no symptoms; the other 50 percent have symptoms, which can
     include heavy menstrual bleeding, pain in the pelvis, and in some cases, urinary frequency (Ward, 2023, pp.
     644-645). If a tumor grows very large, it can cause pelvic heaviness and rectal pressure and can interfere with
     sexual activity (ACOG, 2020).

     In those patients with fibroids who do not have any symptoms, the condition is often discovered during a routine
     examination. Fibroids are slow-growing and usually regress during menopause because of the decrease in
     hormones (Schuiling & Likis, 2020). If symptomatic, the most reported symptoms are heavy menstrual periods, with
     or without pain (ACOG, 2023c). Assessment reveals that the uterus with fibroids is nontender and may feel lumpy
     on palpation. The uterus can be enlarged and shaped irregularly. Diagnostic imaging, such as ultrasound or MRI, is
     used to confirm the presence of fibroids (ACOG, 2023c)

     Treatment for fibroids includes pharmacotherapy, such as a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device (IUD) or
     antifibrinolytic medication such as tranexamic acid (Lysteda). Other medications that produce anovulation can be
     used to shrink the fibroid. These methods have varying levels of success and come with their side effects (ACOG,
     2023c). If surgery is recommended, a myomectomy can be performed to preserve fertility, or a complete removal of
     the uterus (hysterectomy) may be performed (ACOG, 2023c)

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     Tranexamic Acid

     Tranexamic acid is a synthetic form of lysine. Lysine is an amino acid used to build proteins.

     Tranexamic acid prevents the breakdown of blood clots. This medication is used for the treatment of heavy
     menstrual bleeding.

         · Generic Name: tranexamic acid
         · Trade Name: Lysteda, Cyklokapron
         · Class/Action: miscellaneous coagulation modifiers
         · Route/Dosage: Medication is started on the first day of the menstrual cycle. Oral medication, 650 mg, is

             prescribed three times per day for up to 5 days in a row, not to exceed more than 6 doses in 24 hours or for
             more than 5 days in a row. Swallow tablets whole; do not crush or chew.
         · Indications: An antifibrinolytic is indicated for the treatment of heavy menstrual bleeding in persons assigned
             female at birth.
         · Warnings and Precautions: Thromboembolic risk. Venous and arterial thromboses have been reported.
         · Mechanism of Action: "Tranexamic acid is thought to lower endometrial tPA activity, resulting in decreased
             blood loss. It blocks lysine binding sites on plasminogen molecules, preventing plasmin formation and
             menstrual fluid fibrinolysis" ("Tranexamic acid (Lysteda) for treatment of menorrhagia," 2010, p. 1210).
         · Contraindications: Tranexamic acid is contraindicated in patients with increased thromboembolic risk,
             including those using combined hormonal contraceptive methods and those with a history of thrombosis or
             hypercoagulopathy.
         · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: The most common adverse effects of tranexamic acid are headache, sinus
             and nasal symptoms, back pain, abdominal pain, musculoskeletal pain, joint pain, muscle cramps, migraine,
             anemia, and fatigue.
         · Nursing Implications: The nurse needs to educate the patient about this drug, especially about the signs and

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.3 · Benign Growths                                                                                                                  281

        symptoms of thrombosis, and the expected side effects. The nurse should provide information on the
        appropriate time of the month to take the medication (on the first day of the period) and include instructions
        on when to stop taking the medication (on the last day of the period or for no more than 5 days).

(Thornton, 2023)

Polyps
A uterine polyp, also known as an endometrial polyp, is a growth that derives from the inner lining of the uterus
(endometrium), shown in Figure 6.8. These growths are usually benign and do not require specific treatment unless
they grow so large as to protrude through the cervix and cause discomfort to the premenopausal patient (Schuiling
& Likis, 2020, p 554). Though usually benign, polyps that develop in perimenopause or menopause should be
investigated with a biopsy (Tanos et al., 2017). Irregular or heavy menstrual periods can be caused by uterine
polyps, and any postmenopausal bleeding requires further investigation (Tanos et al., 2017).

FIGURE 6.8 Uterine Polyps A uterine polyp, also known as an endometrial polyp, is a growth that derives from the inner lining of the
uterus. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The diagnosis of a uterine polyp is usually made with a transvaginal ultrasound or other imaging (Schuiling & Likis,
2020). Treatment of polyps is similar to that for fibroids and includes hormones that cause anovulation to reduce
estrogen and progesterone or surgical removal of the polyp. The nurse's responsibility is to provide education on
what to expect during the transvaginal ultrasound and to accompany the patient during the procedure.

Benign Ovarian Growths

An ovarian cyst, shown in Figure 6.9, is a blood- or fluid-filled sac found on or near the ovary. These cysts are
derived from the different tissues that make up the ovary (Ward, 2023). Many cysts are discovered as incidental
findings during regular examination. Most cysts are benign and asymptomatic but require follow-up based on the
guidelines from the Society of Radiologists in Ultrasound. These guidelines consider a person's menstrual history,
family history, and whether the person is pre-, peri-, or postmenopausal (Andreotti et al., 2020). Occasionally,
ovarian cysts can burst and cause pain in the abdomen. If the cyst is bleeding or causes the ovary to twist (referred
to as ovarian torsion), surgical removal may be necessary (Ward, 2023).
282  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     FIGURE 6.9 Ovarian Cyst Contrast the normal ovary on the left with the ovary with a cyst on the right. (attribution: Copyright Rice
     University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Benign Cervical Growths

     Growths on the cervix are typically benign and are usually an incidental finding during a routine examination.
     Patients with cervical growths may experience increased post-sex bleeding. Nurses can provide education to
     patients that any abnormal bleeding (bleeding following sex or midcycle bleeding) can be a sign of infection and may
     warrant an examination from a health-care provider (Schuiling & Likis, 2020).

     Growths on the cervix are usually one of the following: mucous cysts, polyps, or warts (Ward, 2023). Mucous cysts,
     also called Nabothian cysts, are formed from mucus-producing tissue, are benign, and typically do not need
     treatment unless they become very large (Barrigón et al., 2018). Figure 6.10 shows an example of Nabothian cysts
     on the cervix. A cervical polyp is a fleshy, red-colored growth protruding from the cervix. They are usually benign and
     do not need treatment unless they become a nuisance to the patient (Ward, 2023). Condylomata acuminata (warts)
     are caused by the human papillomavirus (HPV) and can manifest as a cauliflower-type growth on the cervix. These
     growths can also be found in the vagina, on the vulva, or in the perianal area (CDC, 2021). The current HPV vaccine
     prevents more than 90 percent of the virus strains that cause warts in addition to the strains that lead to cancer
     (CDC, 2022a). Treatment for condylomata is limited to the application of an acidic solution or, in severe cases,
     surgical removal (CDC, 2021).

     FIGURE 6.10 Nabothian Cysts Nabothian cysts are benign findings on the cervix. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
     CC BY 4.0 license)

     Benign Vulvar and Vaginal Growths

     The Bartholin's glands (see Figure 3.4) are located inside the vaginal opening and provide moisture and lubrication

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.4 · Malignant Neoplasms                                                                                                283

to the vagina. Obstruction of one of these glands can cause a fluid-filled cyst, a Bartholin's cyst, or an abscess to
form (Schuiling & Likis, 2020) The patient may be unaware of the cyst, and it may drain on its own. However, the cyst
may become enlarged and cause pain and discomfort to the patient. Conservative treatment is warm compresses or
a sitz bath to allow the cyst to resolve on its own. Antibiotics may be prescribed if the cyst appears to be large,
inflamed, or infected. Occasionally, the cyst may become so inflamed that it may be necessary for the provider to
drain it. Common bacteria involved in an abscess are Escherichia coli (E. coli), methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA), and those causing gonorrhea and chlamydia (Chen, 2022).

        LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

Genital Piercing

The practice of genital piercing has become more popular in recent years, and the nurse will undoubtedly encounter
this in the patients they care for. Piercing is done with several motivations. It can be a

    · form of self-expression,
    · test of physical endurance,
    · statement of resistance to society, or a
    · direct sexual statement (Van Hoover et al., 2017).

In some circumstances, genital piercing can be done as a means of overcoming past traumatic experiences (Van der
Meer et al., 2008).

Genital piercing can cause infection, scarring, infertility due to infection, and tissue damage to the organ pierced or
surrounding structures (Van Hoover et al., 2017).

Nurses need to be informed and prepared to assist with the removal of genital piercing in the following
circumstances:

    · childbirth
    · breast-feeding (if the piercing is in the nipple)
    · electrocautery used during procedures
    · radiologic procedures
    · presence of infection (Young & Armstrong, 2008)

6.4 Malignant Neoplasms

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Correlate the incidence, risk factors, signs and symptoms, diagnostic procedures, staging, current
        treatment, and nursing care for cervical cancer

    · Distinguish the incidence, risk factors, signs and symptoms, diagnostic procedures, staging, current
        treatment, and nursing care for uterine cancer

    · Summarize the incidence, risk factors, signs and symptoms, diagnostic procedures, staging, current
        treatment, and nursing care for ovarian cancer

    · Critique the incidence, risk factors, signs and symptoms, diagnostic procedures, current treatment, and
        nursing care for vulvar and vaginal cancer

    · Categorize nursing care for specific gynecologic surgeries

Prevention and early detection are key components of cancer care. Nurses play a vital role in providing education to
patients regarding regular wellness checkups and screening exams. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) publishes and provides guidance for recommended screening intervals. Some of the current
recommendations include such items as no regular cervical cancer screening for persons AFAB under age 21 or
those over age 65 or who have undergone a hysterectomy. Other professional organizations also weigh in on these
guidelines, including the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). These and other professional
organizations do not always agree on the timing or efficacy of screening exams, which confuses patients and care
providers (Ward, 2023) As with all medical information, nurses provide patients with the most up-to-date, evidence-
284  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     based information available at the time.

     Cervical Cancer

     A slow-growing cancer found in the cervix is called cervical cancer (Figure 6.11). Most cervical cancer can be
     attributed to HPV infection. HPV strains 16 and 18 cause more than 70 percent of all cervical cancers. (CDC, 2022a).
     The HPV vaccine, given to preteens and persons up to the age of 45, can protect sexually active people from the
     cancer-causing HPV strains (CDC, 2022a).

     FIGURE 6.11 Cervical Cancer When precancerous cells are found early, this increases the chances of a full recovery from cervical cancer.
     (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Risk Factors
     Risk factors for cervical cancer include human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
     positive status, and cigarette smoking. There are more than 500 different strains of the HPV virus. Strains 16 and 18
     are responsible for 70 percent of cervical cancers, 90 percent of anal cancers, and 45 percent of oropharyngeal
     cancers (Ward, 2023).

     Signs and Symptoms
     Abnormal cervical cells or precancerous cells often have no symptoms and are found only with regular cervical
     screening exams. Occasionally, the patient will present with cervical bleeding following sex or between menstrual
     cycles. Pelvic pain and unusual vaginal discharge may also be warning signs of cervical cancer (CDC, 2023). The
     recommendations of how often screening exams should be completed have evolved. The evidence suggests that
     annual screening exams have not been shown to decrease mortality from cancer (Ward, 2023). The medical
     community has a much better understanding of the growth patterns of HPV and has adjusted the guidelines based
     on this understanding (ACOG, 2023a).

     Diagnostic Procedures
     Cervical screening and HPV DNA testing are done in most labs around the country. These two combined screening
     exams are referred to as co-testing. Cells are removed from the endocervical area using a brush in a procedure
     called a Papanicolaou test, or Pap smear. Most labs can also test for HPV infection and, if one is present, determine
     the strain. The results from these screening exams are used to determine an individualized approach to further
     testing using the 2019 American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology (ASCCP) risk-based management
     consensus. The guidelines are available on the ASCCP website, and a handy app allows for simple interpretation of
     the recommendations (Perkins et al., 2020).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                              6.4 · Malignant Neoplasms                                                                 285

        LINK TO LEARNING

Watch this animation showing the Pap test (https://openstax.org/r/77paptest) to see the steps involved.

If further testing is recommended, the patient will undergo a colposcopy and possibly a biopsy. The colposcopy
allows the provider to visualize the cervical tissue under a high-powered microscope with a bright light. Using
different solutions applied to the cervix to highlight abnormal areas, the provider may take biopsies to look for the
depth of abnormal cells (Schuiling & Likis, 2020). The screening tests for cervical cancer are summarized in Table
6.2.

Tests                Process

Co-testing for both  1. Sample cells are taken from the endocervix to test for precancerous conditions.
HPV and cervical     2. If abnormal cells are present, they are placed into a category based on the American
cell changes
                          Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology (ASCCP) website, using the Bethesda
    · HPV-DNA             categories defined by the pathology report.
        testing      3. If the HPV test is positive, the DNA is tested to determine the strain.
                     4. All these data are entered into the (ASCCP) guidelines (on either the website or the
    · Pap smear           app), and a treatment plan is made based on individual circumstances.
        (cytology)

TABLE 6.2 Screening Tests for Cervical Cancer (Perkins et al., 2020)

Medical and Surgical Management
Treatments for cervical precancer and cancer include cryotherapy (freezing) of the cells to allow for healthy cells to
regenerate. Ablation with a laser may be done to remove abnormal cells. Conization of the cervix is the process of
excising a cone-shaped piece of tissue to remove the full thickness of abnormal cells. The loop electrosurgical
excision procedure (LEEP) allows the provider to remove a large portion of the endocervical area and cauterize at
the same time. This tissue can be sent to the pathology lab for further examination (Schuiling & Likis, 2020).

Nursing Care
Nursing care for a patient undergoing a cervical diagnostic procedure such as a Pap smear includes education about
the procedure and what to expect. It is helpful to show the speculum to the patient and describe the sounds made
when the device is opened, as it can be startling if they are not expecting it. The patient should provide consent for
the procedure and be reassured that consent can be withdrawn at any time and the examination will cease.

Patients who have undergone a colposcopy, LEEP, or biopsy should be informed that some vaginal bleeding may
occur (Schuiling & Likis, 2020) A peripad can be provided with instructions on which signs and symptoms should be
reported. All patients who have undergone screening or diagnostic testing should be given realistic expectations of
when their results will be available and how they will receive them.

Ovarian Cancer

Ovarian cancer is an abnormal growth of cells on the ovaries that quickly multiply and can invade surrounding
tissues (Figure 6.12). Ovarian cancer can be caused by a gene mutation or can occur naturally. Patients who have
taken contraceptives that cause anovulation, have breast-fed, or have had multiple pregnancies are at a potentially
lower risk.
286  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     FIGURE 6.12 Stages of Ovarian Cancer Ovarian cancer is found many times by palpation when the cancer is in the late stage. (attribution:
     Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Risk Factors
     Risk factors for ovarian cancer include a family history of female organ cancers, especially if the person is positive
     for the BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutation. Other risk factors include:

         · obesity
         · nulliparity (never having been pregnant)
         · infertility
         · history of endometriosis
         · beginning menstruation at a younger age or starting menopause at an older age than average (Ward, 2023)

     Signs and Symptoms
     The signs and symptoms of ovarian cancer can be vague (Ward, 2023). This often leads to a diagnosis at a later
     stage, which increases the morbidity and mortality of the disease (Schuiling & Likis, 2020). Unexplained weight loss
     and fatigue should prompt any patient to seek a medical evaluation, as these can be symptoms of cancer in the later
     stages. Other symptoms may include:

         · increased feelings of abdominal fullness
         · increased flatulence
         · feeling full after eating small amounts of food
         · pelvic pain
         · irregular vaginal bleeding

     Diagnostic Procedures
     Diagnostic procedures for ovarian cancer include ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance
     imaging (MRI). In some cases, a positron emission tomography (PET) scan may be used to look for distant disease.
     The blood test, called cancer antigen 125 (CA125), is often positive in patients with ovarian cancer but can also be
     positive in other conditions, making the test not specific enough to use as a screening tool (Ward, 2023).

     Medical Management/Treatment
     Medical management is determined based on the stage of the cancer when discovered. These stages are
     summarized in Table 6.3. Staging is done by examining the tumor, lymph node involvement, and metastasis to other
     sites. The higher the stage, the more the cancer has advanced. If the cancer is found early, surgery to remove the
     ovaries, fallopian tubes, and uterus may be performed. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy may also be offered
     based on the staging of the disease (Schuiling & Likis, 2020).

     Stage                                                           What It Means

     Stage I Cancer is confined to one or both ovaries.

       Stage II Cancer has spread to the uterus or other nearby organs.

     TABLE 6.3 Stages of Ovarian Cancer (Society of Gynecologic Oncology, 2020)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     6.4 · Malignant Neoplasms                         287

Stage  What It Means

Stage III Cancer has spread to the lymph nodes or abdominal lining.

  Stage IV Cancer has spread to distant organs, such as the lungs or liver.

TABLE 6.3 Stages of Ovarian Cancer (Society of Gynecologic Oncology, 2020)

        LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

Cancer during Pregnancy

Cervical and ovarian cancers are the most common cancers that occur during pregnancy (Bohlin et al., 2024).
Diagnostic testing with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and sonogram can be used during pregnancy without
harm to the fetus.

Cervical cancer treatment can be initiated after the fetal lungs have matured, and birth via cesarean section is
recommended (Bohlin et al., 2024). If cancer has progressed, treatments such as chemotherapy, radiation, or
hysterectomy with removal of lymph nodes are not compatible with pregnancy.

Ovarian cancer can be treated during pregnancy by removing the ovary and adnexa if the cancer has not
metastasized; however, advanced ovarian cancer might necessitate chemotherapy and radiation that is
contraindicated in pregnancy (Bohlin et al., 2024).

Providers must discuss staging and treatment options along with gestation of pregnancy. Patients must decide on
their willingness to terminate the pregnancy, conservatively treat the cancer during pregnancy, or wait for treatment
until after the birth. These decisions can be very challenging for the patient and their family. Providers and nurses
must offer ethical support to the patient.

Nursing Care
Nursing care for a patient undergoing testing for ovarian cancer or treatment after diagnosis involves the use of
therapeutic listening and support. Often when a patient is stressed or traumatized from hearing unwelcome news,
they may repeatedly ask the same questions. Patience, caring, and understanding are some of the best tools
available to the nurse.

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

Patient-Centered Care

The diagnosis of ovarian cancer can be devastating to the patient. The nurse can provide patient-centered care
when answering questions regarding the diagnosis and treatment. The nurse will approach the patient with
sensitivity and respect. The nurse encourages the patient to talk about their feelings and express their concerns.
Evaluating the patient's religious and cultural beliefs can guide the nurse to gather support resources. The nurse is
available to answer questions for the family and support family members.

Uterine Cancer

One of the most common gynecologic cancers, uterine cancer may originate in the lining of the uterus (called
endometrial cancer) or in the muscle of the uterus, which is the rarer form called uterine sarcoma (Society of
Gynecologic Oncology, 2020). Endometrial cancer accounts for approximately 12,000 deaths per year in the United
States (Ward, 2023). If detected early, uterine cancer has a high survivability rate.

The risk factors of uterine cancer include prolonged exposure to unopposed estrogen. In the normal menstrual
cycle, the hormone progesterone quiets the uterus, suspends the growth of the uterine lining, and allows for the
sloughing of the lining (menstruation). Some circumstances that allow for unopposed estrogen are polycystic ovary
syndrome (PCOS) with anovulation and HRT without the use of progesterone. Infertility and nulliparity can also
288  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     increase the risk for uterine cancer (Ward, 2023).

     The signs and symptoms of endometrial cancer are unusual bleeding. Bleeding after sex, between periods, or after
     the start of menopause are important warning signs and need to be followed up with an evaluation as soon as
     possible.

     FIGURE 6.13 Endometrial Biopsy In an endometrial biopsy, a speculum is introduced in the vagina, and a thin biopsy tool is passed
     through the cervix into the uterus. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Diagnostic Procedures
     The diagnostic procedure for endometrial cancer is a uterine biopsy, shown in Figure 6.13. Preparation of the
     patient is similar to that for obtaining a Pap smear. A speculum is introduced, and a thin biopsy tool is passed
     through the cervix into the uterus. Cells are collected from several different areas of the uterine lining and are sent
     to the pathology lab. After the procedure, the patient may experience cramping and light vaginal bleeding that can
     last up to 24 hours.

     Nursing responsibilities include preparing the patient for the procedure and supporting the patient during the
     biopsy. The nurse may also be responsible for preparing the specimen for transport to the pathology lab. The nurse
     will provide the patient with instructions to take an anti-inflammatory for cramping pain and to notify the health-
     care provider for vaginal bleeding that soaks a pad every 1 to 2 hours, abdominal pain, and fever (Goldstein, 2023).

     Treatment
     Treatment for endometrial cancer includes the removal of the uterus (hysterectomy). Depending on the spread of
     the disease, the fallopian tubes and ovaries may also be removed. If cancer is discovered in the early stages and
     confined to the uterus, recovery can be complete (Ward, 2023). If cancer has progressed, chemotherapy or
     radiation might be necessary.

     Vulvar and Vaginal Cancer

     Vulvar and vaginal cancer are very rare. These cancers have been linked to the HPV infection. The most important

     Access for free at openstax.org
6.4 · Malignant Neoplasms                                                                                                                  289

preventive measure is to be vaccinated against HPV to avoid infection (CDC, 2022a). Other risk factors include
multiple sexual partners and smoking.

The most common symptom that patients present with is persistent itching or burning of the vulva or a sore that
does not heal (Figure 6.14) (Ward, 2023). It is important to educate patients on the early warning signs of
gynecologic cancers and encourage them to seek prompt attention from their health-care provider for evaluation.

Signs and symptoms of vulvar or vaginal cancer include:

    · itching, burning, or pain on the vulva/in the vagina
    · a lump, sore, swelling, or wart-like growth
    · thickened or raised patches of skin--red, white, or brown
    · a mole that changes color or shape
    · a lesion or sore on the vulva
    · hard or swollen lymph nodes in the groin

FIGURE 6.14 Vulvar Carcinoma A cancerous lesion on the vulva can look like a lump, a sore, or a wart-like growth. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Diagnostic Procedures
Diagnostic procedures for vulvar and vaginal cancers include a biopsy. The three types of biopsies are as follows:

    · Punch biopsy--A tool is used to remove a section of the lesion to determine thickness.
    · Shave biopsy--Some tissue is removed across the top of the lesion.
    · Needle biopsy--A needle removes tissue from inside the lesion.

If the lesion is determined to be cancerous, the patient will be referred to a gynecologic oncologist for further
evaluation and to develop a treatment plan (Society of Gynecologic Oncology, 2020).

Hysterectomy

Surgical removal of the uterus is called a hysterectomy. A hysterectomy is one of the most common surgeries
performed in the United States (ACOG, 2021). Once the uterus has been removed, a patient can no longer become
pregnant.

The four ways a hysterectomy can be performed include:

    · through the vagina
    · through the abdomen
    · using laparoscopy (minimally invasive surgery) to assist in removal of the uterus
    · using robot-assisted laparoscopy (in which a robot-controlled arm is used to assist the surgeon with the fine

        motor movements needed in the abdomen).
290  6 · Structural and Tissue Disorders of the Reproductive System

     All these surgical options have benefits and potential risks. The health-care provider will discuss these with the
     patient and, using shared decision making with the patient, decide on a treatment plan.

     Depending on the reason the hysterectomy is being performed, the uterus may be removed by itself, or the fallopian
     tubes and ovaries may be removed as well. For example, if the purpose is to remove fibroids, the ovaries and
     fallopian tubes may be left intact. If the reason for the hysterectomy is cancer, the ovaries and fallopian tubes may
     be removed. Because the ovaries secrete hormones, their removal will prompt a physiologic menopause that may
     require hormone replacement therapy.

     Risks Associated with Hysterectomy
     Surgery of any kind comes with risks. Risks specific to hysterectomy include:

         · infection
         · hemorrhage
         · injury to the bladder
         · injury to other nearby organs
         · blood clots
         · anesthesia complications (ACOG, 2021)

     Preoperative and Postoperative Care for Hysterectomy
     Preoperative care for a hysterectomy is the same as for any other surgical procedure. The patient will have baseline
     screening of their cardiac activity (electrocardiogram, or EKG) and complete blood counts. In some cases,
     presurgical antibiotics will be ordered to reduce the chance of infection. A plan for venous thromboembolism (VTE)
     prophylaxis will be ordered based on provider and hospital protocol.

     Postoperative care will usually include a hospital stay of 1 to 3 days, depending on the type of surgery performed
     and the patient's recovery. The patient will be encouraged to resume walking soon after surgery to prevent blood
     clots. Constipation and inability to pass urine are common concerns following a hysterectomy. A diet rich in fiber
     along with adequate hydration can assist with constipation. In some cases, a stool softener may be recommended.
     Vaginal bleeding may be present and may require the use of peripads. Vaginal rest is recommended for a minimum
     of 6 weeks after surgery. The patient is instructed not to place anything in the vagina during that time. The patient
     should be instructed not to lift heavy items until released by the surgeon to do so.

             LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

     The Legacy of Henrietta Lacks and Her Contribution to Medicine

     A young mother diagnosed with an aggressive form of cervical cancer made a huge contribution to medicine when
     her unusual cells were made into the cell line nicknamed HeLa cells.

     HeLa cells, derived from Henrietta Lacks's name, have made profound contributions to medical science and
     research since their collection in the early 1950s. They are considered "immortal" in that they can grow and divide
     endlessly in a laboratory, where other cell lines cannot. These cells have been instrumental in numerous
     groundbreaking discoveries, including the development of the polio vaccine, advancements in cancer research, and
     insights into cellular biology. HeLa cells have been pivotal in understanding cell behavior, genetic mechanisms, and
     the testing of pharmaceuticals. Their unique ability to continuously replicate has provided scientists with a
     consistent and reproducible experimental platform, accelerating progress in diverse fields. Investigators did not ask
     Henrietta Lack for permission to use her cells. And while the researchers who discovered the cell line's unique
     capabilities originally gave them away freely to other scientists, HeLa cells were later commercialized and used to
     drive profits. Until Lacks' family settled a lawsuit with a biotech company in 2023, her family never saw any financial
     benefit from the usage of her cells. Despite this ethical consideration surrounding their use, HeLa cells remain an
     indispensable tool in scientific exploration, shaping the landscape of modern medicine and contributing significantly
     to the understanding of human biology and disease.

     Read this article to learn more about Henrietta Lacks (https://openstax.org/r/77helacells) and HeLa cells.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                6 · Summary 291

Summary

6.1 Functional Disorders

Menstrual disorders can significantly impact a patient's physical and emotional well-being. Menstrual disorders that
cause pain can decrease the patient's quality of life and interfere with daily tasks. AUB can cause anxiety for
patients, especially when the cause is unknown. Endometriosis can cause patients to experience debilitating pain
and can increase concern for fertility. PCOS also causes concern for fertility and increases risks for endocrine
disorders.

Perimenopause and menopause can be difficult times for some patients. Symptoms related to these transitions can
be treated with medicine, hormone therapy, and lifestyle changes. Patients with a history of CPP should be
supported in the management of symptoms.

Care of the patient with these conditions starts with a detailed history, physical exam, and diagnostic testing. To
help empower patients, nurses can assist them in understanding their conditions. Nurses can provide education on
medical and nonmedical treatments. Nurses can also offer resources for support groups for patients needing
emotional support while dealing with their condition.

6.2 Structural Disorders

Structural disorders of the reproductive system can affect the patient's overall physical well-being. Pelvic floor
health and other conditions that can affect the anatomic integrity of the reproductive system need to be assessed as
part of a comprehensive physical exam. Pelvic floor health is an essential aspect of a patient's overall well-being.
This overview has reviewed pelvic floor integrity, including prevention and strengthening exercises. Congenital
malformations may be present in the uterus or vagina. These conditions can be accompanied by other anomalies in
pelvic organs. Women who have experienced female genital mutilation are at greater risk of structural disorders of
the reproductive system.

6.3 Benign Growths

This section explored the various types of benign growths that can occur in the female reproductive system. An
understanding of the prevalence, types, and clinical implications of benign growths, such as fibroids, ovarian cysts,
and polyps, is essential for providing comprehensive care to persons assigned female at birth. This section explored
the etiology and risk factors associated with these growths, emphasizing the importance of early detection and
intervention. Furthermore, the module addresses diagnostic modalities, treatment options, and nursing
considerations for patients facing these reproductive health challenges. By exploring this content, future nurses will
be well equipped to contribute to the holistic care of patients, promoting optimal health outcomes.

6.4 Malignant Neoplasms

In this section, the nursing student is provided with an overview of the malignancies that can occur in the female
reproductive system. The text provides an overview of various cancers, including those affecting the cervix, uterus,
ovaries, and other related structures. Emphasizing a holistic approach to patient care, the module equips aspiring
nurses with essential knowledge and critical thinking skills necessary for early detection, compassionate patient
communication, and collaborative interdisciplinary management of patients facing these challenging health
conditions.

Key Terms

abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) common gynecologic condition characterized by atypical bleeding patterns that
    deviate from a person's normal menstrual cycle

Bartholin's cyst fluid-filled sac created when the Bartholin gland becomes blocked
cervical cancer slow-growing cancer found in the cervix
congenital malformation abnormality of a structure that develops during formation of the embryo and presents

    with a wide variety of symptoms
cystocele prolapse of the bladder into the anterior vaginal wall
endometriosis chronic and often painfully debilitating gynecologic disorder characterized by the presence of

    endometrial-like tissue outside the uterus
292 6 · Assessments

fistula abnormal connection between two surfaces in the body that are not meant to be connected
hypermenorrhea prolonged menstrual bleeding
hysterectomy surgical removal of the uterus
leiomyoma (also, fibroid) benign tumor that develops from the smooth muscle tissue of the uterus
menorrhagia heavy menstrual bleeding
metrorrhagia irregular menstrual cycles
ovarian cyst blood- or fluid-filled sac found on or near the ovary
pelvic floor disorders any condition that decreases the integrity of the pelvic muscular structures
perimenopause phase of menstrual irregularities that is attributed to fluctuating hormone levels lasting for

    months up to several years and that ends when menses has ceased for 12 months
premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) similar to PMS but has a more extreme presentation, causing extreme

    depression and anxiety in the luteal phase of the cycle
premenstrual syndrome (PMS) common and cyclic disorder that occurs during the luteal phase of the menstrual

    cycle in people who menstruate; characterized by mood swings, irritability, anxiety, fatigue, breast tenderness,
    bloating, and changes in appetite or sleep patterns
primary amenorrhea absence of menarche by the age of 16 years
primary dysmenorrhea typical menstrual pain that occurs before or during a period
rectocele prolapse of the rectum into the posterior vaginal wall
secondary amenorrhea absence of menstruation for a duration of three or more cycles
secondary dysmenorrhea menstrual pain caused by an underlying condition
uterine malformation congenital malformation that includes changes to the shape of the uterus
uterine polyp benign growth that develops in the cervix or uterus
uterine prolapse occurs when the pelvic floor weakens and the uterus descends into the vagina
vaginal fistula opening between the vagina to another anatomical structure
vasomotor symptoms cardinal symptoms of perimenopause and menopause known as hot flashes and night
    sweats

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. What condition would the nurse suspect in a patient who presents with very painful menstrual cramps that
        prevent them from working each month?
           a. amenorrhea
           b. dysmenorrhea
           c. premenstrual syndrome
           d. abnormal uterine bleeding

    2. What lifestyle change would the nurse recommend for a patient who presents with multiple symptoms of
        perimenopause?
           a. Switch to flannel sheets and use extra blankets to stay warm at night.
           b. Avoid sexual intercourse until vaginal dryness passes.
           c. Have a glass of wine each night before bed to reduce insomnia.
           d. Begin a regular exercise routine.

    3. What condition would the nurse include when teaching a patient about the potential complications of
        polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)?
           a. breast cancer
           b. cirrhosis of the liver
           c. insulin resistance
           d. insomnia

    4. What type of medication would the nurse prepare to speak about with a patient recently diagnosed with
        endometriosis?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        6 · Assessments 293

         a. oral contraceptives
         b. selective serotonin inhibitors
         c. dopamine agonist
         d. bisphosphonates

 5. What question is most important for the nurse to ask a patient who presents with pelvic pain for the past
      year?
         a. "Is the pain associated with having a bowel movement or passing urine?"
         b. "Have you had any unexplained weight loss?"
         c. "Have you tried taking ibuprofen or acetaminophen?"
         d. "Do you have many sexual partners?"

 6. A 58-year-old postmenopausal woman presents with a sensation of pelvic heaviness and states she feels like
      something is sitting in her vagina. On examination, the provider notes a visible protrusion of the bladder into
      the anterior vaginal wall. What structural disorder of the female reproductive system is consistent with these
      findings?
         a. pelvic floor prolapse
         b. DES exposure
         c. vaginal septum
         d. bladder fistula

 7. A 28-year-old patient presents with recurrent urinary tract infections and continuous wet sensation in her
      undergarments. On examination, the provider observes leaking of urine noted in the vagina. What structural
      disorder of the female reproductive system is most likely responsible for this condition?
         a. pelvic floor prolapse
         b. DES exposure
         c. vaginal septum
         d. bladder fistula

 8. A patient presenting with chronic pelvic pain and heavy menstrual bleeding will be evaluated for what
      conditions? Select all that apply.
         a. endometriosis
         b. uterine fibroids
         c. ovarian cysts
         d. uterine polyps

 9. What is an example of a patient's comment that demonstrates the patient understands fibroids?
         a. "I will only need to treat the fibroids when I am menopausal."
         b. "A sonogram can help determine the size of my fibroids."
         c. "There is little treatment to help my fibroids."
         d. "Oral contraceptives will only make my fibroids worse."

10. When suspecting an ovarian cyst on the basis of abdominal pain, what other causes need to be ruled out due
      to the severity of the condition? Select all that apply.
         a. ectopic pregnancy
         b. inflamed appendix
         c. ovarian torsion
         d. submucosal fibroid

11. What does treatment for a Bartholin's cyst include?
         a. topical antibiotics
         b. warm compress
         c. cold packs
294 6 · Assessments

           d. topical steroids

  12. What are possible characteristics of a patient who is at a higher risk for developing uterine cancer?
           a. 35-year-old patient with 2 vaginal births
           b. 16-year-old patient with 28-day menstrual cycle
           c. 67-year old patient taking only estrogen for HRT
           d. 25-year-old patient taking oral contraceptive pills

  13. The nurse is reviewing information in anticipation of providing education to her patient. What is an accurate
        statement about ovarian cancer?
           a. The symptoms of ovarian cancer are easy to detect because they are very specific to the disease
                process.
           b. The symptoms of ovarian cancer are difficult to detect because they are vague and nonspecific.
           c. There are no symptoms of ovarian cancer.
           d. There are screening tests available for ovarian cancer that make it easy to detect.

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. What response would the nurse provide to a patient in their late 40s who asks why they are having difficulty
        losing weight around their midsection?

    2. Why would a patient with a history of pelvic surgery have an increased risk of endometriosis?

    3. List interventions to reduce pelvic floor dysfunction.

    4. What are the common types of benign growths of the female reproductive tract?

    5. Describe two diagnostic modalities for identifying benign growths in the female reproductive system.

    6. List the signs and symptoms of vulvar cancer.

Reflection Questions

    1. How would you reply if a patient asks why the health-care provider cannot get rid of their chronic pelvic pain
        and can only manage it with pain medication?

    2. What information is needed when assessing a patient who presents with a menstrual system abnormality?

    3. Discuss the ethical considerations that arise when providing care to a woman who has undergone female
        genital mutilation and presents with a structural disorder of the female reproductive system. How can a nurse
        ensure respectful and patient-centered care while navigating sensitive topics related to reproductive health?

    4. What education would the nurse provide for a person with an ovarian cyst?

    5. What education would the nurse provide for a person with a cervical growth?

    6. The nurse is talking to a group of adolescents. What education can the nurse provide on the prevention of
        cervical cancer?

What Should the Nurse Do?

Anna is a 32-year-old female who presents at the women's health clinic with complaints of irregular menstrual
cycles and persistent pelvic pain. She reports experiencing dysmenorrhea, heavy menstrual bleeding, and
discomfort during intercourse. She mentions a history of anxiety but denies any other psychiatric conditions. Anna's
medical history includes obesity and a family history of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Her vital signs, within
normal ranges, show a blood pressure of 120/80 mm Hg, a heart rate of 72 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of
18 breaths per minute, and a normal body temperature. Anna expresses concern about her fertility due to
difficulties in conceiving for the past year. Further assessment reveals she has been experiencing chronic pelvic
pain, impacting her daily life.

    1. What menstrual disorders could be contributing to Anna's complaints, and what nursing interventions might
        be appropriate for managing these disorders?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           6 · Assessments 295

    2. Considering Anna's age and symptoms, what are the potential signs of perimenopause or menopause, and
        what nursing interventions could support her during this transition?

    3. Given Anna's family history of PCOS, what aspects of her presentation align with this syndrome, and what
        treatment and nursing interventions would be appropriate for managing PCOS?

    4. Considering Anna's symptoms of chronic pelvic pain, what diagnostic tests or procedures could help identify
        the underlying cause, and what are potential nursing interventions for managing endometriosis?

    5. What are the potential risk factors contributing to Anna's chronic pelvic pain, and how can nurses provide
        holistic care to address the physical and emotional impact of this condition?

Claudine is a 42-year-old female who seeks consultation at the urology clinic due to complaints of urinary
incontinence and persistent pelvic pressure. Claudine, a software engineer, reports a history of recurrent urinary
tract infections and occasional pain during sexual intercourse. She denies any significant psychiatric conditions but
mentions a family history of congenital reproductive malformations, raising concerns about potential hereditary
factors contributing to her current symptoms. Claudine's medical history includes a previous surgery for a herniated
disc, performed 5 years ago. This lumbar discectomy to address persistent back pain may have implications for her
pelvic floor health. Since the surgery, Claudine has noticed a gradual onset of urinary incontinence and discomfort in
the pelvic region, prompting her visit to the clinic. Further assessment reveals that urinary incontinence is more
pronounced for Claudine during physical activities, such as lifting heavy objects or engaging in strenuous exercise.
She expresses concern about the impact of these symptoms on her overall quality of life and is eager to explore
potential solutions.

    6. What are the potential risk factors for pelvic floor disorders in Claudine's case, and how might her history of
        lumbar discectomy contribute to urinary incontinence and pelvic pressure? What nursing interventions could
        be beneficial?

    7. Based on Claudine's symptoms, which type of pelvic organ prolapse might she be experiencing, and what
        medical and nursing interventions could be considered for her condition?

    8. Considering Claudine's family history of congenital reproductive malformations, what complications might
        arise from such malformations, and how can nurses contribute to the care of persons with these conditions?

Molly is a 38-year-old female who presents at the gynecology clinic with complaints of heavy menstrual bleeding
and pelvic pain. She is a marketing executive, and she reports a history of irregular menstrual cycles since
adolescence, but the symptoms have worsened in recent months. She describes experiencing prolonged menstrual
periods with significant clotting, leading to heightened anxiety and disruptions in her daily life. Molly's medical
history includes a diagnosis of hypertension managed with antihypertensive medication. She denies any significant
psychiatric conditions. She has no history of gynecologic surgeries or pregnancies. Molly's vital signs indicate a
blood pressure of 130/80 mm Hg, a heart rate of 72 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute,
and a normal body temperature. During the pelvic examination, the health-care provider observes an enlarged
uterus. Further diagnostic procedures, including ultrasound and a pelvic MRI, reveal the presence of benign uterine
growths known as fibroids. Molly expresses concern about the impact of these growths on her fertility and overall
well-being.

    9. What signs and symptoms of fibroids are present in Molly? Describe the diagnostic procedures used to
        confirm the presence of fibroids. How might the fibroids impact Molly's fertility, and what nursing
        interventions can support her during this process?

  10. In Molly's case, what are the potential implications of uterine polyps? Describe the diagnostic procedure for
        uterine polyps and any necessary nursing responsibilities during the procedure.

  11. Discuss the risk factors for ovarian cysts and the considerations nurses should keep in mind when caring for
        Molly, who has been diagnosed with benign ovarian cysts.

Maria is a 52-year-old female who presents at the oncology clinic with concerns about abnormal uterine bleeding
and pelvic pain. She is a schoolteacher and reports experiencing irregular menstrual cycles over the past year, along
with postmenopausal bleeding, which prompted her visit. She denies any significant psychiatric history and has a
medical history of hypertension, controlled with medication, and testing positive for HPV. Vital signs indicate a blood
pressure of 120/70 mm Hg, a heart rate of 78 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, and a
normal body temperature. Maria's pelvic examination reveals an enlarged uterus, and further diagnostic procedures,
including endometrial biopsy and imaging studies, confirm a diagnosis of uterine cancer. The staging assessment
reveals the cancer is localized to the uterus. Maria is concerned about the impact of cancer on her overall health and
296 6 · References

seeks guidance on treatment options.
  12. Considering Maria's case, what risk factors are relevant to cervical cancer, and how would you correlate them
        with her symptoms?
  13. Based on Maria's case, how would you distinguish the signs and symptoms of uterine cancer, and what
        diagnostic procedures would be appropriate for confirmation?
  14. If Maria were to undergo gynecologic surgery for cancer treatment, how could nurses categorize and address
        her preoperative and postoperative care needs?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. Design a pamphlet that describes the complications associated with PCOS and the regular screening that
        patients with the condition should undergo.

References

Altayar, O., Al Nofal, A., Leon, G. C., Prokop, L. J., Wang, Z., & Murad, M. H. (2017, May). Treatments to prevent bone
   loss in functional hypothalamic amenorrhea: A systemic review and meta-analysis. Journal of the Endocrine
   Society, 1(5). 500-511. https://doi.org/10.1210/js.2017-00102

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2015). ACOG Committee Opinion No. 651: Menstruation in
   girls and adolescents: Using the menstrual cycle as a vital sign. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 126(6).
    https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000001215

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 214: Pelvic organ
   prolapse. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 134(5), 126-142.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 218: Chronic pelvic pain.
   Obstetrics & Gynecology, 135(3), e98-e109. https://doi.org/10.1097/aog.0000000000003716

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021, January). Hysterectomy. https://www.acog.org/
    womens-health/faqs/hysterectomy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022a). Dysmenorrhea: Painful periods.
    https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/dysmenorrhea-painful-periods

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022b). Perimenopausal bleeding and bleeding after
   menopause. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/perimenopausal-bleeding-and-bleeding-after-
    menopause

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022c). Chronic pelvic pain. https://www.acog.org/womens-
    health/faqs/chronic-pelvic-pain

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023a, April). Updated cervical cancer screening guidelines.
    uhttps://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practice-advisory/articles/2021/04/updated-cervical-cancer-
    screening-guidelines

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023b). Abnormal uterine bleeding: Frequently asked
   questions. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/abnormal-uterine-bleeding

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023c). Uterine fibroids. https://www.acog.org/womens-
    health/faqs/uterine-fibroids

American Society for Reproductive Medicine. (2012). Abnormalities of the reproductive tract (Müllerian defects).
    Reproductive Facts.org. https://www.reproductivefacts.org/globalassets/_rf/news-and-publications/
    bookletsfact-sheets/english-pdf/Abnormalities_of_the_Female_Reproductive_Tract_Mullerian_Defects.pdf

Andreotti, R. F., Timmerman, D., Strachowski, L. M., Froyman, W., Benacerraf, B. R., Bennett, G. L., Bourne, T., Brown,
    D. L., Coleman, B. G., Frates, M. C., Goldstein, S. R., Hamper, U. M., Horrow, M. M., Hernanz-Schulman, M.,
    Reinhold, C., Rose, S. L., Whitcomb, B. P., Wolfman, W. L., & Glanc, P. (2020). O-RADS US risk stratification and
    management system: A consensus guideline from the ACR ovarian-adnexal reporting and data system
   committee. Radiology, 294(1), 168-185. https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2019191150

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              6 · References 297

Barbieri, R. L., & Ehrmann, D. A. (2023). Patient education: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) (Beyond the basics).
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/polycystic-ovary-syndrome-pcos-beyond-the-basics#H13

Barrigón, A., Ziadi, S., Jacot-Guillarmod, M., Da Silva, S., Dumont, M., Raineri, I., & Bongiovanni, M. (2018).
   Nabothian cyst content: A potential pitfall for the diagnosis of invasive cancer on pap test cytology. Diagnostic
   Cytopathology, 47(2), 127-129. https://doi.org/10.1002/dc.24098

Basnet, R. (2021). Impact of pelvic floor muscle training in pelvic organ prolapse. International Urogynecology J 32,
    1351-1360 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00192-020-04613-w

Bohlin, K. S., Brännström, M. Dahm-Kähler, P. (2024). Gynecological cancer during pregnancy--From a gyne-
   oncology perspective. Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica, 103(4), 761-766. https://doi.org/10.1111/
    aogs.14763

Bryant, C., Cockburn, R., Plante, A.-F., & Chia, A. (2016). The psychological profile of women presenting to a
    multidisciplinary clinic for chronic pelvic pain: High levels of psychological dysfunction and implications for
   practice. Journal of Pain Research, 9, 1049-1056. https://doi.org/10.2147/JPR.S115065

Casper, R. F. (2023). Patient education: Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD)
   (Beyond the basics). https://www.uptodate.com/contents/premenstrual-syndrome-pms-and-premenstrual-
    dysphoric-disorder-pmdd-beyond-the-basics#H6

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021, August 18). Anogenital warts. https://www.cdc.gov/std/
    treatment-guidelines/anogenital-warts.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022a, December 20). Genital HPV infection--basic fact sheet.
    https://www.cdc.gov/std/hpv/stdfact-hpv.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022b). PCOS (polycystic ovary syndrome) and diabetes.
    https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/basics/pcos.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023, August 25). What should I know about cervical cancer
   screening? https://www.cdc.gov/cancer/cervical/basic_info/screening.htm

Chen, K. (2022, March 21). Bartholin gland masses. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/bartholin-
    gland-masses

Christ, J. P., & Cedars, M. I. (2023). Current guidelines for diagnosing PCOS. Diagnostics (Basel, Switzerland), 13(6),
    1113. https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13061113

Corcoran, C., & Jacobs, T. F. (2023). Metformin. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK518983/

Crowley, M. J., Diamantidis, C. J., McDuffie, J. R., et al. (2016). Metformin use in patients with historical
   contraindications or precautions [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK409379/

Davis, E., & Sparzak, P. B. (2022). Abnormal uterine bleeding. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK532913/

Dydyk, A. M., & Gupta, N. (2023). Chronic pelvic pain. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK554585/

Eisenberg, E. (2022). My periods have changed. Is menopause around the corner? https://www.acog.org/womens-
    health/experts-and-stories/the-latest/my-periods-have-changed-is-menopause-around-the-corner

Endocrine Society. (2022a). Menopause treatment. https://www.endocrine.org/patient-engagement/endocrine-
    library/menopause-treatment

Endocrine Society. (2022b). Polycystic ovary syndrome. https://www.endocrine.org/patient-engagement/endocrine-
    library/pcos

Endocrine Society. (n.d.). Understanding the diagnosis. https://www.endocrine.org/menopausemap/understanding-
    the-diagnosis/index.html
298 6 · References

Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. (2021). How do healthcare
   providers diagnose menopause? https://www.nichd.nih.gov/health/topics/menopause/conditioninfo/diagnosed

Fasero, M., Quereda, F., Andraca, L., Coronado, P. J., Mendoza, N., Ramírez, I., de la Viuda, E., Coronado, P.,
    Baquedano, L., Llaneza, P., Nieto, V., Otero, B., Sanchez-Mendez, S., Alvarez de Frutos, V., Barriga, P., Benítez, Z.,
    Bombas, T., Jesús Cancelo, M. J., Cano, A., & Branco, C. C. (2023). Pharmacological interactions and menopausal
   hormone therapy: A review. Menopause, 30(8), 873-880.https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37449718/

Garcia, V. R. (2023). Anatomy and physiology of the reproductive system. In J. Phillippi & I. Kantrowitz-Gordon
   (Eds.), Varney's midwifery (7th ed., pp. 311-341). Jones & Bartlett Learning.

Goldstein, A. (2023). Endometrial biopsy. In J. Phillippi & I. Kantrowitz-Gordon (Eds.), Varney's midwifery (7th ed.,
    pp. 616-617). Jones & Bartlett Learning.

Gruber, N., & Modan-Moses, D. (2021). Menstrual cycle in adolescents: Updating the normal pattern. The Journal of
   Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 106(1), e372-e374. https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgaa688

Han, Y., Wang, C., Zhang, L., Zhu, J., Zhu, M., Li, Y., Teng, D., Teng, W., & Shan, Z. (2022). Menopausal impact on the
   association between thyroid dysfunction and lipid profiles: A cross-sectional study. Frontiers in Endocrinology,
   13, 853889. https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2022.853889

Harper-Harrison, G., & Shanahan, M. M. (2023, February). Hormone replacement therapy StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK493191/

Hickey, M., Horne, A. W., & Cooper, M. (2023). Evaluation of dysmenorrhea: Summary. BMJ Best Practice.
    https://bestpractice.bmj.com/topics/en-us/420

Hyvärinen, M., Juppi, H.-K., Taskinen, S., Karppinen, J. E., Karvinen, S., Tammelin, T. H., Kovanen, V., Aukee, P.,
    Kujala, U. M., Rantalainen, T., Sipilä, S., & Laakkonen, E. K. (2022). Metabolic health, menopause, and physical
   activity--A 4-year follow-up study. International Journal of Obesity, 46, 544-554. https://doi.org/10.1038/
    s41366-021-01022-x

Jina, R., Rowe, T. C., & Dunne, C. (2022). Managing menopause part 1: Vasomotor symptoms. BC Medical Journal,
   64(8), 344-349.

Johnson, A., Roberts, L., & Elkins, G. (2019). Complementary and alternative medicine for menopause. Journal of
   Evidence-Based Integrative Medicine, 24. http://doi.org/10.1177/2515690X19829380

Ko, S. H., & Jung, Y. (2021). Energy metabolism changes and dysregulated lipid metabolism in postmenopausal
   women. Nutrients, 13(12), 4556. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13124556

Marloff, S. (2021). Menopause symptoms are far from universal. HealthyWomen. https://www.healthywomen.org/
    your-health/menopause-aging-well/menopause-symptoms-far-from-universal

Maxwell, M., Berry, K., Wane, S., et al. (2020, December). Pelvic floor muscle training for women with pelvic organ
   prolapse: The PROPEL realist evaluation. Southampton (UK): NIHR Journals Library. (Health Services and
    Delivery Research, No. 8.47.) https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK565832/

McKenna, K. A., & Fogleman, C. D. (2021). Dysmenorrhea. American Family Physician, 104(2), 164-170.

Mishra, S., Elliot, H., & Marwaha, R. (2023). Premenstrual dysphoric disorder StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK532307/

National Cancer Institute. (2021, December 20). Diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure and cancer.
    https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/hormones/des-fact-sheet

Nawaz, G., & Rogol, A. D. (2022, June 21). Amenorrhea. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK482168/

Perkins, R. B., Guido, R. S., Castle, P. E., Chelmow, D., Einstein, M. H., Garcia, F., Huh, W. K., Kim, J. J., Moscicki, A.,
    Nayar, R., Saraiya, M., Sawaya, G. F., Wentzensen, N., & Schiffman, M. (2020). 2019 ASCCP risk-based
   management consensus guidelines for abnormal cervical cancer screening tests and cancer precursors. Journal

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              6 · References 299

   of Lower Genital Tract Disease, 24(2), 102-131. https://doi.org/10.1097/lgt.0000000000000525

Phillippi, J., & Kantrowitz-Gordon, I. (Eds.). (2024). Varney's midwifery (7th ed.). Jones & Bartlett Learning.

Rei Otsuka, M. T., Tange, C., Nishita, Y., Kimura, T., Stoelzel, M., Tanaka-Amino, K., Shimokata, H., & Terauchi, M.
    (2020). Vasomotor symptoms, sleep problems, and depressive symptoms in community-dwelling Japanese
   women. The Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Research, 47(10), 3677-3690. https://doi.org/10.1111/
    jog.14937

Schuiling, K. D., & Likis, F. E. (2020). Gynecologic health care: With an introduction to prenatal and postpartum care
    (4th ed.). Jones & Bartlett Learning.

Silver, N. E. (2023). Mood changes during perimenopause are real. Here's what to know. https://www.acog.org/
    womens-health/experts-and-stories/the-latest/mood-changes-during-perimenopause-are-real-heres-what-to-
    know

Smith, R. P., & Kaunitz, A. M. (2022). Dysmenorrhea in adult females: Treatment. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/dysmenorrhea-in-adult-females-treatment

Smuskiewicz, A. (2019). Perimenopause. In H. L. Armstrong (Ed.), Encyclopedia of sex and sexuality : Understanding
   biology, psychology, and culture: N-Z (pp. 496-498). Bloomsbury.

Society of Gynecologic Oncology. (2020, June 25). Ovarian cancer stages. https://www.sgo.org/patient-resources/
    ovarian-cancer/ovarian-cancer-stages/

Tanos, V., Berry, K. E., Seikkula, J., Abi Raad, E., Stavroulis, A., Sleiman, Z., Campo, R., & Gordts, S. (2017). The
   management of polyps in female reproductive organs. International Journal of Surgery, 43, 7-16. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.ijsu.2017.05.012

The North American Menopause Society. (n.d.-a). Menopause 101: A primer for the perimenopausal.
    https://www.menopause.org/for-women/menopauseflashes/menopause-symptoms-and-treatments/
    menopause-101-a-primer-for-the-perimenopausal

The North American Menopause Society. (n.d.-b). Changes in the vagina and vulva. https://www.menopause.org/for-
    women/sexual-health-menopause-online/changes-at-midlife/changes-in-the-vagina-and-vulva

Thornton, P. (2023, September 25). Lysteda. Drugs.com. https://www.drugs.com/lysteda.html

Torres-Lacomba, M., Navarro-Brazález, B., Yuste-Sánchez, M. J., Sánchez-Sánchez, B., Prieto-Gómez, V., Vergara-
    Pérez, F. Women's experience with compliance with pelvic floor home exercise therapy and lifestyle changes for
   pelvic organ prolapse symptoms: A qualitative study. Journal of Personalized Medicine, 12(3), 498-514.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/jpm12030498

Tranexamic acid (Lysteda) for treatment of menorrhagia. (2010). Obstetrics & Gynecology, 116(5), 1210.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/01.aog.0000390401.85827.1b

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health. (2021a). Endometriosis.
    https://www.womenshealth.gov/a-z-topics/endometriosis

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health. (2021b). Premenstrual syndrome (PMS).
    https://www.womenshealth.gov/menstrual-cycle/premenstrual-syndrome

U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2018, August 21). Cervical cancer: Screening.
    https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/cervical-cancer-screening

United Nations Population Fund. (2022a, February). Female genital mutilation (FGM) frequently asked questions.
    https://www.unfpa.org/resources/female-genital-mutilation-fgm-frequently-asked-questions#practice_origins

United Nations Population Fund. (2022b, May). Obstetric fistula. https://www.unfpa.org/obstetric-fistula#readmore-
    expand

United Nations. (n.d). Ending female genital mutilation by 2030. https://www.un.org/en/observances/female-
    genital-mutilation-day
300 6 · References

Van der Meer, G. T., Schultz, W. C., & Nijman, J. M. (2008). Intimate body piercings in women. Journal of
   Psychosomatic Obstetrics & Gynecology, 29(4), 235-239. https://doi.org/10.1080/01674820802621874

Van Hoover, C., Rademayer, C., & Farley, C. L. (2017). Body piercing: Motivations and implications for health. Journal
   of Midwifery & Women's Health, 62(5), 521-530. https://doi.org/10.1111/jmwh.12630

Ward, K. (2023). Malignant and chronic gynecologic disorders. In J. Phillippi & I. Kantrowitz-Gordon (Eds.), Varney's
   midwifery (7th ed., pp. 644-645). Jones & Bartlett Learning.

Women's Health Network. (2023). Menopause in different cultures. https://www.womenshealthnetwork.com/
    menopause-and-perimenopause/menopause-in-different-cultures/

World Health Organization. (2022). Menopause. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/menopause
World Health Organization. (2023). Endometriosis. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/

    endometriosis
Xu, W., Huang, Y., Ma, L., Chen, P., Li, S., Chu, K., Lan, Y., Li, C., Song, Y., Yang, Q., & Zhou, J. (2023). Clinical

    observation of menopause hormone therapy in postmenopausal women with euthyroid and mild subclinical
   hypothyroidism. BMC Endocrine Disorders, 23(21). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12902-023-01269-7
Young, C., & Armstrong, M. L. (2008). What nurses need to know when caring for women with genital piercings.
   Nursing for Women's Health, 12(2), 128-138. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-486x.2008.00299.x

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 7

Commonly Occurring Reproductive and
Genitourinary System Infections

FIGURE 7.1 Infections of the Genitourinary System Infections of the uterus, pelvis, and urinary tract are common and endemic in
developing countries and specifically affect people assigned female at birth. (credit: "Micrograph of a clue cell" by Mikael Häggström,
M.D./Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
7.1 Sexually Transmitted Infections
7.2 Vaginal Infections and Other Conditions
7.3 Urinary Tract Infections
INTRODUCTION Commonly occurring genitourinary and reproductive system infections in people assigned female
at birth affect all age groups in all areas of the world. Infections may be caused by bacteria, viruses, or yeasts and
can cause symptoms and even permanent damage that can affect the reproductive system or a fetus or neonate in a
pregnant patient. Choices in diet, personal hygiene, and clothing can influence risk factors for these infections as
much as sexual practices and the choice of sexual partner. The role of the nurse is to be direct and nonjudgmental in
discussing these life choices and infectious findings with patients.
302  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

     7.1 Sexually Transmitted Infections

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Educate patients on how to prevent and treat sexually transmitted infections that occur in persons
             assigned female at birth

         · Describe common sexually transmitted bacterial and protozoan infections that occur in persons assigned
             female at birth

         · Describe common sexually transmitted viral infections that occur in persons assigned female at birth
         · Identify applicable nursing interventions when caring for a person assigned female at birth who has a

             sexually transmitted infection

     Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) affect people in all areas of the world. STIs are not specific to those of certain
     age groups, demographics, or economic status. STIs can affect any person who engages in sexual intercourse or
     other sexual behaviors. STIs are specifically transmitted by passing an organism between sexual partners through
     oral, anal, or vaginal contact (Garcia et al., 2023). This section will review sexually transmitted infections that affect
     people assigned female at birth.

     Prevention of Sexually Transmitted Infections

     Sexually transmitted infections can be prevented only by eliminating sexual contact. However, the following safer
     sex practices discussed can significantly reduce the risk of transmission. It is important for all persons to have a
     trusting relationship with their health-care providers so that they can discuss concerns and ways to be safe during
     sexual contact. Health-care providers should be able to communicate with their patients effectively so that the
     patient feels safe and able to discuss issues. The provider should be nonjudgmental in their approach (Garcia et al.,
     2023). In all situations, providers should avoid stigma, negative attitudes and beliefs that motivate the general
     public to fear, reject, avoid, and discriminate against a group of people.

     Sexual Practices
     A person with a sexually transmitted infection can pass the organism to others through contact with shared sex toys,
     skin, genitals, mouth, rectum, or body fluids through vaginal, anal, and oral sex. The person with the STI may not
     have any symptoms but can still transmit the infection (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
     [ACOG], 2023). Using a tool like the 5P's can help the nurse or provider in talking to patients about STI risks (Table
     7.1.

     Category         Sample Questions

     Partners         · Is the patient having sex?
                      · What is(are) the gender(s) of their partner(s)?

     Practices        · Is the patient having vaginal sex?
                      · Is the patient having anal sex?
                      · Is the patient having oral sex?
                      · Is the patient using sex toys?

     Protection from  · Have the patient and partner(s) discussed prevention of human immunodeficiency virus
     STIs                (HIV) infection and STIs?

                      · Have the patient and partner(s) discussed getting STI testing?
                      · What kind of protection do patient and partner(s) use?

     TABLE 7.1 The 5P's for Patient Education about STIs Source: (Rietmeijer, 2023)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         7.1 · Sexually Transmitted Infections          303

Category         Sample Questions

Past history of      · Has the patient ever been tested for STIs?
STIs                 · Has the patient ever been diagnosed with an STI?
                     · If yes, how long ago and was it treated?
                     · Have any partners had an STI?

Pregnancy        · Does the patient intend to have children in the future?
intention        · How important is pregnancy prevention until then?
                 · Is the patient or their partner(s) using contraception?
                 · Would the patient like to know about ways to prevent pregnancy?

TABLE 7.1 The 5P's for Patient Education about STIs Source: (Rietmeijer, 2023)

Abstinence
Abstinence is the only way to 100 percent prevent STIs. This includes not having vaginal, anal, or oral sex (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2022). Not all people will practice abstinence, so it is important that they
know all other options that are available.

Sexual Behaviors
Some sexual behaviors can increase the risk of STIs. For adolescents, biologic factors may increase this risk.
Younger females with immature cervical epithelia have higher levels of cytokines and chemokines. The immature
epithelium is thought to be more susceptible to STI pathogens, especially N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, and
human papillomavirus (Fortenberry, 2023). The following is a list of other sexual behaviors that increase the risk for
STIs:

    · multiple partners
    · new partners
    · partners with multiple partners
    · for transgender adolescents, penile penetration
    · inconsistent condom use
    · alcohol and drug use
    · rectal douching or enemas before receiving anal sex
    · sex with a partner who recently had an STI
    · trading sex for money or drugs, including oral, anal, penile, or vaginal, with a sex worker
    · men who have sex with men

(Fortenberry, 2023; Rietmeijer, 2023)

Barrier and Chemical Methods of Contraception for STI Prevention
Many options are available to decrease the risk of acquiring STIs. For example, condoms are very effective.
Consistent and correct use of condoms can lower the risk of all STIs. Condom use can reduce the transmission of
HIV by 80 percent to 95 percent (Rietmeijer, 2023). A new condom should be used with each sex act, and the
condom should be handled correctly to avoid damage. The external condom should be placed after the penis is
erect but before any genital, oral, or anal contact. Only water-based or silicone-based lubricants should be used
with condoms, as other types of lubricants can break down the latex, allowing STI pathogens and sperm to escape.
The external condom should be held firmly against the base of the penis during withdrawal to decrease exposure to
bodily fluids (CDC, 2021a). Internal condoms (condoms that are inserted into the vagina) are available and can
protect against acquiring and transmitting STIs.

Cervical diaphragms are not recommended as protection against STIs (CDC, 2021a). Topical microbicides and
spermicides should not be used as the primary prevention of STIs, either. Vaccines are available for several STIs,
including hepatitis A, hepatitis B, human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, N. meningitidis infection, and Mpox
(Rietmeijer, 2023).
304  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

       CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

       Take Action: Teaching about Proper Condom Use

           · Do not use 5 years after the manufacturing date, at any time after the expiration date, or at any time the
               packaging is damaged.

           · If using lubricant, it must be water or silicone based.
           · A new condom should be used for each sex act.
           · The condom should be handled carefully to prevent tears.
           · The condom should be placed on the penis after it is erect but before any genital, oral, or anal contact with

               the partner.
           · The penis should be withdrawn while erect, and the condom should be held firmly against the base of

               penis during removal.
           · Do not use internal and external condoms simultaneously.

     Education and Community Programs about STI Prevention
     All health-care providers and nurses should be trained to counsel on STI prevention. The United States Preventive
     Services Task Force recommends behavioral counseling for all sexually active people who are members of
     disproportionately affected populations, including adolescents, persons assigned male at birth having sex with
     persons assigned male at birth, transgender and nonbinary people, people with HIV, and pregnant persons
     (Rietmeijer, 2023). The CDC (2021) also recommends prevention counseling for all sexually active persons who
     currently have an STI, who had an STI in the past year, or who have multiple partners. Counseling should include
     information about how STIs are transmitted, behaviors that can increase the risk, and suggestions to adjust
     behaviors to decrease the risk (Rietmeijer, 2023). It is important for the counseling to include all sexual behaviors
     that expose the person to an STI, to assess what the patient understands about how STIs are transmitted, to assess
     the person's readiness to change, to negotiate a goal, and to identify a realistic first step in getting to the goal
     (Rietmeijer, 2023). This counseling can be done in an individual outpatient setting, in-person counseling,
     telemedicine visit, or via media messages such as text or written material. Peer-group sessions have been shown to
     improve outcomes but may be more difficult to coordinate (Rietmeijer, 2023). Public education and awareness are
     still needed about STIs. This can occur in peer groups, schools, families, and communities. Provider education about
     a holistic approach to sexual health may improve responsiveness (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
     2020).

     Bacterial and Protozoan Sexually Transmitted Infections

     Various bacteria and protozoa can cause STIs. It is important to determine what type of organism is causing the STI
     in order to treat it correctly. The health-care provider will test for STIs and treat according to the CDC
     recommendations.

     Gonorrhea
     One common STI is gonorrhea, which is caused by gram-negative bacteria called Neisseria gonorrhoeae (Figure
     7.2). As the bacteria invade the endothelium and spread, patients have signs and symptoms of infection; however,
     some patients are asymptomatic and do not know they are carrying the bacteria. Signs and symptoms can include:

         · inflammation of the vagina
         · itching of the vagina
         · mucopurulent discharge from the vagina
         · dysuria
         · urinary urgency and frequency
         · lower pelvic pain
         · rectal pain or bleeding
         · abnormal vaginal bleeding

     (CDC, 2021a)

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.1 · Sexually Transmitted Infections                                                                                         305

FIGURE 7.2 Gonorrhea This scanning electron micrograph shows Neisseria gonorrhoeae bacteria, which cause gonorrhea. (credit:
"Neisseria gonorrhoeae Bacteria" by NIAID/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Incidence
Gonorrhea is on the rise in the United States, with 583,405 cases reported in 2018. This is a rate of 171.9 cases per
100,000 population, compared to a rate of about 100 cases per 100,000 population in 2012 (U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, 2020). In 2020, there were approximately 82 million cases of gonorrhea worldwide
(World Health Organization [WHO], 2023). The bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae infects the mucous membranes in
the reproductive tract, mouth, throat, eyes, and rectum (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2020).

Screening and Diagnosis
All sexually active people assigned female at birth who are less than 25 years old and all persons assigned male at
birth having intercourse with persons assigned male at birth should be screened for gonorrhea every year. People
assigned female at birth who are older than 25 years should be screened if they have a new sex partner, have more
than one sex partner, have a sex partner who has other sex partners, or have a sex partner with an STI. Other high-
risk populations, such as those with multiple anonymous partners, those in which either partner has a substance
use disorder, or those at risk for HIV acquisition, should be screened at all anatomic sites of exposure every 3 to 6
months. Screening for gonorrhea is not recommended for cisgender heterosexual persons less than 25 years of age
who are at low risk for infection (CDC, 2021a).

Cultures or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests are used to diagnose gonorrhea. In people with a vagina,
endocervical swabs are used; and in people with a penis, urethral swabs are used. Rectal, oropharyngeal, and
conjunctival cultures or PCR tests using a swab can also be done to check for infection. Urine cultures for gonorrhea
can also be performed (CDC, 2021a).

Management and Treatment
Gonorrhea is one STI that must be reported to the Department of Health in every state in the United States (CDC,
2021a). Drug-resistant strains of gonorrhea are resistant to fluoroquinolone, cefixime, and extended-spectrum
cephalosporins, and these strains have been seen throughout the world. The standard treatment for gonorrhea is
ceftriaxone (Rocephin) 500 mg IM in a single dose for persons weighing < 150 kg (330 lb) and ceftriaxone 1,000 mg
IM for persons weighing  150 kg (330 lb). If the patient has a cephalosporin allergy, they can take gentamicin
(Garamycin) 240 mg IM in a single dose PLUS azithromycin (Zithromax) 2 g orally in a single dose. If ceftriaxone is
not available, the patient can take cefixime (Suprax) 800 mg orally in a single dose (CDC, 2021a).
306  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

     Complications
     Untreated gonorrhea can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), which can cause chronic pelvic pain, infertility,
     and ectopic pregnancy due to scarring in the reproductive tract. There is an increased risk of HIV infection.
     Gonorrhea can also cause a disseminated infection, which can lead to skin lesions, arthralgias, and arthritis (CDC,
     2021a).

     Patient Education
     Recent sex partners (within the past 60 days) should get referred for evaluation, testing, and presumptive
     treatment. If greater than 60 days, then the most recent partner should be treated. If access to care is limited and
     the partner does not seek their own evaluation, the patient's provider or a local pharmacy can provide treatment to
     the partner or partners if they live in a state where this is permitted (CDC, 2021a).

     Symptoms should subside with treatment, but if symptoms persist, repeat testing should be performed. The patient
     should abstain from sexual activity until 7 days after treatment and until all sex partners are treated. People with
     gonorrhea should get tested for other STIs, including chlamydia, syphilis, and HIV (CDC, 2021a). The CDC (2021)
     recommends a test of cure (TOC), a retesting to determine that the treatment was successful, in 3 months for
     uncomplicated gonorrhea that has been treated.

     Chlamydia
     The gram-negative bacterium Chlamydia trachomatis causes the STI chlamydia (Figure 7.3). The prevalence of
     chlamydia is highest in persons 24 years old or younger. Asymptomatic infection is usually found in patients during
     screening (CDC, 2021a). Some patients will have the following symptoms, while others will be asymptomatic:

         · unusual vaginal or penile discharge;
         · burning with urination;
         · pain in the back or abdomen;
         · fever;
         · pain during sex;
         · bleeding between periods; and
         · rectal pain, bleeding, or discharge.

     FIGURE 7.3 Chlamydia This Pap smear shows Chlamydia trachomatis in the vacuoles at 500× and stained with hematoxylin and eosin
     (H&E). (credit: "Pap Smear" by Dr. Lance Liotta Laboratory/National Cancer Institute, Public Domain)

     Incidence
     Chlamydia is the most common bacterial STI in the United States, with 1,758,668 cases reported in 2018 (U.S.
     Department of Health and Human Services, 2020). There were more than 129 million reported cases of chlamydia
     worldwide in 2020 (WHO, 2023).

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.1 · Sexually Transmitted Infections                                                                                      307

Screening and Diagnosis
All sexually active persons assigned female at birth < 25 years old should be screened every year. Those  25 years
old should be screened if they have a new sex partner, have more than one sex partner, have a sex partner who has
other sex partners, or have a sex partner with an STI. Routine screening of persons assigned male at birth is not
recommended unless they are in a setting where there is a high incidence of chlamydia, such as a correctional
facility or if they are part of a high-risk population, such as persons assigned male at birth having sex with other
persons assigned male at birth (CDC, 2021a). A diagnosis can be made by obtaining a vaginal or cervical swab, a
Papanicolaou (Pap) test, or a first-void urine for those assigned female at birth. In persons assigned male at birth,
the diagnosis can be made by a first-catch urine or a meatal or urethral swab (CDC, 2021a).

Management and Treatment
Chlamydia is a reportable STI in every state in the United States. The provider or lab must report cases to the
Department of Health (CDC, 2021a). Treatment for chlamydia is usually doxycycline (Vibramycin) 100 mg orally 2
times a day for 7 days. Alternative treatments are azithromycin (Zithromax) 1 g orally once or levofloxacin (Levaquin)
500 mg orally once a day for 7 days. Repeat testing is not recommended. For pregnant persons, doxycycline is
contraindicated in the second and third trimesters, but azithromycin is safe. Follow-up testing for pregnant persons
should be done about 4 weeks after treatment to ensure there is no more infection. Pregnant persons who are < 25
years old or who have a new sex partner, have more than one sex partner, have a sex partner who has other sex
partners, or have a sex partner with an STI should be tested at the first prenatal visit and again in the third trimester
(CDC, 2021a).

Complications
Chlamydia that is untreated can cause serious complications. Persons assigned female at birth are at risk for
developing pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), which can cause chronic pelvic pain, infertility, and ectopic pregnancy
due to scarring of the reproductive tract. Chlamydia can increase the risk of transmitting or acquiring HIV. In
pregnant persons, chlamydia can cause preterm birth and serious complications in the neonate, such as ophthalmia
neonatorum or pneumonia (CDC, 2021a).

Patient Education
Recent sex partners (within the past 60 days) should get referred for evaluation, testing, and presumptive
treatment. If greater than 60 days, then the most recent partner should be treated. If access to care is limited, the
patient or local pharmacy can provide treatment to the partners (CDC, 2021a). Persons receiving treatment should
abstain from sexual activity for 7 days after the single-dose regimen or until completion of a 7-day regimen and
resolution of any symptoms. Pregnant persons who receive treatment need to have a TOC at approximately 4 weeks
after treatment; nonpregnant persons do not need a TOC if they completed their treatment (CDC, 2021a).

        CULTURAL CONTEXT

STI Concerns for Persons Assigned Female at Birth (AFAB) with AFAB Intimate Partners

Providers should not assume that persons AFAB who are having sex with AFAB partners are at low risk for STIs and
HIV. Providers should determine risk based on sexual history. There is limited data on the transmission of STIs
among persons AFAB having sex with AFAB partners. Routine screening should include HIV, chlamydia, and
gonorrhea for all sexually active patients under age 25 and those  25 years of age if at increased risk. (CDC, 2021a)

Trichomoniasis
The single-celled anaerobic protozoa Trichomonas vaginalis causes trichomoniasis, the most common nonviral STI
in the world (Figure 7.4). Most persons assigned female at birth have no symptoms or mild symptoms such as a
vaginal discharge that can be malodorous, yellow-green, and frothy. The person may also experience vulvar irritation
(CDC, 2021a).
308  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

     FIGURE 7.4 Trichomoniasis Trichomonas vaginalis is a pear-shaped microorganism with an evident nucleus. (credit: "Trichomonas
     vaginalis (07)" by Manuel Medina/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

     Incidence
     Trichomoniasis is one of the most prevalent nonviral STIs in the world. It is thought to affect approximately 2.6
     million people in the United States (CDC, 2021a). It is not a reportable STI, so estimates may be inaccurate.
     Trichomonas is a protozoan that can survive on fomites, such as towels and toilet seats, but transmission via fomites
     has not been proven. Persons AFAB can transmit trichomoniasis to any partner regardless of sex. Persons AMAB
     normally acquire this only from persons assigned female at birth (Sobel & Mitchell, 2023).

     Screening and Diagnosis
     Routine screening for trichomoniasis is not recommended. Up to 70 percent of the population who have it may not
     have symptoms, so screening for it is recommended only for patients who have HIV or who are in high-prevalence
     settings, such as STI clinics and correctional facilities, or for patients with new or multiple sex partners, with a
     history of sex work, or with a history of STIs (Sobel & Mitchell, 2023). Urine specimens and Pap smears in persons
     AFAB are acceptable for trichomoniasis testing. A vaginal or urethral swab using nucleic acid amplification tests
     (NAATs) is the best way to diagnose trichomoniasis; however, microscopic and pH testing can be used if necessary
     (Sobel & Mitchell, 2023).

     Management and Treatment
     The treatment for persons AFAB is metronidazole (Flagyl) 500 mg 2 times a day for 7 days; for persons AMAB, the
     treatment is metronidazole 2 g orally in a single dose.

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     Metronidazole (Flagyl)

     Metronidazole (Flagyl) is used as a treatment for trichomoniasis and bacterial vaginosis.

         · Generic Name: metronidazole
         · Trade Name: Flagyl
         · Class/Action: amebicide
         · Route/Dosage: 500 mg twice a day for 7 days
         · Indications: for treatment of trichomoniasis and bacterial vaginosis
         · Mechanism of Action: bactericidal

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.1 · Sexually Transmitted Infections                                                                                                   309

    · Contraindications: hypersensitivity, Cockayne syndrome, and first trimester of pregnancy
    · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: depression, trouble sleeping, headache, dizziness, weakness, nausea,

        vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, constipation, rash, itching, mouth sores, and vaginal itching
    · Nursing Implications: Educate patient about use.
    · Parent/Family Education: Do not drink alcohol or consume foods that contain propylene glycol while taking

        medication or for 3 days after completion. Do not take during first trimester of pregnancy.

Complications
For persons who are pregnant, trichomoniasis is associated with adverse outcomes such as premature rupture of
membranes, preterm delivery, and delivery of a small for gestational age infant (CDC, 2021a). Trichomoniasis is also
associated with increased risk of HIV transmission and pelvic inflammatory disease (CDC, 2021a).

Patient Education
Persons should be instructed that their partners need treatment and that they should abstain from sexual activity
for approximately 7 days after they and their partners have completed treatment and no longer have symptoms.
Retesting is recommended for all persons assigned female at birth at approximately 3 months after treatment, even
if partners have received treatment, because of the high rate of reinfection (CDC, 2021a).

Syphilis
The spirochete bacterium Treponema pallidum (Figure 7.5) causes the STI syphilis. Syphilis presents in four
different stages, with each stage having its own characteristics. Health-care providers will develop a treatment plan
according to the stage. Treatment for syphilis is important, as untreated syphilis can be detrimental and cause
lifelong complications. For pregnant patients, syphilis can cause multiple problems with the fetus, such as
miscarriage or birth defects (CDC, 2021a).

FIGURE 7.5 Syphilis Treponema pallidum, the bacterium that causes syphilis, is spiral shaped. (credit: "Syphilis Bacteria" by National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Symptoms and Incidence
Syphilis is a treatable STI, caused by the bacterium Treponema pallidum, that affected approximately 115,045
people in the United States in 2018. This was a 71 percent increase in the number of cases of syphilis in the United
States since 2014, when the number of cases was approximately 67,000. There were approximately 7.1 million
cases of syphilis worldwide in 2020 (WHO, 2023). Untreated syphilis progresses in stages. Primary syphilis presents
as a chancre, a genital sore or lesion where syphilis pathogens enter the body (Figure 7.6). It is usually painless and
may go unnoticed.
310  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

     FIGURE 7.6 Syphilis Chancre A chancre is a syphilis lesion that presents at the site where the bacteria enter the body, here on the tongue.
     (credit: "Primary stage syphilis sore (chancre) on the surface of a tongue." by Division of STD Prevention, National Center for HIV, Viral
     Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention/ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Public Domain)

     Secondary syphilis presents as a rash or lesions away from the primary site. This can begin when the initial site is
     healing or healed. It usually is not itchy and may be faint. It can occur anywhere on the body, although the hands
     and feet are common sites (Figure 7.7). Other symptoms associated with secondary syphilis are myalgia,
     pharyngitis, swollen lymph nodes, headaches, patchy hair loss, muscle aches, or fatigue (Tudor et al., 2023).

     FIGURE 7.7 Secondary Syphilis Secondary syphilis often presents as a rash on the hands or feet. (credit: "Secondary stage syphilis sores
     (lesions) on the palms of the hands. Referred to as `palmar lesions'" by Division of STD Prevention, National Center for HIV, Viral Hepatitis,
     STD, and TB Prevention/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Public Domain)

     Latent stage syphilis occurs when there are no signs and symptoms, but syphilis remains in the body. Early latent
     syphilis is when infection occurred within the past 12 months, and late latent syphilis is when the infection occurred
     more than 12 months previously. Tertiary syphilis is rare, but it can affect many body organs, including the cardiac
     and neurologic systems. It can invade any organ (Tudor et al., 2023). It can occur 10 to 30 years after the initial
     infection and can be fatal. Neurosyphilis occurs when the infection invades the nervous system, causing headaches,
     muscle weakness, paralysis, trouble with movement, numbness, or changes in mental status. Ocular syphilis
     invades the visual system and can cause eye pain, redness in the eye, floaters, sensitivity to light, and changes in

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.1 · Sexually Transmitted Infections                                                                                       311

vision. Otosyphilis occurs when the infection invades the auditory and/or vestibular system and can cause hearing
loss, ringing in the ears, difficulty with balance, and dizziness. Congenital syphilis occurs when a pregnant person
transmits the infection to a fetus during pregnancy (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2020).

Screening and Diagnosis
All pregnant persons should be screened for syphilis at their first prenatal visit and again in the third trimester, as
mandated by most states. For pregnant patients who live in communities with high rates of syphilis or who have a
risk of acquiring syphilis during pregnancy, testing should be done twice in the third trimester, at 28 weeks and at
the time of delivery (CDC, 2021a). Persons at an increased risk, such as sex workers, persons who are incarcerated,
persons assigned male at birth having sex with other persons assigned male at birth, and persons with HIV, should
be screened annually (CDC, 2021a).

Darkfield examinations and molecular tests for detecting syphilis directly from a lesion or tissue are the definitive
methods for diagnosing early syphilis and congenital syphilis; however, they can have a false-negative result if the
patient has applied a topical antibiotic (Tudor et al., 2023). A presumptive diagnosis of syphilis requires two
laboratory serologic tests: a nontreponemal test such as the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) or the
rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test and a treponemal test such as the T. pallidum passive particle agglutination (TP-PA)
assay, various enzyme immunoassays (EIAs), chemiluminescence immunoassays (CIAs) and immunoblots, or rapid
treponemal assays (CDC, 2021a). Nontreponemal tests are easy to perform and inexpensive, but they are not
specific for syphilis. There is the possibility of false-negative results in patients during primary syphilis and possible
false-positive results in patients without syphilis or with previously treated syphilis. The nontreponemal tests can
give false-positive results in patients with HIV, some autoimmune conditions, vaccines, injectable drug use,
pregnancy, and older age. A confirmatory treponemal test is required. The treponemal test will confirm the positive
if it is a true positive test (CDC, 2021a; Tudor et al., 2023).

Management and Treatment
Syphilis is a reportable STI in every state in the United States. The provider or lab must report cases to the
Department of Health (CDC, 2021a). Treatment of latent, primary, and secondary syphilis is penicillin G benzathine
(Bicillin L-A) 2.4 million units IM in a single dose. Later phases of syphilis should be treated with 1 injection per week
for 3 weeks (WHO, 2023). Patients with neurosyphilis, ocular syphilis, or otosyphilis should be treated with penicillin
G aqueous (Pfizerpen) 18 to 24 million units per day, administered as 3 to 4 million units IV every 4 hours or
continuous infusion for 10 to 14 days (CDC, 2021a). Pregnant women with all phases of syphilis should receive the
same penicillin treatment. If they are allergic, they should be desensitized and treated with penicillin because it is
the only medication with documented efficacy in pregnancy (CDC, 2021a).

Complications
Treatment of syphilis can sometimes be too late to prevent permanent damage to the patient. Once this damage
occurs, treatment will not reverse these problems. The spread of syphilis can cause permanent damage to the brain
and neurologic system, causing pain, heightened or loss of sensations, visual problems that can lead to blindness,
and stroke. Permanent cardiovascular changes can lead to aortic aneurysm, a weakening of the aorta causing a
bulging area that can rupture. Some patients will have gastric changes that lead to weight loss, pain, and vomiting.

Untreated syphilis during pregnancy can lead to miscarriage, stillbirth, or preterm delivery. Infants born with
congenital syphilis may be asymptomatic at birth but can suffer from hepatomegaly, jaundice, rash, nasal discharge,
lymphadenopathy, and skeletal abnormalities. They can develop fetal hydrops (abnormal accumulation of fluid in
the fetal tissues), myocarditis, pneumonia, sepsis, and central nervous system dysfunction that can lead to
hydrocephalus, cranial nerve palsies, optic atrophy, blindness, deafness, neurodevelopmental regression, seizures,
and fetal death (Arrieta, 2023). These problems can be prevented with adequate treatment during the prenatal
period.

Patient Education
Patients should get tested at 6 months and 12 months after treatment. All patients testing positive for syphilis
should get tested for HIV. All sex partners within 90 days prior to diagnosis should receive treatment for syphilis
(CDC, 2021a).
312  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

     Pelvic Inflammatory Disease
     Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is an inflammatory disorder of the upper female genital tract that can be caused
     by various STIs, notably gonorrhea and chlamydia. Screening and treating for gonorrhea and chlamydia can reduce
     the incidence and long-term side effects of PID (CDC, 2021a).

     Incidence
     Data on the incidence of PID are limited because signs and symptoms vary between people infected and there is no
     diagnostic test that can easily detect PID.

     Screening and Diagnosis
     There is no screening for PID because it is caused by multiple organisms, and diagnosis can be difficult because the
     symptoms vary. Laparoscopy can be used to make an accurate diagnosis of inflammation in the fallopian tubes and
     pinpoint bacteria but cannot identify endometritis and may also miss mild inflammation in the fallopian tubes. This
     test is not readily available and may not be justified for mild symptoms (CDC, 2021a). No history, physical, or
     laboratory finding can make a definitive diagnosis. Persons assigned female at birth most often present with lower
     abdominal pain. It is usually bilateral, can occur suddenly, and can last up to a few weeks. Pain can be subtle, and
     the patient could notice worsening pain with coitus or with sudden, jarring movement. The onset of pain is more
     likely to occur during or shortly after menses. Abnormal uterine bleeding, urinary frequency, and abnormal vaginal
     discharge are possible symptoms. During a physical exam, there may be abdominal tenderness with palpation,
     worse in the lower quadrants. Rebound tenderness, fever, and decreased bowel sounds may be present in patients
     with severe cases (Ross & Chacko, 2022).

     A presumptive diagnosis of PID should be used for persons assigned female at birth who are young and sexually
     active and all others who are at risk for STIs if they are experiencing pelvic or lower abdominal pain, if no other
     cause for the illness can be identified, and if one or more of the following three minimum clinical criteria are present
     on pelvic examination: cervical motion tenderness, uterine tenderness, or adnexal tenderness. This is the most
     common way that PID is diagnosed (CDC, 2021a). More than 85 percent of cases of PID are caused by STIs;
     therefore, all patients with possible PID should be tested for STIs. A negative STI result does not rule out PID, but a
     positive one warrants treatment. Some persons assigned female at birth do not have symptoms of PID and may
     never be diagnosed with this disease until they have tubal-related fertility issues due to scarring of the fallopian
     tubes (Ross & Chacko, 2022).

     Management and Treatment
     Parenteral treatment for PID has improved effectiveness over oral treatment. Intramuscular or oral treatment could
     be considered for patients with mild to moderate acute PID. Table 7.2 summarizes PID treatment options.

     Type of Treatment                                 Treatment

     Parental (treatment is usually 24-48 hours,       1. Ceftriaxone 1 g IV every 24 hours PLUS
     then transitioned to oral medications)            Doxycycline 100 mg orally or IV every 12 hours PLUS
                                                       Metronidazole 500 mg orally or IV every 12 hours

                                                       2. Cefotetan (Cefotan) 2 g IV every 12 hours PLUS
                                                       Doxycycline 100 mg orally or IV every 12 hours

                                                       3. Cefoxitin (Mefoxin) 2 g IV every 6 hours PLUS
                                                       Doxycycline 100 mg orally or IV every 12 hours

       IM and oral regimens                            1. Ceftriaxone 500 mg IM in a single dose PLUS
                                                       Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times/day for 14 days WITH
     TABLE 7.2 Treatment for PID Source: (CDC, 2021a)  Metronidazole 500 mg orally 2 times/day for 14 days

     Access for free at openstax.org
                              7.1 · Sexually Transmitted Infections                                                          313

Type of Treatment  Treatment

                   2. Cefoxitin 2 g IM in a single dose and probenecid (Benemid) 1 g
                   orally administered concurrently in a single dose PLUS
                   Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times/day for 14 days WITH
                   Metronidazole 500 mg orally 2 times/day for 14 days

                                                                  3. Other parenteral third-generation cephalosporin (e.g.,
                                                                  ceftizoxime or cefotaxime) PLUS
                                                                  Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times/day for 14 days WITH
                                                                  Metronidazole 500 mg orally 2 times/day for 14 days

TABLE 7.2 Treatment for PID Source: (CDC, 2021a)

Complications
Pelvic inflammatory disease during pregnancy places a pregnant person at risk for maternal morbidity and preterm
delivery. Pregnant persons with PID may need to be hospitalized and treated with IV antibiotics (ACOG, 2022). They
may require a consultation with an infectious disease specialist (CDC, 2021). Persons with PID are at risk for
reoccurrence. They are also at risk to develop hydrosalpinx, where the fallopian tube gets blocked, fills with fluid,
and gets enlarged; chronic pelvic pain; infertility; ectopic pregnancy; and ovarian cancer (Peipert & Madden, 2021).

Infertility is a serious complication of PID because PID can often reoccur and can cause tubal and epithelial
destruction, which can affect fertility. PID can cause permanent injury to the fallopian tube, including loss of ciliary
action, fibrosis, and occlusion of the tube. After PID resolves, hydrosalpinx can occur and cause difficulty with
implantation of the blastocyte (Peipert & Madden, 2021). Table 7.3 summarizes bacterial and protozoan STIs and
PID.
314  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

     Disease        Organism             Signs and                            Lab Diagnosis           Treatment per CDC
                                         Symptoms                                                     Guidelines

     Pelvic         Numerous             Abdominal                            Test for Neisseria      Ceftriaxone 1 g IV
     inflammatory   organisms can cause  tenderness, adnexal                  gonorrhoeae and         every 24 hours PLUS
     disease (PID)  PID:                 tenderness, and                      Chlamydia               doxycycline 100 mg
                    Neisseria            cervical motion                      trachomatis; also       orally or IV every 12
                    gonorrhoeae,         tenderness; fever,                   test for M.             hours PLUS
                    Chlamydia            vaginal discharge,                   genitalium, HIV, and    metronidazole 500
                    trachomatis,         irregular menstrual                  Treponema               mg orally or IV every
                    Mycoplasma           bleeding, pelvic pain,               pallidum;               12 hours
                    genitalium,          pain with                            also vaginal fluid
                    Treponema pallidum   intercourse, painful                 with large amount of
                                         and frequent                         white blood cells
                                         urination, and                       (WBCs); elevated
                                         uterine tenderness                   erythrocyte
                                                                              sedimentation rate
                                                                              (ESR) and/or C-
                                                                              reactive protein

     Gonorrhea      Neisseria            Dysuria, urinary                     Assigned female at      Ceftriaxone 500 mg
                    gonorrhoeae          urgency, urinary                     birth: vulvovaginal or  IM in a single dose
                                         frequency, lower                     endocervical swab,      for persons weighing
                                         pelvic pain, and                     urine sample, Pap       <150 kg and
                                         abnormal vaginal                     smear                   ceftriaxone 1,000
                                         bleeding                             Assigned male at        mg IM for persons
                                                                              birth: fresh-catch      weighing  150 kg;
                                                                              urine or urethral       if cephalosporin
                                                                              sample                  allergy, patient can
                                                                                                      take gentamicin 240
                                                                                                      mg IM in a single
                                                                                                      dose
                                                                                                      PLUS azithromycin 2
                                                                                                      g orally in a single
                                                                                                      dose;
                                                                                                      if ceftriaxone not
                                                                                                      available, use
                                                                                                      cefixime 800 mg
                                                                                                      orally in a single
                                                                                                      dose

     Chlamydia      Chlamydia            No symptoms, or                      Assigned female at      Doxycycline 100 mg
                    trachomatis          vaginal discharge,                   birth: cervical or      orally 2 times/day
                                         abnormal vaginal                     vaginal swab, Pap       for 7 days OR
                                         bleeding, pelvic pain,               smear, or first-void    azithromycin 1 g
                                         urinary frequency, or                urine                   orally once OR
                                         dysuria; possible                    Assigned male at        levofloxacin
                                         fever, abdominal                     birth: urethral swab    500 mg orally once a
                                         pain, nausea,                        or first-void urine     day for 7 days
                                         vomiting, fatigue,
                                         and malaise

     TABLE 7.3 Bacterial and Protozoan Sexually Transmitted Infections (CDC, 2021a)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                7.1 · Sexually Transmitted Infections   315

Disease         Organism            Signs and                Lab Diagnosis           Treatment per CDC
                                    Symptoms                                         Guidelines

Trichomoniasis  Trichomonas         Assigned female at       Diagnosis using         Patients with a
                vaginalis           birth: asymptomatic,     NAAT swab of the        vagina:
                                    or foul-smelling         vagina, endocervical    metronidazole 500
                                    discharge, pruritis,     swab, urinalysis, or    mg 2 times/day for 7
                                    dyspareunia,             urethral sample         days
                                    dysuria, and vaginal                             Patients with a
                                    spotting                                         penis: metronidazole
                                    Assigned male at                                 2 g orally in a single
                                    birth: testicular pain,                          dose
                                    dysuria, or rectal                               Alternative for all
                                    pain                                             patients: Tinidazole
                                                                                     (Tindamax) 2 g orally
                                                                                     in a single dose

Syphilis        Treponema pallidum  Painless lesion          Venereal Disease        Penicillin G
                                    (chancre), rash, can     Research Laboratory     benzathine 2.4
                                    proceed to               (VDRL) and rapid        million units to be
                                    cardiovascular and       plasma reagin (RPR);    given by a single IM
                                    neurologic lesions       fluorescent             injection
                                                             treponemal antibody
                                                             absorption (FTA-
                                                             ABS) and the
                                                             treponema pallidum
                                                             particle agglutination
                                                             (TP-PA) assays are
                                                             needed for
                                                             confirmation of the
                                                             diagnosis

TABLE 7.3 Bacterial and Protozoan Sexually Transmitted Infections (CDC, 2021a)

Patient Education
Patients should experience clinical improvement in less than 3 days after initiation of treatment; if not, they should
be hospitalized for possible change in medication and possible laparoscopy. Sex partners should be tested for
gonorrhea and chlamydia. People with an IUD who get PID need treatment but do not need to have the IUD
removed (CDC, 2021a).

Viral Sexually Transmitted Infections

Viral STIs are caused by a virus and are not curable. Some viral STIs are preventable with vaccines, and others have
treatments available to help with suppression.

Human Papillomavirus
The double-stranded DNA virus human papillomavirus (HPV) replicates in the basal cell layer of stratified
squamous epithelial cells, which then replicate and cause hyperplasia and possible cancer. HPV is the most
common cause of cervical dysplasia, as well as the majority of cervical, penile, vulvar, vaginal, anal, and
oropharyngeal cancers and precancers (CDC, 2021a).

Incidence
Human papillomavirus is the most common sexually transmitted infectious organism in the United States and the
world (Garcia et al., 2023). Approximately 79 million Americans are infected with HPV (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, 2020). Globally in 2020, about 300 million patients had HPV (WHO, 2023). There are 150
316  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

     types of HPV, and at least 40 of them affect the genital area. Many types of HPV do not cause any symptoms and are
     self-limiting. However, types 6 and 11, as well as some others, cause about 90 percent of all anogenital warts.
     Anogenital warts can be painful and itchy, or they can be asymptomatic. HPV types 16 and 18 cause most cervical,
     penile, vulvar, vaginal, anal, and oropharyngeal cancers and precancers (CDC, 2021a). Globally, cervical cancer is
     the most common cancer in persons assigned female at birth and is most often caused by HPV (Palefsky, 2022).

             LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

     Male Circumcision and HPV

     Male circumcision protects against a variety of STIs. HPV is the most common STI, and numerous studies have
     shown that male circumcision can decrease the circumcised patient's risk of acquiring HPV. When looking further at
     these studies, the incidence of HPV in AFAB partners of the circumcised person was also decreased. The exact
     mechanism of how this occurs is unknown. One theory suggests that keratinization of the circumcised penis makes
     the penis less susceptible to infection, but this has not been proven consistently. More likely, there is a decreased
     bacterial load and biodiversity in a circumcised penis. It is also possible that circumcision removes immune cells
     from within the foreskin, causing different cytokine environments and inflammatory responses to pathogen entry
     (Shapiro et al., 2023). The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) states that the benefits of male circumcision
     outweigh the risks, but the benefits are not enough to recommend universal circumcision for all males (Task Force
     on Circumcision et al, 2012). Therefore, it is the decision of the parents or guardians to determine if the male is
     circumcised (Guevara et al., 2021).

     Screening and Diagnosis
     During cervical cancer screening, HPV testing can be performed using the same sample. However, annual cervical
     cancer screening is not recommended for all patients with a vagina who are at average risk. This includes patients
     with no previous cervical cancer or high-grade precancer, those who are not currently under close follow-up for
     abnormal results, those not immunocompromised, and those who had no exposure to diethylstilbestrol in utero. For
     patients 21 to 29 years old, a study of cells, or cytology test (in this case, a Pap smear) to detect abnormal cells is
     recommended every 3 years. For patients aged 30 to 65 years, a cytology test every 3 years, an HPV test every 5
     years, or a cytology plus HPV test every 5 years is recommended (CDC, 2021a). FDA-approved tests for HPV are
     approved only for cervical specimens and are used to detect oncogenic types of HPV (CDC, 2021a).

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Age-Based Cervical Screening Recommendations Using Cytology and/or Human
     Papillomavirus Typing

     Disclaimer: Always follow the agency's policy for cervical cancer screening.

     Definition: Reduce the risk of harm to patients through effective, efficient, and competent performance.

     Knowledge: The nurse will analyze basic safety principles, understand evidence-based practice standards, and
     reflect on unsafe nursing practices to ensure that patients are screened properly.

     Skill: Demonstrate effective strategies to reduce the risk of harm. The nurse will teach all patients AFAB:

         · Cervical cancer testing (screening) should begin at age 25.
         · Those aged 25 to 65 should have a primary HPV test every 5 years. If primary HPV testing is not available,

             screening may be done with either a co-test that combines an HPV test with a Papanicolaou (Pap) test every 5
             years or a Pap test alone every 3 years.

     (A primary HPV test is an HPV test that is done by itself for screening. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has
     approved certain tests to be primary HPV tests.)

         · The most important thing to remember is to get screened regularly, no matter which test you get.
         · People over age 65 who have had regular screening in the past 10 years with normal results and no history of

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.1 · Sexually Transmitted Infections                                                                                  317

        CIN2 (a cervical biopsy finding of moderately abnormal cells present on the surface of the cervix) or more
        serious diagnosis within the past 25 years should stop cervical cancer screening. Once stopped, it should not
        be started again.
    · People who have had a total hysterectomy (removal of the uterus and cervix) should stop screening (such as
        Pap tests and HPV tests) unless the hysterectomy was done as a treatment for cervical cancer or serious
        precancer. People who have had a hysterectomy without removal of the cervix (called a supracervical
        hysterectomy) should continue cervical cancer screening according to the preceding guidelines.
    · People who have been vaccinated against HPV should still follow these guidelines for their age groups.

Attitude: The nurse will respect their role in cervical cancer screening by adhering to safe, evidence-based practice
standards.

Management and Treatment
There is no cure for HPV. Treatment can be done on genital warts or precancerous lesions caused by the virus (CDC,
2021a). For patients with genital warts, the warts may resolve on their own, but treatment may be preferred for
cosmetic reasons. Cryotherapy and/or external medication may be used for treatment. Medications that are self-
applied include imiquimod (Aldara), podofilox (Condylox), or sinecatechins (Veregen). A provider can perform
cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen, or they can apply trichloroacetic acid or bichloroacetic acid or surgically remove
the warts. For patients who test positive for HPV types 16 or 18, a colposcopy should be performed, even if the
cytology is normal. For patients with abnormal cytology and a positive HPV, a loop electrosurgical excision
procedure (LEEP) of the cervix is often recommended (CDC, 2021a).

The HPV vaccine is recommended for all youth aged 11 to 12 and for adults up to age 26 who have not been
vaccinated. The vaccine can prevent infection with the types of HPV that cause most genital warts and cancers (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 2020). Adults aged 27 to 45 can get the HPV vaccine if they have not
been vaccinated and they are at risk for HPV. Less benefit is shown at this age because most adults by this point
have been exposed to HPV already (CDC, 2023a). The vaccine has been proven safe and effective, but the rates of
vaccination are still low; around 50 percent of youth aged 13 to 17 had completed the vaccine series in 2018 in the
United States (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2020).

Complications
Human papillomavirus infection may present with no signs or symptoms; at other times it can cause genital warts.
This infection can also cause cervical cancer, anal cancer, vulvar or vaginal cancer, penile cancer, or oropharyngeal
cancer (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2020). Human papillomavirus is the number 1 cause of
cervical cancer, the fourth most common cancer worldwide in people with a cervix. Approximately 570,000 cases
are diagnosed each year, and around 311,000 people die of cervical cancer each year (Palefsky, 2022). In the
United States, there were 11,542 new cases of cervical cancer and 4,272 deaths from this cancer in 2020 (CDC,
2023b).

Patient Education
Nurses should educate patients that HPV often goes unnoticed but can have severe health consequences. The
vaccine can prevent HPV, but there is no cure once the person has contracted it. Nurses can encourage patients who
have tested positive for HPV to address their immune health by decreasing stress, taking multivitamins, exercising,
and engaging in overall healthy habits. Sexual partners can unknowingly share HPV, making it impossible to know
where it started (CDC, 2021a). In addition, a person can have HPV for a long time prior to having genital warts or
changes on their cervix. Therefore, patient education should include that having a new diagnosis of HPV does not
mean their partner is having sex with another person; the virus could have been contracted many years prior (CDC,
2021a).

        LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

Reporting of Sexually Transmitted Infections

Some states in the United States require the provider to report certain STIs to the state or local government. Many
states also use partner notification services. STIs in children and older persons strongly indicate sexual abuse. All
318  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

     U.S. states have laws that require the reporting of sexual abuse of a child or an older person (Source: CDC, 2021).

     Herpes Simplex Virus
     Herpes is a condition caused by the herpes simplex virus (HSV), an easily transmissible virus that can cause a
     variety of symptoms in the population. It is a chronic condition that can produce painful lesions in the anogenital
     area. Severe disease can lead to neurologic involvement (CDC, 2021a).

     Incidence
     Herpes simplex virus (HSV) is a global health issue. From 2005 to 2010, approximately 16 percent of the U.S.
     population aged 14 to 49 acquired HSV-2 (Albrecht, 2022). There are two types of herpes simplex virus: type 1 and
     type 2. Both can cause genital herpes. HSV can be found in mucous membranes as well as in the lesions or skin
     affected by the virus. This type of virus can be spread through oral to oral, oral to genital, or genital to genital
     contact (Johnston & Wald, 2023). Transmission occurs when there is an outbreak or at periods of subclinical
     shedding, when the patient has no symptoms, making this an easily spread virus (Albrecht, 2022).

     Screening and Diagnosis
     Screening for and diagnosis of HSV can be performed depending on where the virus is in the cycle of a lesion. If a
     lesion is new and has yet to start healing, an HSV NAAT assay test is available. A serum PCR test is available and is
     the preferred method to diagnose HSV if the infection affects the central nervous system (CNS). This blood test
     should not be used to detect a genital herpes infection, unless neurologic involvement is suspected (CDC, 2021a).
     HSV NAAT tests are run on a swab with a specimen from the lesions. This test is the most sensitive but could be
     negative on older lesions. A viral culture, which is a swab with a specimen from the lesion, may be the only test
     available but has low sensitivity (CDC, 2021a).

     Management and Treatment
     The primary infection is the first time the patient has HSV, and the symptoms are often severe and include painful
     genital ulcers, dysuria, fever, tender lymphadenopathy, and headache (Albrecht, 2022). Medication should be
     initiated with the start of an outbreak to maximize effectiveness and reduce the duration of the episode (CDC,
     2021a). For the first episode of genital herpes, the preferred treatment is acyclovir (Zovirax) 400 mg orally 3 times a
     day for 7 to 10 days OR famciclovir (Famvir) 250 mg orally 3 times a day for 7 to 10 days OR valacyclovir (Valtrex) 1
     g orally 2 times a day for 7 to 10 days. The virus intermittently sheds, and recurrent episodes can occur. Suppressive
     treatment can be used to prevent outbreaks. Patients who have HSV may have prodromal symptoms prior to an
     outbreak, which include tingling, paresthesias, or pruritis (Albrecht, 2022). Treatment taken during the prodromal
     period can include:

         · acyclovir 400 mg orally 2 times a day OR
         · valacyclovir 500 mg orally once a day OR
         · valacyclovir 1 g orally once a day OR
         · famciclovir 250 mg orally 2 times a day.

     If an outbreak occurs, the following can be used and are most effective if started within 1 day of the outbreak:

         · acyclovir 800 mg orally 2 times a day for 5 days OR
         · acyclovir 800 mg orally 3 times a day for 2 days OR
         · famciclovir 1 g orally 2 times a day for 1 day OR
         · famciclovir 500 mg once, followed by 250 mg 2 times a day for 2 days OR
         · famciclovir 125 mg 2 times a day for 5 days OR
         · valacyclovir 500 mg orally 2 times a day for 3 days OR
         · valacyclovir 1 g orally once daily for 5 days (CDC, 2021a).

     Pregnant patients who have an active herpes lesion must have a cesarean birth to avoid infecting the newborn.
     Therefore, patients with recurrent genital herpes should receive suppressive therapy beginning at 36 weeks'
     gestation to prevent an outbreak at birth. The therapy should be acyclovir 400 mg given orally 3 times a day or
     valacyclovir 500 mg given orally 2 times a day until delivery (CDC, 2021a).

     Complications
     Most often, HSV causes oral infection or genital lesions, but more severe cases can lead to disseminated infection,

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.1 · Sexually Transmitted Infections                                                                                    319

pneumonitis, hepatitis, or CNS complications such as meningitis or encephalitis. Immunocompromised patients,
such as those with HIV, can have longer and more severe episodes. HSV is one disease in a group of infectious
diseases, called TORCH, which can be passed from the pregnant person to the fetus (CDC, 2021a). Approximately 2
percent to 3 percent of all congenital anomalies are attributed to perinatal infection (Jaan & Rajnik, 2023).
Intrauterine infection due to maternal primary infection can cause the placenta to necrotize and cause inflammation
of the umbilical cord, leading to hydrops fetalis or even fetal demise. This is more common if the HSV infection
occurs in the second half of pregnancy (Jaan & Rajnik, 2023). A neonate born after intrauterine infection can have
skin vesicles, eye damage, and severe central nervous system problems including microcephaly. Neonates that
acquire HSV during delivery can develop localized skin, eye, and mouth diseases (SEM), CNS disease, or
disseminated disease (Demmler-Harrison, 2022). Neonates with SEM can progress to CNS or disseminated disease
if not treated. Neonates with SEM can have skin lesions, eye watering and pain, and ulcerative lesions of the mouth
and tongue. Infants with CNS disease can exhibit seizures, lethargy, irritability, tremors, poor feeding, and
temperature instability, where neonates with disseminated virus can have dysfunction of multiple organs, including
the liver, lungs, heart, kidneys, and neonatal death (Demmler-Harrison, 2022).

Patient Education
Herpes simplex virus outbreaks can come and go. Suppressive medication can be used to decrease the severity,
duration, and/or frequency of outbreaks. Current and future sexual partners should be informed of a person's HSV
status before engaging in sexual activity, and patients should abstain from sexual activity when lesions are present.
Condoms can help reduce transmission of genital herpes; however, the virus can still be spread through lesions in
the genital or anal area that are not covered with the condom. Sexual activity should be avoided during an outbreak
(WHO, 2023). Immunocompromised patients, such as those with HIV, could have longer or more severe episodes.
Pregnant people with genital herpes can take acyclovir to prevent active lesions at the time of delivery (CDC,
2021a).

Hepatitis
Inflammation of the liver is called hepatitis, and it is most commonly caused by a virus, such as hepatitis A, B, or C.
Hepatitis D and E are rare. Hepatitis can range from mild to severe. Hepatitis A is found in stool and is often passed
through the oral-fecal route via contaminated food, drinks, or objects. It can be spread through sexual contact via
the oral-fecal route as well (Mehta & Reddivari, 2022). Hepatitis B is a virus that can cause both acute and chronic
disease and can be transmitted through blood and body fluids and is more likely to be sexually transmitted (Mehta &
Reddivari, 2022). Hepatitis C is most commonly transmitted through infected blood and blood products. It is rarely
sexually transmitted (Mehta & Reddivari, 2022).

Incidence
There are about 1.5 million cases of hepatitis A in the world each year, more common in areas of lower
socioeconomic status and less access to clean drinking water. There are rarely relapses, and hepatitis A does not
lead to chronic infection (Mehta & Reddivari, 2022). Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a global health problem, with an
estimated 250 million HBV carriers in the world. HBV can be spread through blood and body fluids, perinatally;
percutaneously, such as in intravenous drug use; and through sexual contact (Lok, 2023). Hepatitis B can spread
from a pregnant person to the newborn. High-risk populations include those having unprotected sex with infected
partners, those having sex with multiple partners, those with history of other STIs, and those who inject drugs (CDC,
2021a). Hepatitis C is prevalent in 0.5 percent to 2 percent of the population in the world, with approximately 71
million cases of chronic hepatitis C worldwide. Those who use intravenous drugs and persons who have hemophilia
have the highest number of cases (Mehta & Reddivari, 2022).

Screening and Diagnosis
During the acute phase of HBV infection, serum lab work shows increased levels of alanine and aspartate
aminotransferase (ALT and AST, respectively). Serologic testing can determine the acute or chronic phase of HBV
infection. Table 7.4 summarizes different tests for HBV and what they indicate.

All pregnant persons should be tested for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and high-risk patients should be
tested again at delivery so that the infant can be treated right after birth (CDC, 2021a).
320  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

     Test                                                    Indications from Results

     Positive HBsAg                                          Acute or chronic infection

     Presence of IgM antibody to hepatitis B core antigen    Acute or recently acquired HBV infection
     (IgM anti-HBc)

     Antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs)                            Resolved infection or present after vaccination

     HBsAg and anti-HBc, with a negative test for IgM anti-  Chronic HBV infection
     HBc

     Only positive total anti-HBc                            Acute, resolved, or chronic infection or can be a false-
                                                             positive result

     TABLE 7.4 Tests for Hepatitis B Infections (CDC, 2023)

     Management and Treatment
     There is no treatment for acute HBV infection. However, therapeutic agents can be used with chronic HBV to help
     achieve suppression and remission of liver disease (CDC, 2021a). Two products are available to prevent HBV. The
     first is hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG), which is used for postexposure prophylaxis. HBIG is prepared from
     plasma with high concentrations of anti-HBs and provides short-term (3 to 6 months) protection from HBV. This is
     usually used in combination with the hepatitis B vaccine for people who have not been vaccinated or did not
     respond to the vaccination (CDC, 2023a). This, along with the hepatitis B vaccine, is also given to infants born to
     persons who are HBsAG positive (Drutz, 2023). The hepatitis B vaccine is available and is a three- or four-dose
     scheduled vaccine. It is recommended for all infants and should be given at any time if the person has not been
     vaccinated (CDC, 2023a).

     Complications
     Hepatitis B virus infection can lead to serious complications, including the development of cirrhosis of the liver, liver
     disease, hepatocellular carcinoma, and death. Alcoholics with HBV often have accelerated liver disease (Lok, 2023).

     Patient Education
     The nurse should teach the patient with HBV infection to avoid alcohol and get vaccinated for hepatitis A and other
     diseases, such as flu. Family and close friends should get tested and receive the HBV vaccine (Lok, 2023). It is
     important to complete the whole hepatitis B vaccine series (CDC, 2021a). The person with HBV should always use a
     latex condom when having sex.

     The patient should use caution to prevent spreading the virus through blood, such as avoiding needle sharing.
     People with HBV infection should cover any cuts or lesions to prevent spread and should not share household
     articles that can be contaminated with blood, such as razors or toothbrushes. Patients with HBV should not donate
     blood, plasma, body organs or tissue, or semen (CDC, 2021a). Blood used for transfusions is tested for HBV in the
     United States. Pregnant patients are tested for HBV during pregnancy; those with HBV will need their newborn to
     receive hepatitis vaccine and hepatitis B immunoglobulin within 12 hours to prevent transmission of the virus
     (Mehta & Reddivari, 2022) after birth.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Visit the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website (https://openstax.org/r/77Prevention) for current and
     trusted information about STIs.

     Human Immunodeficiency Virus
     The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is an enveloped retrovirus that is encapsulated by two single-stranded
     RNAs and can be the cause of AIDS. HIV begins as an acute infection that may or may not cause symptoms and then

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.1 · Sexually Transmitted Infections                                                                                     321

progresses to a chronic infection. Medications can be used to control the virus to undetectable levels and delay or
prevent progression to late-stage HIV. Late-stage HIV is known as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and
is fatal (CDC, 2021a).

Incidence
As of 2021, 38.4 million adults and 1.7 million children are living with HIV or AIDS worldwide (Quinn, 2022). In the
United States, there are about 1.2 million people with HIV. In 2015, there were 37,800 new cases reported,
compared with a decline to 34,800 cases in 2019 (HIV.gov, 2022). HIV is a virus that enters the body through the
anogenital mucosa or by binding to dendritic cells found in the cervicovaginal epithelium as well as in the tonsils and
adenoids. This means HIV can be transmitted through anal-genital, genital-genital, or oral-genital sex (Sax, 2022a).
HIV can also be spread through blood and specific body fluids, including breast milk (WHO, 2023). HIV-infected
cells in the body fuse with CD4+ T cells, which then spread the virus. During initial infection, the patient has a large
number of CD4+ T cells and no HIV immune response, leading to rapid viral replication. The populations most at risk
for HIV are persons AMAB having sex with other persons AMAB, people who inject drugs, blood product recipients,
and health-care workers with needlestick exposure (Sax, 2022a).

After the primary infection, the patient develops antibodies against HIV antigens, and seroconversion occurs. As the
virus stabilizes, a viral set point level is reached. This is variable in patients who are not on treatment, but for
patients on treatment, the viral load can remain low. Patients then enter the phase of chronic HIV without AIDS.
Without treatment, the patient will usually progress to AIDS within 5 to 10 years. However, with treatment, patients
with HIV can often have a near-normal lifespan (Wood, 2023). AIDS is the outcome of chronic HIV infection with a
consequent depletion of CD4 cells. AIDS is defined as a CD4 count < 200 cells/microL or the presence of any AIDS-
defining conditions, which include the following:

    · bacterial infections, multiple or recurrent
    · candidiasis of bronchi, trachea, or lungs
    · candidiasis of esophagus
    · cervical cancer, invasive
    · coccidioidomycosis, disseminated or extrapulmonary
    · cryptococcosis, extrapulmonary
    · cryptosporidiosis, chronic intestinal, > 1 month
    · cytomegalovirus disease (other than liver, spleen, or nodes), onset at age >1 month
    · cytomegalovirus retinitis
    · encephalopathy, HIV related
    · herpes simplex--chronic ulcers (>1 month) or bronchitis, pneumonitis, or esophagitis, onset at age >1 month
    · histoplasmosis, disseminated or extrapulmonary
    · cystoisosporiasis (formerly known as isosporiasis) chronic intestinal (>1 month)
    · Kaposi sarcoma
    · lymphoma, Burkitt
    · lymphoma, immunoblastic
    · lymphoma, primary, of brain
    · Mycobacterium avium complex or Mycobacterium kansasii, disseminated or extrapulmonary
    · Mycobacterium tuberculosis of any site
    · Mycobacterium, other species, disseminated or extrapulmonary
    · Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia
    · pneumonia, recurrent
    · progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
    · Salmonella septicemia, recurrent
    · toxoplasmosis of brain, onset at age >1 month
    · wasting syndrome attributed to HIV (Wood, 2023)

Screening and Diagnosis
Patients at higher risk for HIV acquisition, including sex workers and AMAB persons who have sex with others
AMAB, should be screened for HIV at least annually. Anyone seeking testing for another STI should also be tested
for HIV. All pregnant persons should be screened for HIV as well. Written consent is not needed, and the CDC
322  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

     recommends the opt-out process for testing so that all pregnant persons are tested, unless they decline. Testing
     rates have been shown to be higher with this method. (CDC, 2021a).

     Testing for HIV requires a blood sample. Initial positive results should be confirmed using the supplemental HIV-1/
     HIV-2 antibody differentiation. Any rapid positive results should also be followed up with RNA testing (CDC, 2021a).

     Management and Treatment
     HIV and AIDS are reportable conditions in every state in the United States. Reporting should be done by the provider
     or lab according to state and local mandates. These reports are confidential (CDC, 2021a). Early detection and
     treatment of HIV can improve outcomes and reduce new cases, so all sex partners and needle-sharing partners
     should be notified as soon as possible (CDC, 2021a).

     Antiretroviral therapy (ART) consists of medications that suppress HIV. They should be given during the acute phase
     to decrease severity and transmission (CDC, 2021a). ART should be administered to all HIV-positive patients,
     regardless of the severity of the disease. ART has been proven to reduce AIDS and non-AIDS morbidity and
     mortality. ART is effective at suppressing serum viral RNA levels and increasing CD4 levels, possibly to near-normal
     levels. Low viral levels are thought to reduce the risk of transmission. ART should be started as soon as possible and
     should be managed by a provider who is experienced with HIV management (Sax, 2022b). The ART should be
     chosen based on drug-resistance testing but will be a combination of medications.

     ART is continued indefinitely (Sax, 2022b). Pregnant patients should receive these combination treatments as well
     (ACOG, 2024).

     Currently, no vaccine exists to prevent HIV, but HIV preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is available. The daily oral
     antiretroviral PrEP is a medication that can reduce the rate of HIV acquisition, especially in those persons assigned
     male at birth who have intercourse with other persons assigned male at birth. All sexually active patients should be
     educated about PrEP because it is 99 percent effective in preventing HIV. PrEP is available as an oral therapy taken
     at home or an injectable therapy given in a clinic setting every 8 weeks. Compliance with taking the medication is
     important when deciding which treatment to use. PrEP is recommended for certain populations, especially those
     who have injected drugs and have shared a needle or equipment in the past 6 months or patients who engage in
     sexual behavior that increases their risk of HIV. This includes

         · patients who have sexual partners with HIV,
         · persons assigned male at birth who have sex with persons assigned male at birth if there has been

             condomless anal sex within 6 months,
         · heterosexual persons assigned male at birth from regions where HIV is epidemic who have condomless sex,
         · heterosexual cisgender persons assigned female at birth who have engaged in condomless sex in the past 6

             months with partners assigned male at birth who are at high risk of HIV infection, or
         · heterosexual persons assigned male at birth who have been diagnosed with a bacterial STI or have engaged in

             condomless sex with partners from areas of low general HIV prevalence but who are at high risk of HIV
             infection (Krakower, 2023).

     Complications
     Early ART treatment can reduce the severity and chance of transmission of HIV. Patients without ART can have a
     large viral load and are highly infectious. These patients can also spread HIV perinatally if they are pregnant.
     Pregnant patients should be tested at the first prenatal visit and again in the third trimester. Knowing about a
     person's positive HIV status can help to maintain that patient's health and reduce the risk of transmission to the
     fetus by taking ART. Transmission to the fetus without ART is about 30 percent, but that risk is decreased to < 2
     percent with ART and obstetric interventions (ACOG, 2024). A patient with HIV and a viral load of  1,000 copies/mL
     can wait for spontaneous labor and have a vaginal delivery without increased risk of transmission to the fetus.
     Patients with a viral load > 1,000 copies/mL should be offered an elective C-section at 38 weeks with intravenous
     zidovudine (Retrovir) given 3 hours preoperatively (ACOG, 2024). Ideally, this will take place before the onset of
     labor and rupture of membranes to reduce the risk of transmission to the fetus. Breast-feeding should be discussed
     with the provider. HIV can be transmitted through breast milk, but the risk is less than 1 percent with ART (HIV.gov,
     2023). Breast-feeding may be necessary in countries without safe water sources. Getting treatments to people in
     these areas is important (WHO, 2023).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       7.1 · Sexually Transmitted Infections           323

If an HIV infection continues without ART, the patient's CD4 cell count decreases. This causes the patient to become
immunocompromised. Once the patient is immunocompromised, they can develop complications such as
oropharyngeal or vulvovaginal candidiasis, seborrheic dermatitis, bacterial folliculitis, and methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Streptococcus pneumonia can also occur (Wood, 2023).

The patient is at higher risk of other STIs. HIV can progress to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), which
is defined as a CD4 cell count < 200 cells/microL or the presence of any AIDS-defining conditions. These conditions
include, but are not limited to, bacterial infections, multiple or recurrent; cervical cancer; Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia; encephalopathy; Kaposi sarcoma; lymphomas; and wasting syndrome. Death will likely occur (Wood,
2023).

Patient Education
Patients with HIV infection who take antiretroviral therapy (ART) can suppress the virus to undetectable levels,
which can reduce morbidity, increase lifespan, and prevent sexual transmission to others. Patients diagnosed with
HIV should be sent to an HIV specialist and may also need counseling. Pregnant patients should be tested because
treatment with ART can significantly decrease the risk of spread to the fetus (CDC, 2021a). Table 7.5 summarizes
sexually transmitted infections caused by viruses.

Disease         Organism Signs and Symptoms           Lab Diagnosis    Treatment per CDC
                                                                       Guidelines

Human           150 types  None, or may have genital  HPV testing      No treatment for virus
papillomavirus  of HPV:    warts or precancerous      during cervical
(HPV)           double-    lesions                    screening
                stranded
                DNA virus

Herpes simplex  Viral      May have no symptoms or    HSV NAAT assay   First episode: Acyclovir
virus           infection  genital lesions            PCR serum        400 mg orally 3 times/day
                HSV-1 or                              Viral culture    for 7-10 days
                HSV-2                                                  OR
                                                                       Famciclovir 250 mg orally
                                                                       3 times/day for 7-10 days
                                                                       OR
                                                                       Valacyclovir 1 g orally 2
                                                                       times/day for 7-10 days
                                                                       Recurrent HSV-2:
                                                                       Acyclovir 400 mg orally 2
                                                                       times/day
                                                                       OR
                                                                       Valacyclovir 500 mg orally
                                                                       once a day
                                                                       OR
                                                                       Valacyclovir 1 g orally once
                                                                       a day
                                                                       OR
                                                                       Famciclovir 250 mg orally
                                                                       2 times/day

TABLE 7.5 Viral Sexually Transmitted Infections
324  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

     Disease           Organism Signs and Symptoms                Lab Diagnosis      Treatment per CDC
                                                                                     Guidelines

     Hepatitis B       Virus          No symptoms to flu-like     Serologic testing  None for acute HBV;
                                      symptoms: anorexia,                            immune globulin, for
                                      nausea, jaundice, right                        prevention, therapeutic
                                      upper quadrant                                 agents used for treatment
                                      discomfort, fatigue                            of chronic HBV

     Human             Retrovirus     Asymptomatic to viral       HIV-1/2 antigen    Antiretroviral treatment
     immunodeficiency                 syndrome including fever,   (Ag)/antibody      (ART) does not cure but
     virus (HIV)                      malaise,                    (Ab) combination   does suppress the virus
                                      lymphadenopathy,            immunoassays,
                                      pharyngitis, arthritis, or  serum
                                      rash

     TABLE 7.5 Viral Sexually Transmitted Infections

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Test your knowledge of STIs by taking this quiz (https://openstax.org/r/77STIquiz) from the University of Rochester.

     7.2 Vaginal Infections and Other Conditions

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Describe the common vaginal infections of bacterial vaginitis and candidiasis
         · Educate patients regarding the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of bacterial vaginitis and candidiasis

     Bacterial vaginitis and vulvovaginal candidiasis are common infectious causes of vaginitis. Anaerobic bacteria cause
     bacterial vaginitis, while vulvovaginal candidiasis is caused by a fungal infection (Paladine & Desai, 2018). Group B
     strep infection is a bacterial infection that can colonize the vagina and infect a newborn during delivery (CDC,
     2022b).

     Bacterial Vaginitis

     The condition bacterial vaginitis (BV) occurs when there is an imbalance between the good bacteria and the
     harmful bacteria in the vagina, resulting in a larger amount of anaerobic bacteria. Symptoms may be minimal but
     include a homogeneous, thin vaginal discharge with a fishy odor (CDC, 2021b).

     Incidence
     Bacterial vaginitis is the most common cause of vaginal symptoms in persons assigned female at birth and affects
     over 21 million of them in the United States each year (CDC, 2021b). It affects 23 percent to 29 percent of persons
     AFAB across the world.

     Screening and Diagnosis
     Routine screening for BV is not indicated, but persons experiencing symptoms should report them to their provider.
     A person assigned female at birth whose partner is BV positive should get tested (CDC, 2021b).

     Diagnosis can be made using clinical criteria or a gram stain. The most common diagnostic test is the Amsel
     diagnostic criteria, which requires that three out of four of the following be present:

         · thin, homogeneous discharge
         · positive whiff test
         · clue cells present on microscopy (Figure 7.8)
         · vaginal pH > 4.5

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.2 · Vaginal Infections and Other Conditions                                                                                                 325

FIGURE 7.8 Bacterial Vaginosis Clue cells are present in microscopy when a patient has bacterial vaginosis, one type of bacterial vaginitis.
(credit: "Clue cells - CDC PHIL 3720" by CDC and M. Rein/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

A whiff test is done by mixing a few drops of potassium hydroxide (KOH) with a vaginal sample. The KOH kills
bacteria and leaves only yeast behind, revealing if there is a yeast infection. In addition, there is a fishy odor before
or after the addition of 10 percent KOH to the sample (Paladine & Desai, 2018). Newer lab tests use DNA probes to
detect BV (CDC, 2021b).

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

Vaginal Culture and Pap Smear

Disclaimer: Always follow the agency's policy for vaginal culture and Pap smear.

Definition: Reduce the risk of harm to patients through effective, efficient, and competent performance.

Knowledge: The nurse will analyze basic safety principles, understand evidence-based practice standards, and
reflect on unsafe nursing practices to ensure that patients are screened properly.

Skill: Demonstrate effective strategies to reduce the risk of harm. The nurse will do the following:

    · Perform hand hygiene before patient contact. Don appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) based on
        the patient's need for isolation precautions or the risk of exposure to bodily fluids.

    · Introduce yourself to the patient.
    · Verify the correct patient using two identifiers.
    · Determine whether the patient has had any previous pelvic examinations, procedures, or surgeries. Also

        determine if there are any questions the patient needs answered, as well as the patient's ability to cooperate
        for the examination.
    · Have the patient empty the bladder.
    · Ensure that the light source works.
    · Set up supplies for the examination and specimen collection.
    · Assist the patient into the lithotomy position with the buttocks at the edge of the table and place a pillow
        under the head. Drape the patient's abdomen and lower extremities so that only the perineal area is exposed.
        Do not place the patient into this position until just before the physical examination begins. Be prepared to
        provide assistance if a weak or dizzy patient is not able to maintain this position.
    · Ensure that a chaperone is present for all breast, genital, and rectal examinations performed by the
        practitioner.
326  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

               Papanicolaou (Pap) smear: Provider to obtain this specimen first.
               Obtain a specimen to diagnose Candida (yeast) organisms and submit it on a slide or on a swab per the

                   organization's practice. This may be done by a nurse or provider, depending on the organization.
               KOH dissolves other types of cells and protein, which makes it easier to see the Candida cells. On exam,

                   will see clue cells--vaginal epithelial cells studded with adherent bacteria.
         · Assist the patient with removing the feet from the footrests.
         · Offer the patient a damp washcloth and towel to use to cleanse self after the examination.
         · In the presence of the patient, label the specimen per the organization's practice.
         · Place the labeled specimen in a biohazard bag and transport it to the laboratory immediately per the

             organization's practice.
         · Assess, treat, and reassess pain.
         · Discard supplies, remove PPE, and perform hand hygiene.

     Attitude: The nurse will respect their role in assisting with vaginal cultures and Pap smears by adhering to safe,
     evidence-based practice standards.

     Management and Treatment
     Bacterial vaginitis can be treated with metronidazole (Flagyl) 500 mg orally 2 times a day for 7 days or
     metronidazole gel 0.75 percent one full applicator (5 g) intravaginally once a day for 5 days or clindamycin cream
     (Cleocin Vaginal) 2 percent one full applicator (5 g) intravaginally at bedtime for 7 days (CDC, 2021b). Douching can
     increase the risk of BV and should be avoided. Regular condom use can help prevent BV. The exact cause of the
     infection is not well understood (CDC, 2021b).

     Complications
     Bacterial vaginitis can cause discomfort, such as vaginal itching, copious discharge from the vagina that may be foul
     smelling, and burning during urination (WHO, 2023). It can also increase the risk of HIV, gonorrhea, chlamydia, and
     herpes infections (Paladine & Desai, 2018). Bacterial vaginitis during pregnancy can cause preterm delivery (CDC,
     2021b).

     Patient Education
     Partners AMAB do not require treatment, but partners AFAB can spread the infection to each other. Bacterial
     vaginitis may go away without treatment, but it can increase the risk of complications (CDC, 2021b). The patient
     should be educated that douching can change the pH of the vagina and lead to BV and should always be avoided
     (CDC, 2021b).

             LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

     Vaginitis in Those over 65

     Vaginitis in patients over the age of 65 requires normal evaluation in addition to evaluation for vulvovaginal atrophy
     and genital neoplasia. Vulvovaginal atrophy is common in menopausal patients who may experience watery, white,
     or yellow discharge; vaginal burning or irritation; itching; and other urinary symptoms. Microscopy findings are
     nonspecific, and treatment includes topical estrogen therapy (Sobel, 2023).

     Vulvovaginal Candidiasis

     The yeast Candida causes the fungal infection vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC). This yeast normally lives on the skin
     and within the body without causing problems. It can cause a problem when there is overgrowth caused by
     hormones, medications, or changes in the immune system. Obesity and pregnancy can increase endogenous
     estrogen, which increases the risk. Diabetes mellitus, immunosuppressant medications, and broad-spectrum
     antibiotics can also raise the risk of acquiring VVC (Jeanmonod et al., 2023). VVC can cause vaginal itching and
     soreness, dyspareunia, external dysuria, and abnormal vaginal discharge (CDC, 2022b).

     Incidence
     About 75 percent of all persons assigned female at birth will have at least one occurrence of VVC in their lifetime,

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.2 · Vaginal Infections and Other Conditions                                                                                    327

and 40 percent to 45 percent will have two or more episodes (CDC, 2022b). VVC is classified as noncomplicated or
complicated. VVC is considered noncomplicated when it is infrequent and mild to moderate in a person who is not
immunocompromised, and it is likely caused by Candida albicans. VVC is complicated when it is recurrent or severe,
a non-albicans candidiasis, or in a person with diabetes or other immunocompromising conditions, such as HIV, or
who is on immunosuppressive therapy (CDC, 2022b).

Screening and Diagnosis
There is no routine screening for VVC. Patients may complain of dysuria, pruritis, pain, swelling, redness,
dyspareunia, and postcoital bleeding. They may also have a thick discharge with curds. The diagnosis can be made
by the health-care provider noting the thick discharge on the vaginal walls or with a wet preparation: A slide of
vaginal discharge under a microscope will show yeast (Figure 7.9). A 10 percent KOH preparation added to the slide
will improve visualization of yeast. A vaginal culture can also be used to make the diagnosis (CDC, 2022b).

FIGURE 7.9 Vulvovaginal Candidiasis A wet mount shows pseudohyphae of Candida albicans (arrows). (credit: "Vaginal wet mount of
candidal vulvovaginitis" by Mikael Häggström/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Management and Treatment
Fluconazole (Diflucan) is the only prescription oral treatment, which consists of one 150 mg dose. There are
numerous over-the-counter vaginal creams, ointments, or suppositories used to treat VVC. These include
clotrimazole, miconazole, and tioconazole. Prescription vaginal creams, ointments, or suppositories that are
available include butoconazole (Gynazole-1) and terconazole (Terazol 3) (CDC, 2022b). During pregnancy, any of the
topical azole medications is appropriate for treatment, but oral fluconazole should not be used, as it has been
shown to increase the risk of spontaneous abortion and congenital anomalies (CDC, 2022b).

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Fluconazole
328  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

         · Generic Name: fluconazole
         · Trade Name: Diflucan
         · Class/Action: antifungal agent
         · Route/Dosage: oral, 150 mg one time; severe infection, 150 mg every 72 hours for 2 to 3 doses
         · High Alert/Black Box Warning: may occasionally cause dizziness or seizures, caution with driving
         · Indications: used to treat vulvovaginal candidiasis
         · Mechanism of Action: interferes with fungal activity, decreasing synthesis and cell formation
         · Contraindications: hypersensitivity to fluconazole; coadministration with CYP3A4 substrates
         · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: headache, rash, abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, dizziness,

             prolonged cardiac QT interval
         · Parent/Family Education: Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or may be pregnant. Fluconazole can cause

             fetal harm.

     Complications
     Patients with complicated VVC should have a vaginal culture or PCR test to confirm the diagnosis and determine if
     the cause is non-albicans Candida. Patients with complicated VVC usually need a longer course of treatment. A
     longer course of a non-fluconazole treatment is recommended for non-albicans VVC (CDC, 2022b).

     Patient Education
     Poorly controlled diabetes can increase the risk of VVC. HIV-positive patients and patients taking
     immunosuppressant medications are at an increased risk of getting VVC, as are patients taking antibiotics. These
     patients may need longer treatment of VVC (CDC, 2022b). Creams and suppositories used to treat VVC are oil based
     and can weaken latex condoms and diaphragms. Sex partners do not usually require treatment (CDC, 2022b). The
     nurse should instruct the AFAB patient to follow these guidelines to prevent VVC:

         · Do not douche because it alters normal bacteria.
         · Do not use scented feminine products.
         · Change tampons, pads, and panty liners often.
         · Do not wear tight underwear, pantyhose, or clothes, which can increase the temperature.
         · Wear underwear with a cotton crotch to stay dry.
         · Change out of wet swimsuits and workout clothes as soon as possible.
         · Always wipe from front to back when using the bathroom.
         · Avoid hot tubs and taking hot baths (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2021).

     Group B Streptococcus

     The bacterium group B streptococcus (GBS) can live in a person's gastrointestinal and genital tracts without
     causing problems; it is not an STI pathogen. Sometimes, the bacteria can invade the body and cause infection. They
     also can be passed to a fetus during a vaginal delivery. Newborns infected with GBS can have severe complications,
     including death (CDC, 2022a).

     Incidence
     More than 28,000 cases of invasive group B streptococcus (GBS) are diagnosed in the United States each year (CDC,
     2022a). About 1 in 4 pregnant persons have GBS in their body (CDC, 2022a). While the incidence in the United
     States has decreased due to maternal treatment, there are still 320,000 cases of newborns affected with GBS each
     year in the world (Berardi et al., 2021).

     Screening and Diagnosis
     Cultures should be taken to determine if an infection is present. These cultures can consist of blood, urine, or spinal
     fluid (CDC, 2022a). All pregnant persons should have a lower vaginal and rectal swab to test for GBS at 36 to 37
     weeks' gestation. Universal screening has yielded an 80 percent reduction in early-onset GBS in newborns. The
     swab should test for sensitivity if the patient has a severe penicillin allergy (Baker, 2023).

     Management and Treatment
     Treatment depends on the type of infection that the patient has. In pregnant persons with a positive GBS culture,
     intrapartum antibiotics should be given. Patients who have a history of giving birth to an infant with early-onset

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.2 · Vaginal Infections and Other Conditions                                                                                329

disease or who had GBS bacteriuria during the current pregnancy should also receive intrapartum antibiotics.
Pregnant persons who have an unknown culture status (culture not performed or result not available) should receive
antibiotics if they have

    · intrapartum fever (100.4° F [38° C]) or
    · preterm labor (<37+0 weeks of gestation) or
    · preterm prelabor rupture of membranes or
    · prolonged rupture of membranes (18 hours) or
    · intrapartum nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) positive for GBS.

Patients who have a scheduled cesarean section do not need intrapartum antibiotics (Baker, 2023).

Penicillin is the treatment of choice for pregnant persons with group B strep. The usual dose is 5 million units
administered intravenously (IV) for the initial dose, followed by 2.5 to 3 million units IV every 4 hours until delivery.
Ampicillin 2 g IV initial dose, followed by 1 g every 4 hours until delivery, can also be used. If there is a high risk for
anaphylaxis to penicillin, susceptibility should be performed to see if the bacteria are susceptible to erythromycin or
clindamycin (Baker, 2023).

Complications
Adults with a group B strep infection can develop sepsis. Infants born to persons with untreated GBS can
experience serious consequences. Newborns can exhibit fever, difficulty in feeding, irritability or lethargy, difficulty
in breathing, or blue color of the skin. These infants can also develop meningitis, which can cause death. Other long-
term complications include deafness and developmental disabilities (CDC, 2022a).

Patient Education
Patients should be educated on the importance of testing for GBS during pregnancy. Patients should also be aware
of their GBS results during pregnancy. Results should be at the place of birth where the patient delivers the baby,
but in case they are not, the patient should be able to tell the nurse and provider their GBS status. Table 7.6
summarizes information about vaginal infections and other conditions.
330  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

     Disease       Organism               Signs and                           Lab Diagnosis         Treatment per CDC
                                          Symptoms                                                  Guidelines

     Bacterial     Gardnerella.           Thin white or gray                  Microscopy, vaginal   Metronidazole 500
     vaginitis     vaginalis, Prevotella  vaginal discharge;                  pH, and Whiff test    mg orally 2 times/
                   species, Mobiluncus    pain, itching, or                                         day for 7 days
                   species, Atopobium     burning in vagina;                                        OR
                   vaginae, and other     strong fish-like odor,                                    Metronidazole gel
                   BV-associated          especially after sex;                                     0.75% one full
                   anaerobic bacteria     burning with                                              applicator (5 g)
                                          urination; itching                                        intravaginally, once a
                                          around outside of                                         day for 5 days
                                          vagina                                                    OR
                                                                                                    Clindamycin cream
                                                                                                    2% one full
                                                                                                    applicator (5 g)
                                                                                                    intravaginally at
                                                                                                    bedtime for 7 days

     Vulvovaginal  Candida albicans       Vaginal itching or                  Wet preparation       Clotrimazole 2%
     candidiasis                          soreness, pain during               (saline, 10% KOH) of  cream 5 g
                                          sexual intercourse,                 vaginal discharge     intravaginally daily
                                          pain or discomfort                  demonstrates          for 3 days
                                          when urinating, or                  budding yeasts,       OR
                                          abnormal vaginal                    hyphae, or            Miconazole cream
                                          discharge                           pseudohyphae; and     intravaginally daily
                                                                              vaginal culture       for 7 days
                                                                                                    OR
                                                                                                    Miconazole vaginal
                                                                                                    suppository
                                                                                                    OR
                                                                                                    Tioconazole 6.5%
                                                                                                    ointment
                                                                                                    intravaginally in a
                                                                                                    single application
                                                                                                    OR other prescription
                                                                                                    antifungals

     TABLE 7.6 Vaginal Infections and Other Conditions (CDC, 2021; CDC, 2022a; CDC, 2022b)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          7.3 · Urinary Tract Infections                  331

Disease        Organism        Signs and                Lab Diagnosis     Treatment per CDC
                               Symptoms                                   Guidelines

Group B        Group B         Usually no               Urine culture or  Penicillin G (during
streptococcus  Streptococcus   symptoms; with           vaginal culture   labor) 5 million units
                               cystitis: may have                         IV initial dose, then
                               urinary frequency,                         2.5 to 3 million units
                               urgency, or dysuria;                       every 4 hours until
                               with pyelonephritis:                       delivery
                               may have fever,                            OR
                               urinary symptoms,                          Ampicillin 2 g IV
                               nausea and vomiting,                       initial dose, then 1 g
                               flank pain; infected                       IV every 4 hours until
                               newborn can have                           delivery
                               fever, difficulty in
                               feeding, difficulty in
                               breathing, lethargy,
                               irritability, or bluish
                               skin

TABLE 7.6 Vaginal Infections and Other Conditions (CDC, 2021; CDC, 2022a; CDC, 2022b)

7.3 Urinary Tract Infections

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Define an upper urinary tract infection and the pathophysiology, diagnosis, management, and prevention
        of all types

    · Define a lower urinary tract infection and the pathophysiology, diagnosis, management, and prevention of
        all types

    · Define interstitial cystitis and the pathophysiology, diagnosis, management, and prevention of all types
    · Identify nursing interventions to provide care for patients with urinary tract conditions

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) affect many patients, and persons assigned female at birth are more susceptible to
them, likely due to their shorter urethral length (National Institutes of Health [NIH], 2023). Many times, the urinary
tract infection is caused by bacteria, but patients can also experience urinary tract infections with an unknown
etiology (NIH, 2023).

Lower Urinary Tract Infection

Lower urinary tract infections are common, and many persons AFAB will experience them. Cystitis refers to infection
of the lower urinary tract and bladder, while urethritis is an infection of the lower urinary tract and urethra.
Interstitial cystitis refers to a condition that causes chronic bladder pain.

Cystitis
Infection of the lower urinary tract and the bladder is called cystitis. Acute cystitis is often related to a bacterial
infection in the bladder. Persons AFAB are at higher risk of getting cystitis because their urethra is shorter than that
of persons born with a penis. Uncomplicated cystitis is a term used for an infection in otherwise healthy and
nonpregnant persons, while complicated cystitis is a term used for an infection in persons with risk factors.
Escherichia coli is the most common cause of both types of infection (Li & Leslie, 2023).

Epidemiology
Cystitis is very common in persons assigned female at birth. Approximately one-third of AFAB persons will have
cystitis once by age 24, and 50 percent of all AFAB persons will have it once by age 32. Risk factors include recent
sexual intercourse, a new sex partner within a year, and a personal and family history of UTIs. Use of spermicides
may also increase the risk. Patients with diabetes mellitus or structural or functional abnormalities of the urinary
332  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

     tract are at increased risk (Gupta, 2023). Patients with a renal transplant are also at increased risk, especially during
     the first year after transplant (Li & Leslie, 2023). Approximately 8 percent of pregnant patients experience UTIs
     (ACOG, 2023). UTI in pregnancy can cause preterm delivery and a low-birth-weight infant (ACOG, 2023).

     Signs and Symptoms
     The most common signs and symptoms of cystitis are painful urination, urinary frequency, and suprapubic pain.
     Blood may be seen in the urine (Gupta, 2023). Urine could appear cloudy and have a foul odor (Li & Leslei, 2023).

     Diagnosis and Treatment
     The patient should have a history and physical. A urinalysis with white blood cells is often a good indication of a UTI.
     Nitrites are present only if there are bacteria, so a urinalysis may show nitrites (Li & Leslie, 2023). If there are no
     white cells or nitrites, a diagnosis of UTI is unlikely. A urine culture is a definitive test for a UTI and can determine
     what organism is causing the UTI and what antibiotics it is susceptible to (Gupta, 2023). It is acceptable to treat
     symptomatic patients with nitrites in their urine without getting a culture (Li & Leslie, 2023).

     All pregnant patients should be tested with a urine culture early in pregnancy for asymptomatic UTI and, if positive,
     receive treatment with a 5- to 7-day course of targeted antibiotics. Repeat testing is not required (ACOG, 2023).
     Patients with symptoms during pregnancy should have a urinalysis and urine culture, and positive results should be
     treated with antibiotics. These patients should have a TOC in 1 to 2 weeks after treatment is complete if symptoms
     recur (ACOG, 2023). Treatment with an antimicrobial is appropriate and based on the culture results. Medications
     that are safe are cephalexin and fosfomycin. Nitrofurantoin and sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim may be used during
     the first trimester. Amoxicillin and amoxicillin-clavulanate are safe but should not be started before culture results
     because they have a high degree of resistance (ACOG, 2023).

     Treatment of nonpregnant persons consists of an antimicrobial, and the type depends on the risk of the patient
     having an infection caused by a multidrug-resistant (MDR) gram-negative organism. Patients are considered at high
     risk for this if they have had any of the following in the past 3 months:

         · a culture showing a multidrug-resistant gram-negative organism
         · an inpatient stay in a health-care facility
         · use of a fluoroquinolone (Cipro), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim), or broad-spectrum beta-lactam

             (aztreonam)
         · travel to areas with high rates of MDR organisms (e.g., India, Israel, Spain, Mexico)

     For high-risk patients, oral beta-lactams are usually appropriate. Patients without risk factors can be treated with
     nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals (Macrobid), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, or fosfomycin (Monurol)
     (Gupta, 2023).

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Clean Catch Urine Collection

     The nurse will do the following:

       1. Perform hand hygiene and don gloves and additional PPE based on isolation precautions or the risk of
             exposure to bodily fluids.

       2. Verify the correct patient using two identifiers.
       3. Explain the procedure.
       4. Have the patient perform hand hygiene with soap and water.
       5. Provide a specimen hat if the patient's urinary output is being measured.
       6. Ensure that antiseptic cleansing wipes and sterile urine specimen collection container or specimen collection

             kit are within the patient's reach.

     The nurse will instruct the patient to follow these steps before and after collecting the specimen:

       1. Before collecting the specimen, open the urine collection container and place the lid with the flat side down
             and the sterile inside surface up. Do not touch the inside of the cup.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              7.3 · Urinary Tract Infections                               333

  2. Before collecting the specimen, carefully cleanse the urinary meatus using an antiseptic wipe or organization-
        approved cleansing cloth.

  3. Spread the labia minora with the thumb and forefinger or forefinger and middle finger of the nondominant
        hand.

  4. Use the dominant hand to cleanse the urethral area with antiseptic cleansing wipes, moving from front (above
        the urethral orifice) to back (toward the anus).

  5. While continuing to hold the labia apart, initiate a urine stream. After initiating a urine stream, pass the
        specimen container into the stream and collect the appropriate volume of urine per the organization's
        practice.

  6. Remove the specimen container before the urine flow stops and before releasing the labia, and then finish
        voiding. Avoid contamination from feces or tissue paper because it renders the specimen invalid.

  7. After collecting the specimen, replace the specimen container cap securely (without touching the inside of the
        container), cleanse any urine from the exterior surface of the container with a paper towel, place the specimen
        container in the designated location, and perform hand hygiene.

In the presence of the patient, the nurse will label the specimen per the organization's practice.

Transport the specimen to the laboratory immediately per the organization's practice.

Discard supplies, remove PPE, and perform hand hygiene.

Document the procedure in the patient's record.

Urethritis
Infection of the lower urinary tract that causes inflammation of the urethra is called urethritis. Urethritis is more
commonly diagnosed in AMAB persons. Urethritis can be due to infectious or noninfectious causes (Young et al.,
2022).

Epidemiology
Urethritis is often associated with sexually transmitted infections and can be gonococcal or nongonococcal in origin.
Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis are the most common causes of urethritis. Trauma, such as a
urinary catheter, can cause noninfectious urethritis, as can irritation. Urethritis affects 4 million Americans each year
and is more common in persons assigned male at birth (Young et al., 2022).

Signs and Symptoms
Urethritis may not cause any symptoms, or the patient may have dysuria, pruritus, burning, or discharge at the
urethral meatus (Young et al., 2022).

Diagnosis and Treatment
A diagnosis of urethritis is often made from a history and physical. A urethral swab may be tested for white blood
cells as well as a first-void urine. A Gram stain or a methylene blue/gentian violet smear can also be used to make
the diagnosis (Young et al., 2022).

Treatment consists of an antimicrobial, which should be based on the organism causing the infection. Urethritis
caused by gonorrhea is usually treated with a single dose of ceftriaxone 500 mg IM injection, and urethritis caused
by chlamydia is usually treated with a single dose of 1 gram of oral azithromycin or 100 mg doxycycline twice a day
for 7 days (Young et al., 2022).

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals (Macrobid)

    · Generic Name: nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals
    · Trade Name: Macrobid
    · Class/Action: antibiotic
    · Route/Dosage: 100 mg 2 times a day for 5 days
334  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

         · High Alert/ Black Box Warning: Do not take Macrobid if you are in the last 2 to 4 weeks of pregnancy.
         · Indications: used to treat urinary tract infections
         · Mechanism of Action: destroys bacteria by inhibiting bacterial enzymes involved in the synthesis of DNA,

             RNA, cell wall protein synthesis, and other metabolic enzymes
         · Contraindications: allergy, severe kidney disease, jaundice or liver problems during previous use, if you are in

             the last 2 to 4 weeks of pregnancy
         · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: headache, dizziness, gas, upset stomach, mild diarrhea, vaginal itching or

             discharge
         · Parent/Family Education: Take with food. Finish all medication unless otherwise directed. Call your doctor if

             you experience bloody or watery diarrhea; if you have sudden chest pain, wheezing, or new cough; if you have
             nauseas, loss of appetite, or jaundice; or if you have joint pain or swelling with fever, swollen glands, muscle
             aches, or unusual thoughts or behavior.

     Interstitial Cystitis
     Chronic bladder condition that causes pain and has no known cause is called interstitial cystitis. It is a complex
     syndrome that mostly affects the bladder. Interstitial cystitis causes inflammation of the bladder's lining. The long-
     term symptoms can affect a person's quality of life (Lim et al., 2023).

     Epidemiology
     Interstitial cystitis is an uncommon condition. It affects more persons assigned female at birth than persons
     assigned male at birth. The cause of interstitial cystitis is unknown, but these patients may have urothelial
     abnormalities (Clemens, 2023).

     Signs and Symptoms
     Signs and symptoms of interstitial cystitis include pain, pressure, discomfort, or spasms in the bladder. Discomfort
     often worsens when the bladder is filling and is relieved when the bladder is emptied. Foods, drinks, stress, or
     activities such as exercise or sex may worsen symptoms (Clemens, 2023). The nurse should educate the patient
     about foods to avoid, which are known to cause irritation to the bladder. Foods with a high acid content, potassium,
     or capsaicin are irritating. Other foods to avoid include:

         · Indian, Mexican, and Thai food
         · vinegar, spices, MSG, Worcestershire sauce, hot sauces such as Tabasco
         · sweeteners (particularly artificial sweeteners such as saccharin)
         · chili, horseradish, hot peppers, pickles, sauerkraut
         · ketchup, pizza, tomatoes, tomato sauce
         · chocolate
         · citric acid, citrus

     Drinks also can cause irritation, and these include:

         · alcohol
         · caffeine and carbonated beverages
         · tea
         · cranberry juice and tomato juice (Lim et al., 2023)

     Diagnosis and Treatment
     Diagnosis is usually made when the patient has experienced bladder pain for weeks and there is no bacterial cause
     or treatment has been completed. A urinalysis can be done to rule out white blood cells or blood in the urine. If
     there is blood in the urine, cystoscopy should be performed to rule out malignancy. Sexually transmitted infections
     should also be ruled out (Clemens, 2023).

     There is no cure for interstitial cystitis. The goal is to manage symptoms and avoid conditions that increase pain
     (Clemens, 2022).

     Upper Urinary Tract Infection: Pyelonephritis

     Bacterial infection of the upper urinary tract that causes inflammation of the kidneys is called pyelonephritis. It is a

     Access for free at openstax.org
7.3 · Urinary Tract Infections                                                                                           335

complication from a UTI when the bacteria travel to the kidneys and can be classified as uncomplicated or
complicated. Complicated pyelonephritis occurs when the patient has the following risk factors:

    · pregnancy
    · uncontrolled diabetes
    · kidney transplant
    · urinary anatomical abnormality
    · immunocompromise
    · hospital-acquired bacterial infection (Belyayeva & Jeong, 2022).

Epidemiology
Pyelonephritis is one of the most common diseases of the kidney, and the main cause is gram-negative bacteria,
most commonly Escherichia coli. E. coli can adhere to and colonize the urinary tract and kidneys. There are 15 to 17
pyelonephritis infections per 10,000 persons assigned female at birth in the United States (Belyayeva & Jeong,
2022).

Signs and Symptoms
The most common signs and symptoms seen are fever, flank pain (costal vertebral tenderness), and nausea or
vomiting. A patient may not have all these symptoms. Symptoms usually develop in a few hours up to a day. Persons
assigned female at birth may also report dysuria, and hematuria may be present (Belyayeva & Jeong, 2022). Fever
and flank pain are the two most common signs seen in pyelonephritis (Belyayeva & Jeong, 2022).

Diagnosis and Treatment
A urinalysis will likely show white blood cells and may also show hematuria and proteinuria. A complete metabolic
blood panel can determine kidney function, and a complete blood count is used to look for elevated white blood
cells. Urine cultures should be sent to determine the causative organism. An abdominal and pelvic computed
tomography (CT) scan may also be useful, but they are not always required (Belyayeva & Jeong, 2022).

Treatment for pyelonephritis usually consists of antibiotics, analgesics, and antipyretics. Antibiotics should be given
empirically but then adjusted based on the results of the urine culture (Belyayeva & Jeong, 2022). Complicated
cases of pyelonephritis may need inpatient treatment with IV antibiotics (Belyayeva & Jeong, 2022). Pregnant
patients with pyelonephritis should initially be managed in the inpatient setting. These patients should also
complete a 14-day course of antibiotics (ACOG, 2023).

The nurse should offer the patient some basic recommendations:

    · Avoid dehydration. Drink plenty of fluids.
    · Void immediately before and after sexual intercourse.
    · Always wipe front to back when urinating and defecating (Belyayeva & Jeong, 2022).

Complications
Pyelonephritis can cause abscesses to form in or around the kidneys. Renal vein thrombosis or acute renal failure is
possible. Emphysematous pyelonephritis is a necrotizing infection of the kidney that is a severe complication
(Belyayeva & Jeong, 2022).

        LINK TO LEARNING

The University of Rochester Medical Center has created a quiz on urinary tract infections (https://openstax.org/r/
77UTIquiz) where you can test your knowledge.

Nursing Interventions and Patient Education

Patients should void after sexual activity to reduce recurring urinary tract infections. Improving personal hygiene
may also help. These suggestions include:

    · washing hands before voiding
    · using adult or baby wipes instead of toilet paper
336  7 · Commonly Occurring Reproductive and Genitourinary System Infections

         · wiping just once, from front to back
         · taking showers instead of baths
         · using a nontoxic liquid soap with minimal chemicals or perfumes to clean the vaginal area
         · using soft cotton or microfiber washcloths rather than hands while washing
         · washing the vaginal opening first to avoid contamination (Li & Leslie, 2023)

     If the UTI was caused by an STI, the patient should be educated about safe sex practices and partner testing and
     treatment.

     For any patient with a UTI and dysuria, a urinary analgesic, such as phenazopyridine may be used. Nursing
     education should include the urine changing color to a bright orange while taking this medication. This is available
     over the counter. Patients with recurring infections should have urine cultures and radiographic imaging to look for
     abnormalities (Gupta, 2023).

     Patients with interstitial cystitis must deal with symptoms long term. Heat or cold over the bladder may help to
     lessen symptoms. Avoiding foods and activities that worsen symptoms can help. Some patients find that increasing
     fluids helps, while others find that decreasing fluids helps with symptoms, but extremes should be avoided.
     Amitriptyline (Elavil) can be used to manage pain. Physical therapy can help with interstitial cystitis (Clemens,
     2022).

     Misconceptions about UTIs include the idea that confusion in older patients always indicates a UTI. This is not
     always the case and should not be assumed. Urinalysis should not always be used for diagnosis if the patient does
     not have symptoms. Asymptomatic bacteriuria can occur and does not always require antibiotics, except during
     pregnancy, when asymptomatic UTIs should be treated. The patient should increase their fluid intake. Cranberry
     juice or probiotics are often recommended to prevent UTIs, but there is not enough evidence to support their use
     (Cleveland Clinic, 2023).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                7 · Summary 337

Summary

7.1 Sexually Transmitted Infections

STIs are a health problem in the United States and the world. Patient education is an important part of prevention.
Patients need to be educated about how to prevent STIs as well as how to recognize them and when to report
symptoms. There is still a stigma surrounding STIs. People who are dealing with STIs should feel comfortable
talking to their provider. Providers should know how to communicate effectively, teach prevention, and offer
treatment when needed.

7.2 Vaginal Infections and Other Conditions

Bacterial vaginitis and vulvovaginal candidiasis are two common causes of vaginal infections in persons assigned
female at birth. Both are easily treated and are not usually spread through sexual contact, although BV can be
spread between sex partners assigned female at birth. Neither condition requires screening, but both can cause
discomfort and require treatment. Group B streptococcus frequently occurs in the genital and gastrointestinal
tracts. Group B strep may also colonize the vagina and not cause any symptoms, but it can cause neonatal
complications (Puopolo & Madoff, 2022).

7.3 Urinary Tract Infections

Urinary tract infections are extremely common and can be uncomfortable for patients. Many people will experience
a UTI, especially a lower urinary tract infection, at some point in their lives. Lower UTIs can cause discomfort for
patients and can cause complications. If left untreated, they can progress to upper urinary tract infections, which
can be serious and may require hospitalization. Interstitial cystitis is rare but can impact a patient's quality of life, so
nurses need to know how to educate these patients to help alleviate symptoms. It is important for patients and
nurses to recognize signs and symptoms of UTIs and for nurses to educate patients about how to care for
themselves. There are various ways in which patients can prevent UTIs, and nurses should be able to provide this
information. Pregnancy can be complicated by urinary tract infections, so these patients need special education
about signs and symptoms and treatment of UTIs during pregnancy.

Key Terms

bacterial vaginitis (BV) bacterial infection of the vagina
chancre genital sore or lesion where syphilis pathogens enter the body
chlamydia bacterial STI caused by the C. trachomatis bacterium
cystitis infection of the lower urinary tract and the bladder
cytology study of cells
gonorrhea bacterial STI caused by the N. gonorrhoeae bacterium
group B streptococcus type of bacteria that can live in a person's gastrointestinal and genital tracts without

    causing problems but that can invade the body and cause infection
hepatitis viral infection with three main types, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C
herpes simplex virus (HSV) virus that causes herpes and is not curable
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) enveloped retrovirus that is encapsulated by two single-stranded RNAs

    and can be the cause of AIDS
human papillomavirus (HPV) double-stranded DNA virus that replicates in the basal cell layer of stratified

    squamous epithelial cells, which then replicate and cause hyperplasia and possible cancer
interstitial cystitis chronic bladder condition that causes pain and has no known cause
pyelonephritis bacterial infection of the upper urinary tract that causes inflammation of the kidneys
stigma negative attitudes and beliefs that motivate the general public to fear, reject, avoid, and discriminate

    against a group of people
syphilis bacterial STI caused by T. pallidum
trichomoniasis STI caused by a protozoan parasite
urethritis infection of the lower urinary tract that causes inflammation of the urethra
vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC) fungal infection caused by the yeast Candida
whiff test test on vaginal sample in which a few drops of potassium hydroxide (KOH) are mixed with the sample;

    the KOH kills bacteria and leaves only yeast behind, revealing if there is a yeast infection
338 7 · Assessments

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. A nurse is caring for a patient who has just been diagnosed with chlamydia and wants to know when she can
        have sex with her boyfriend again. What is the best response from the nurse?
           a. "You should not have sex until 7 days after you complete treatment and your partner gets treatment."
           b. "You can have sex as soon as you finish the medicine."
           c. "You can have sex once your partner takes the medicine."
           d. "There is no need to wait."

    2. A nurse is caring for a patient who has HSV and is pregnant. The patient is concerned about the fetus. What
        medication is safest to take?
           a. valacyclovir
           b. none
           c. acyclovir
           d. famciclovir

    3. What STIs can cause one of the TORCH infections in the fetus?
           a. HPV
           b. HSV
           c. HIV
           d. syphilis

    4. A nurse is caring for a patient who states she is experiencing a thin vaginal discharge with a strong fishy odor.
        What test does the nurse prepare?
           a. whiff test
           b. vaginal culture
           c. urine culture
           d. blood test

    5. A nurse is caring for a patient who was just diagnosed with VVC. What treatment does the nurse expect to
        teach the patient about?
           a. metronidazole (anti-protozoal)
           b. penicillin G (antibiotic)
           c. clotrimazole (antifungal)
           d. ampicillin (antibiotic)

    6. A nurse is caring for a pregnant patient who asks when she should be tested for GBS. What does the nurse tell
        the patient?
           a. 34-35 weeks
           b. 36-37 weeks
           c. 38-39 weeks
           d. 39-40 weeks

    7. A nurse is caring for a patient with increased urination and pain with urination. What finding would the nurse
        expect if the patient has a UTI?
           a. white blood cells in urine
           b. ketones in urine
           c. blood in urine
           d. protein in urine

    8. A nurse is caring for a patient who was diagnosed with urethritis. What does the nurse identify as a possible
        cause?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           7 · Assessments 339

           a. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
           b. Escherichia coli
           c. pregnancy
           d. spermicides

    9. A nurse is caring for a patient with pyelonephritis. What does the nurse identify as the most common cause?
           a. Escherichia coli
           b. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
           c. Chlamydia trachomatis
           d. Candida albicans

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. Your patient who was recently diagnosed with HIV does not want ART. What risks are there to refusing ART?

    2. Your patient in labor was diagnosed with GBS. She is refusing treatment for the GBS. What risks to the
        newborn should she be aware of?

    3. A nurse is teaching a person assigned female at birth how to collect a clean catch urine sample. What should
        the nurse tell the patient?

Reflection Questions

    1. A patient presents with concerns about having an STI. As the nurse, what information do you need to gather?

    2. What information might you teach a patient who comes to the office for repeated VCC?

    3. What teaching would the nurse reinforce with a patient who comes in with a UTI after having received
        treatment for one 2 months earlier?

What Should the Nurse Do?

Mandeep, a 23-year-old cisgender female, presents at the community health clinic seeking guidance and care. She
reports experiencing vaginal itching, burning sensations, and an unusual vaginal discharge. Mandeep discloses a
recent change in sexual partners and inconsistent condom use. Her medical history includes oral contraceptive use,
and she has no known psychiatric conditions. Vital signs are within normal ranges. Mandeep is visibly distressed and
expresses concerns about her symptoms. The nursing staff conducts a thorough assessment to address her needs.

    1. Considering Mandeep's symptoms, what sexually transmitted infections (STIs) might be suspected?
    2. How would you educate Mandeep on preventing and treating STIs?
    3. What nursing interventions would you implement to support Mandeep's care?
    4. How might you approach discussing the possibility of sexually transmitted viral infections with Mandeep?

Aurélie, a 28-year-old cisgender female, visits the gynecology clinic complaining of vaginal itching, burning, and an
unusual discharge. She mentions experiencing these symptoms for the past week and has attempted over-the-
counter treatments with minimal relief. Aurélie has no significant medical history, denies any psychiatric conditions,
and her vital signs are within the normal range. During the assessment, the nursing staff observes signs consistent
with bacterial vaginitis and candidiasis.

    5. Based on Aurélie's symptoms, what clinical findings might you expect during the examination, and how would
        you differentiate between bacterial vaginitis and candidiasis?

    6. What diagnostic approaches would you recommend to confirm the presence and specific type of vaginal
        infection?

    7. Considering Aurélie's discomfort, what nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic treatment options would you
        discuss with her, and how would you prioritize them?

    8. In line with the educational component, how would you counsel Aurélie on preventing recurrent episodes of
        bacterial vaginitis and candidiasis?

    9. What considerations would you keep in mind regarding the potential emotional impact of these infections on
        Aurélie, and how might you address her concerns and anxieties?

Chase, a 35-year-old person AFAB, visits the urgent care clinic complaining of frequent and painful urination, along
340 7 · References

with lower abdominal pain. They report no significant medical history but mention a recent episode of unprotected
sexual intercourse. Chase denies any psychiatric conditions and presents with slightly elevated body temperature.
The nursing staff notes the discomfort during urination and a sense of urgency. A comprehensive assessment is
initiated to understand the urinary symptoms.

  10. Considering Chance's symptoms, what type of urinary tract infection (UTI) might be suspected, and how
        would you differentiate between upper and lower UTIs?

  11. What diagnostic measures would you recommend to confirm the type and extent of the UTI?
  12. What factors could contribute to the patient's condition, and how might they inform the management plan?
  13. How would you educate Chase on the prevention strategies for recurrent UTIs?
  14. Considering the possibility of interstitial cystitis, what additional assessments might be necessary to explore

        this condition?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. How would you educate a patient assigned female at birth on preventing and treating sexually transmitted
        infections?

    2. Outline a common protozoan sexually transmitted infection in persons assigned female at birth, including
        diagnostic methods. What nursing interventions would you recommend?

    3. Elaborate on common sexually transmitted viral infections impacting persons assigned female at birth.
        Discuss transmission, complications, and preventive measures. What's the nurse's role in patient education?

    4. Describe nursing interventions for persons assigned female at birth diagnosed with sexually transmitted
        infections. How would you address emotional and educational aspects, including privacy, medication
        management, partner notification, and follow-up care?

    5. What are the common causes associated with bacterial vaginitis and candidiasis?

    6. How would you educate patients about the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of bacterial vaginitis and
        candidiasis?

    7. What is an upper urinary tract infection, and how is it diagnosed and managed?

    8. What is a lower urinary tract infection, and how is it diagnosed and managed?

    9. Describe interstitial cystitis and its diagnosis, management, and prevention.

  10. What nursing interventions are pertinent for patients with urinary tract conditions?

References

Albrecht, M. A. (2022). Epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis of genital herpes simplex virus infection.
    UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/epidemiology-clinical-manifestations-and-diagnosis-of-genital-
    herpes-simplex-virus-infection

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). (2023). How to prevent sexually transmitted
   infections (STIs). https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/how-to-prevent-stis

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). (2023). Urinary tract infections in pregnant
   individuals. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/clinical-consensus/articles/2023/08/urinary-tract-
    infections-in-pregnant-individuals

Arrieta, A. (2023). Congenital syphilis: Clinical manifestations, evaluation, and diagnosis. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/congenital-syphilis-clinical-manifestations-evaluation-and-diagnosis

Baker, C. J. (2023). Prevention of early-onset group B streptococcal disease in neonates. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/prevention-of-early-onset-group-b-streptococcal-disease-in-neonates

Belyayeva, M., & Jeong, J. M. (2022). Acute Pyelonephritis. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK519537/

Berardi, A., Trevisani, V., Di Caprio, A., Bua, J., China, M., Perrone, B., Pagano, R., Lucaccioni, L., Fanaro, S., Iughetti,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              7 · References 341

   L., Lugli, L., & Creti, R. (2021). Understanding factors in group B streptococcus late-onset disease. Infection and
   Drug Resistance, 14, 3207-3218. https://doi.org/10.2147/IDR.S291511

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2021a). STI treatment guidelines, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/
    std/treatment-guidelines/default.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2021b). Bacterial vaginosis (BV). STD information from CDC.
    https://www.cdc.gov/std/bv/default.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2022a). Group B strep (GBS). https://www.cdc.gov/groupbstrep/
    index.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2022b). Vaginal candidiasis. https://www.cdc.gov/fungal/
    diseases/candidiasis/genital/index.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2022c). Adolescents and young adults. https://www.cdc.gov/std/
    life-stages-populations/stdfact-teens.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2023a). HPV vaccine. https://www.cdc.gov/hpv/parents/vaccine-
    for-hpv.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2023b). United States cancer statistics: Data visualizations.
    https://gis.cdc.gov/Cancer/USCS/#/AtAGlance/

Clemens, J. Q. (2022). Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome: Management. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/interstitial-cystitis-bladder-pain-syndrome-management

Clemens, J. Q. (2023). Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome: Clinical features and diagnosis. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/interstitial-cystitis-bladder-pain-syndrome-clinical-features-and-diagnosis

Cleveland Clinic. (2023, June 15). The truth about UTIs in older adults. Consult QD.
    https://consultqd.clevelandclinic.org/the-truth-about-utis-in-older-adults/

Demmler-Harrison, G. J. (2022). Neonatal herpes simplex virus infection: Clinical features and diagnosis. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/neonatal-herpes-simplex-virus-infection-clinical-features-and-diagnosis

Drutz, J. E. (2023). Hepatitis B virus immunization in infants, children, and adolescents. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hepatitis-b-virus-immunization-in-infants-children-and-adolescents

Fortenberry, J. D. (2023). Sexually transmitted infections: Issues specific to adolescents. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/sexually-transmitted-infections-issues-specific-to-adolescents

Garcia, M. R., Leslie, S. W., & Wray, A. A. (2023). Sexually transmitted infections. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK560808/

Guevara, C. G., Achua, J. K., Blachman-Braun, R., Cabrera-Valencia, I., Ransford, G. A., Gosalbez, R., Labbie, A. S.,
    Castellan, M. A., & Alam, A. (2021). Neonatal circumcision: What are the factors affecting parental decision?
   Cureus, 13(11), e19415. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.19415

Gupta, K. (2023). Acute simple cystitis in females. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/acute-simple-
    cystitis-in-adult-and-adolescent-females

HIV.gov. (2022). Data and trends: U.S. statistics overview. https://www.hiv.gov/hiv-basics/overview/data-and-
    trends/statistics/

HIV.gov. (2023). Regimens recommended for initial therapy of antiretroviral-naive children.
    https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines/pediatric-arv/regimens-recommended-initial-therapy-antiretroviral-
    naive-children?view=full

Jaan A., & Rajnik, M. (2023). TORCH complex. StatPearls [Internet] https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK560528/

Jeanmonod, R., Chippa, V., & Jeanmonod, D. (2023). Vaginal candidiasis. StatPearls [Internet].
342 7 · References

    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK459317/

Johnston, C., & Wald, A. (2023). Epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis of herpes simplex virus type 1
   infection. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/epidemiology-clinical-manifestations-and-diagnosis-
    of-herpes-simplex-virus-type-1-infection

Justiz Vaillant A. A., & Gulick, P. G. (2022). HIV and AIDS syndrome. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK534860/

Krakower, D. (2023). HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hiv-pre-
    exposure-prophylaxis

Li, R., & Leslie, S. W. (2023). Cystitis. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK482435/

Lim Y, Leslie SW, O'Rourke S. (2023). Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK570588/

Lok, A. S. (2023). Hepatitis B virus: Clinical manifestations and natural history. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hepatitis-b-virus-clinical-manifestations-and-natural-history

Mattoo, T. K., & Greenfield, S. P. (2023). Clinical presentation, diagnosis, and course of primary vesicoureteral reflux.
    UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/clinical-presentation-diagnosis-and-course-of-primary-
    vesicoureteral-reflux

Mehta P., & Reddivari, A. K. R. (2022). Hepatitis. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK554549/

National Institutes of Health (NIH). (2023). Cystitis. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK482435/

Paladine, H. L., & Desai, U. A. (2018, March 1). Vaginitis: Diagnosis and treatment. American Family Physician.
    https://www.aafp.org/pubs/afp/issues/2018/0301/p321.html

Palefsky, J. M. (2022). Human papillomavirus infections: Epidemiology and disease associations. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/human-papillomavirus-infections-epidemiology-and-disease-associations

Peipert, J. F., & Madden, T. (2021). Long-term complications of pelvic inflammatory disease. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pelvic-inflammatory-disease-long-term-complications

Puopolo, K. M., & Madoff, L. C. (2022). Group B streptococcal infection in pregnant individuals. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/group-b-streptococcal-infection-in-pregnant-individuals

Quinn, T. C. (2022). The natural history and clinical features of HIV infection in adults and adolescents. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/global-epidemiology-of-hiv-infection

Rietmeijer, K. (2023). Prevention of sexually transmitted infections. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/
    prevention-of-sexually-transmitted-infections

Ross, J., & Chacko, M. R. (2022). Pelvic inflammatory disease: Clinical manifestations and diagnosis. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/pelvic-inflammatory-disease-clinical-manifestations-and-diagnosis

Sax, P. E. (2022a). Acute and early HIV infection: Pathogenesis and epidemiology. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/acute-and-early-hiv-infection-pathogenesis-and-epidemiology

Sax, P. E. (2022b). Acute and early HIV infection: Treatment. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/acute-
    and-early-hiv-infection-treatment

Shapiro, S. B., Laurie, C., El-Zein, M., & Franco, E. L. (2023). Association between male circumcision and human
   papillomavirus infection in males and females: A systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression. Clinical
   Microbiology and Infection, 29(8), 968-978. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2023.03.028

Sobel, J. D. (2023). Vaginitis in adults: Initial evaluation. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/vaginitis-
    in-adults-initial-evaluation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              7 · References 343

Sobel, J. D., & Mitchell, C. (2023). Trichomoniasis: Clinical manifestations and diagnosis. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/trichomoniasis-clinical-manifestations-and-diagnosis

Task Force on Circumcision; Blank, S., Brady, M., Buerk, E., Carlo, W., Diekema, D., Freedman, A., Maxwell, L.,
   Wegner, S. (2012). Circumcision policy statement. Pediatrics, 130(3), p. 585-586. https://publications.aap.org/
    pediatrics/article/130/3/585/30235/Circumcision-Policy-Statement

Tudor, M. E., Al Aboud, A. M., Leslie, S. W., & Gossman, W. (2023). Syphilis. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK534780/

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2020). Sexually transmitted infections (STI) national strategic
    plan: 2021-2025. https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/STI-National-Strategic-Plan-2021-2025.pdf

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2021). Vaginal yeast infections. Office on Women's Health.
    https://www.womenshealth.gov/a-z-topics/vaginal-yeast-infections

Wood, B. R. (2023). The natural history and clinical features of HIV infection in adults and adolescents. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/the-natural-history-and-clinical-features-of-hiv-infection-in-adults-and-
    adolescents

World Health Organization (WHO). (2023). Sexually transmitted infections (STIs). https://www.who.int/news-room/
    fact-sheets/detail/sexually-transmitted-infections-(stis)

Young, A., Toncar, A., & Wray, A. A. (2022). Urethritis. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK537282/
344 7 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 8

Disorders of the Breast

FIGURE 8.1 Fighting Breast Cancer One in eight persons assigned female at birth worldwide will be diagnosed with breast cancer. In 30
percent of these people, the breast cancer will develop metastatic disease. Nurses play an important role in prevention and screening
education about breast cancer. (credit: "Women Holding Pink Ribbons" by Anna Tarazevich/Pexels, CC0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
8.1 Benign Disorders of the Breast
8.2 Cancer of the Breast
INTRODUCTION Disorders of the breast can affect people of all ages throughout their lifespan. Some of these
changes are normal, age-related changes; others are profoundly life altering, such as a new diagnosis of breast
cancer. Because of this, changes to the breast tissue can be extremely anxiety producing for the person who detects
them. The nurse plays a vital role in providing education on preventive care and breast health, as well as providing
direct nursing care for patients with both cancerous and benign (noncancerous) breast conditions. Most importantly,
the nurse provides support, advocacy, and holistic care to the people they care for.
This chapter begins with a discussion of benign breast conditions. It reviews each of these conditions in detail,
including the signs and symptoms, diagnosis, medical management, and nursing care. Finally, the chapter discusses
holistic care of the patient with breast cancer, including the signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment
modalities of breast cancer, as well as the best ways to provide education and support for patients and their
families. Finally, the chapter reviews medical and nursing care for the patient recovering from a mastectomy.
346  8 · Disorders of the Breast

     8.1 Benign Disorders of the Breast

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the signs and symptoms, diagnosis and management, and nursing care of fibrocystic changes in
             the breast

         · Explain the signs and symptoms, diagnosis and management, and nursing care of fibroadenomas in the
             breast

         · Explain the signs and symptoms, diagnosis and management, and nursing care of nonlactating mastitis
         · Explain the signs and symptoms, diagnosis and management, and nursing care of intraductal papilloma

     A common fear of people experiencing a change in their breasts is that they have cancer, especially because some
     of those changes mimic symptoms of breast cancer. While it is always advisable for a person with breast
     abnormalities to be examined, many benign diseases also cause the same symptoms. In fact, these benign
     conditions are more common than breast cancer (Breastcancer.org, 2022a). One study estimates that 50 percent of
     women over age 30 have breast pain, or mastalgia, and fibrocystic changes (Stachs et al., 2019).

     The term benign breast changes encompasses several different breast conditions. It describes noncancerous
     conditions, including trauma, breast pain, infection, skin changes, nipple discharge, and tumors. These changes are
     often associated with fluctuations in estrogen, which may explain why they are more common in people of
     childbearing age. In most cases, benign breast changes resolve on their own or are easily treated, but a few may
     increase the future risk of breast cancer.

     Fibrocystic Breast Changes

     Changes in either or both breasts that can cause lumpiness, or nodularity, or pain in the affected breast(s) are called
     fibrocystic breast changes (Figure 8.2). They represent the most common benign breast disease in persons
     assigned female at birth between 20 and 50 years of age (Chen et al., 2018; Gopalani et al., 2020).

     FIGURE 8.2 Fibrocystic Breast Changes Fibrocystic breast changes present as lumps or nodules in the affected breast. (attribution:
     Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Several hypotheses exist to explain the development of these changes, but they are most commonly a result of
     cyclic hormonal changes associated with a person's menstrual cycle. Other proposed etiologies include:

         · other hormonal imbalances, such as:
               "progesterone deficiency in luteal phase,
               estrogen excess,
               change in estrogen/progesterone ratio,
               differences in sensitivity and expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors,
               alterations in follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) secretion, and
               androgen deficiency." (Yadav et al., 2020, p. 31)

         · excess consumption of or withdrawal from caffeine and nicotine
         · increased dietary fat intake (Yadav et al., 2020)

     Other symptoms that may accompany these changes include:

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.1 · Benign Disorders of the Breast                                                                                      347

    · fullness or heaviness in the breast
    · tenderness, usually in the upper, outer quadrant
    · the presence of palpable, well-differentiated, and movable cysts
    · nipple discharge

These symptoms tend to come and go, typically getting worse the week before a menstrual period and getting better
about a week after the period.

Diagnosis and Management
Fibrocystic breast changes are diagnosed after a careful history and clinical breast exam. Some providers will also
order a mammogram or sonogram to determine if fibrocystic changes are present. The health-care provider will
palpate the breast tissue to feel evidence of thickening of the glandular tissue, called fibrosis, which will feel like
firm or ropy tissue underneath the skin. The provider will also note any round and fluid-filled sacs (cysts) that can be
felt in the breast tissue. If a cyst or mass is palpated, a diagnostic mammogram, ultrasound, and/or biopsy will be
performed as needed. If the cyst is found to contain fluid, the fluid will be aspirated and sent for pathologic
examination. If the cyst is solid, a fine needle aspiration will be performed, and the cells sent for pathologic
examination. Core biopsy may be needed if a larger sample is required for analysis.

Fibrocystic breast changes usually require only conservative management, and the provider will recommend a
"watch and wait" approach after diagnosis is confirmed. The patient will be instructed to return to the office for
routine examinations to ensure that the lump or cyst has not grown or changed. In some cases, oral contraceptives
can improve fibrocystic breast changes, but some people report a worsening of symptoms. Rarely, the provider may
recommend surgical removal of the cyst or lump, usually only in cases where it is causing significant discomfort or
distress to the patient or if there are multiple lumps or nodules.

Nursing Care
Nursing care centers on providing education about fibrocystic breast changes to the patient, as well as offering
reassurance and support if the patient is expressing anxiety. The nurse can also suggest strategies to reduce
discomfort:

    · Use nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen (Motrin).
    · Reduce caffeine consumption.
    · Reduce nicotine and alcohol usage.
    · Wear a supportive bra.
    · Use heating pads.
    · Apply topical vitamin E oil.

The nurse should reinforce that it may take trying a few different strategies before finding what works for the
patient.

Fibroadenomas

A painless, solid, noncancerous tumor found in the breast tissue is called a fibroadenoma. They are most common
solid tumors of the breast. They can occur in people of all ages but are most common in those between 14 and 35
years old (Ajmal et al., 2022). Fibroadenomas are less common in postmenopausal people, perhaps because of
decreased estrogen stimulation (Ajmal et al., 2022). Just as the etiology of fibrocystic changes is not certain,
researchers are not clear on what causes fibroadenomas to develop, but it is hypothesized that they may be related
to hormonal receptivity in the breast tissue. However, a key difference between fibrocystic cysts and fibroadenomas
is that fibroadenomas do not change in size during the menstrual cycle. Instead, they tend to stay constant in size or
grow slowly with time. However, fibroadenomas may enlarge with pregnancy and decrease in size after menopause.

In most cases, fibroadenomas do not increase a person's risk for breast cancer. However, one type of fibroadenoma,
called a complex fibroadenoma, may slightly increase breast cancer risk (El-Essawy et al., 2020). Patients should be
advised on ongoing follow-up and be aware of any changes to the lump or their breasts.

The primary symptom of a fibroadenoma is a small painless lump in the breast tissue, usually less than 2.5 cm in
diameter (Breastcancer.org, 2022b). They are usually solitary lumps, meaning they are found one at a time;
however, some people do develop multiple fibroadenomas or fibroadenomas in both breasts. These tumors are
348  8 · Disorders of the Breast

     typically well defined, round, and rubbery in consistency (Figure 8.3). They are usually easy to move in the tissue.
     While the tumors don't cause pain, some people do experience tenderness at certain points in their menstrual cycle.

     FIGURE 8.3 Fibroadenoma A fibroadenoma is a well-defined, benign breast tumor. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
     CC BY 4.0 license)

             LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

     Breast Changes after Menopause

     The hormonal changes associated with perimenopause and menopause affect not only the menstrual cycle but the
     breast tissue as well. The decline in estrogen causes connective tissue in the breasts to lose elasticity and
     hydration, causing the breasts to shrink and lose shape, and contributing to a sagging appearance. In addition, there
     is a decline in glandular tissue and an increase in fatty tissue of the breasts (North American Menopause Society,
     2023). However, a person who is taking hormonal therapy may not experience these changes due to the
     supplementation of estrogen and progesterone.

     Diagnosis and Management
     Fibroadenomas are diagnosed based on the clinical exam and possibly a biopsy. A detailed medical history and
     family history are important because risk factors for fibroadenoma and breast cancer are very similar: person's age
     and family history of breast cancer; negative risk factors are also similar: later age at menarche and multiparity (Li et
     al., 2018). Additional testing will usually be ordered to confirm the diagnosis. The most common types of testing for
     the breasts are mammograms, ultrasound exams, and biopsies:

         · Mammography: Fibroadenomas appear as distinct growths with smooth, round borders.
         · Ultrasonography: Ultrasound imaging of the breast helps to distinguish fluid-filled cysts from solid structures,

             like fibroadenomas. Fibroadenomas appear as round, well-defined masses that are hypoechogenic
             (decreased response to the ultrasound waves, producing a dark gray image).
         · Biopsy: Biopsy is often performed in people over 30 years of age to definitively confirm the diagnosis. A small
             sample of the tumor is taken either by fine needle aspiration (FNA) or by core biopsy using ultrasound
             guidance.

     People under the age of 30 years may just need "watchful waiting" to monitor for signs that the tumor is getting
     larger or changing. Ongoing visits with the provider may also be needed.

     In most cases, fibroadenomas do not need any further treatment and will disappear over time. However,
     fibroadenomas can increase the risk of developing breast cancer by 74 percent (Li et al., 2018). The health-care
     provider may recommend removal through lumpectomy or excisional biopsy. Cryoablation, using a cryoprobe
     inserted into the tumor to freeze and destroy the tumor cells, is an alternative to surgery.

     Nursing Care
     Nursing care for the patient with a fibroadenoma will depend on the patient and their clinical situation but centers
     on education and support. Reassurance may be especially crucial for a patient who is anxious or nervous that they
     have breast cancer. The nurse should also stress the need to comply with instructions for follow-up care. The nurse

     Access for free at openstax.org
                              8.1 · Benign Disorders of the Breast                                                        349

may also review strategies and techniques such as self-breast exam to increase the patient's awareness of their
own breast tissue and potential changes.

If a patient is to have surgical removal of the fibroadenoma, nursing care occurs preoperatively, intraoperatively, and
postoperatively. Table 8.1 describes nursing care during all phases of a surgical lumpectomy.

Stage           Nursing Care

Preoperative    · Review preoperative instructions with the patient, including
care                  avoiding food and drink for 8-12 hours before surgery,
                      the need to have someone drive them home,
                      what type of clothing/undergarments to wear and avoid,
                      what to bring to the surgery, and
                      what time to arrive and where.

                · Review medical history and medication usage.

                · Schedule preoperative testing and anesthesiology consultation if ordered.

                · Ensure the consent is signed and witnessed.

                · Review discharge instructions.

Intraoperative  · Admit the patient to the surgical unit and complete all admissions procedures.
care            · Assist with identifying the patient and surgical site.
                · Administer medications as ordered.
                · Act in the role of surgical scrub nurse or circulating nurse during the procedure.
                · Monitor the patient's status as appropriate.

Postoperative   · Monitor the patient through the initial recovery from anesthesia.
care            · Record vital signs and other assessment data.
                · Coordinate with the clinical provider to arrange discharge when safe.
                · Collaborate with the health-care provider if signs or symptoms of complications related

                   to anesthesia or surgery arise.
                · Administer pain medications and antiemetics as ordered and needed.
                · Provide discharge instructions when the patient is ready to leave the surgical center.

TABLE 8.1 Nursing Care during Surgical Lumpectomy of Fibroadenoma

Nonlactation Mastitis

Inflammation of the breast tissue in a non-breast-feeding person, which may or may not occur with an infection, is
called nonlactation mastitis. Mastitis most commonly occurs during breast-feeding; however, it is possible for
patients to develop this infection even while not lactating, known as nonlactational infectious mastitis (NLIM). This
infection can be caused by several organisms, though most are caused by species of staphylococci (Costa Morais
Oliveira et al., 2021). The two forms of NLIM predominantly affect younger people:

    · Periductal mastitis (PDM): PDM, or mammary ductal ectasia, is a chronic inflammation of the breast tissue
        that also causes dilated mammary ducts with thickened walls; plasma cell infiltration; leakage of fluid into the
        surrounding tissue, leading to inflammation and fat necrosis; and sometimes the formation of an abscess
        (Figure 8.4). PDM is associated with obesity, smoking, and diabetes mellitus (Bajaj, 2020). PDM presents as
        pain or redness in the skin of the breast, nipple inversion, greenish nipple discharge, and a possible fever
        (Bajaj, 2020).
350  8 · Disorders of the Breast

         FIGURE 8.4 Periductal Mastitis Periductal mastitis causes an area of inflammation and redness in the breast tissue. (attribution:
         Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     · Idiopathic granulomatous mastitis (IGM): IGM is a rare chronic inflammatory condition of the breast tissue.
        It is noncancerous and most commonly affects women of childbearing age. However, the symptoms and
        presentation closely mimic those of breast cancer, which can complicate diagnosis and treatment. The exact
        cause of IGM is not known, but several possibilities are thought to increase the risk for this condition: reaction
        to oral contraceptives, infection, autoimmune or immunologic response, pregnancy, breast-feeding,
        hyperprolactinemia, galactorrhea, and alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (Sarkar et al., 2023). IGM presents as a
        well-defined, hard lump of the breast, along with nipple inversion, peau d'orange appearance of the skin
        (Figure 8.5), and ulceration and fistula of the breast tissue (Sarkar et al., 2023).

              FIGURE 8.5 Peau d'Orange Appearance of the Breast Peau d'orange in the breast causes a characteristic "orange peel"
              appearance of the skin on the breast and can indicate several conditions, including inflammatory breast cancer or idiopathic
              granulomatous mastitis. (credit: "Clinical photo of IBC patient" by the Intramural Research Program of the Division of Cancer
              Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services/
              National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information, CC BY 3.0)

     Diagnosis and Management
     Because nonlactational mastitis can mimic the signs and symptoms of breast cancer, careful evaluation and
     diagnosis are crucial. Diagnosis begins with assessing the clinical presentation, including a thorough history and
     physical exam. Further imaging may be ordered, such as ultrasound, mammography, or magnetic resonance imaging
     (MRI). However, mammography can be extremely painful in a patient with an abscess, and some types of lesions,
     particularly IGM, may be indistinguishable from breast cancer (Sarkar et al., 2023).

     Fine needle aspiration is not usually indicated in routine cases of mastitis, but it may be indicated in patients with a
     complicated or atypical presentation or to confirm a suspected abscess. Any drainage from the nipple or aspirate
     should also be sent for pathologic study and culture and sensitivity tests to determine the presence of infection and
     guide antibiotic treatment. Other types of tissue biopsy, such as incisional or excisional biopsy and core needle
     biopsy, can be used to distinguish between granulomatous inflammation, infection, and cancer (Bajaj, 2020).

     Once the diagnosis of NILM is confirmed, medical treatment may include:

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.1 · Benign Disorders of the Breast                                                                                                   351

    · antibiotics based on the culture and sensitivity results
    · pain medication if needed
    · surgical incision and drainage of an abscess if present
    · corticosteroids if IGM is diagnosed
    · hospitalization, which is rarely necessary but may be indicated if signs of sepsis are present, if the infection

        does not respond to treatment and continues to progress, or if the patient is clinically unstable

Mastitis, if untreated, can lead to significant complications, including formation of large or extensive fistulas,
bacteremia and sepsis, and recurrent infection or infections at extramammary sites. Rarely, mastitis and abscess
can lead to death, particularly if the infection is poorly treated or not treated at all (Sakar et al., 2023).

Nursing Care
In addition to implementing medical management as ordered by the provider, the nurse can assist the patient by
suggesting comfort measures to help alleviate pain and promote healing. These may include:

    · applying heat or warm compresses to the affected area
    · applying cold packs to the affected area
    · having lymphatic drainage performed
    · wearing a supportive bra
    · sleeping on the unaffected side
    · using breast pads to contain leakage or drainage

Patient education may also be needed about the importance of follow-up care, signs and symptoms to report to the
provider, smoking cessation (if needed), and how to take any prescribed medications, including completing the
entire course of antibiotics and reviewing side effects and drug interactions.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Watch this video providing patient education for a fine needle biopsy of the breast (https://openstax.org/r/
77needlebiopsy) to learn effective ways to prepare the patient for what to expect during a biopsy.

Intraductal Papilloma

A benign tumor that grows inside the milk ducts of the breasts is called an intraductal papilloma. These tumors are
wart-like and made of fibrous tissue, gland tissue, and blood vessels (Figure 8.6). An individual, single tumor that
grows close to the nipple in the larger milk ducts is called a solitary papilloma (American Cancer Society, 2022b).
These solitary papillomas can cause an unusual bloody or clear nipple discharge. Patients may present to the office
due to feeling a lump (sometimes painful) next to or behind the nipple. Papillomas found in the smaller milk ducts
farther from the nipple are called multiple papillomas and do not produce nipple discharge.

FIGURE 8.6 Intraductal Papilloma The papilloma grows inside the ducts, causing unusual breast discharge. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
352  8 · Disorders of the Breast

     Diagnosis and Management
     When a patient has symptoms of nipple discharge, the health-care provider will order a thyroid and prolactin level to
     confirm the discharge is not due to another cause. A mammogram or ultrasound of the breast is also ordered for
     breast masses with nipple discharge. A ductogram can be performed to investigate nipple discharge. Dye is injected
     into the leaking duct, and an x-ray is taken to determine if a papilloma is present and causing the nipple discharge. A
     breast biopsy can be done to determine the actual diagnosis of papilloma. In larger, painful papillomas, surgery can
     be performed to remove the tumor.

     Nursing Care
     Nursing care of these patients consists of routine postsurgical care if a biopsy or papilloma removal is performed.
     The nurse instructs the patient to keep the dressing clean and dry. Nurses must also provide reassurance and
     support. These patients may have a great deal of anxiety and fear of having breast cancer. Nurses can provide
     reassurance that the tumor is benign and no cancer was found.

     8.2 Cancer of the Breast

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Educate people on risk factors and breast cancer screening
         · Support those diagnosed with breast cancer
         · Describe the various treatment modalities for breast cancer
         · Provide care post mastectomy
         · Refer those with breast cancer and their support people to community agencies

     According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2023), more than 239,000 women were
     diagnosed with breast cancer in 2020, and nearly 43,000 women died from the disease. Breast cancer is the most
     common type of cancer diagnosed in persons assigned female at birth (AFAB) and the second most common cause
     of cancer death, second only to lung cancer (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2023). While the lifetime
     risk for a woman to develop breast cancer is around 13 percent, many factors can influence the risk of developing
     breast cancer, including race and ethnicity (Susan G. Komen, 2023c). See Table 8.2 for a breakdown of risk by race
     and ethnicity.

                                      Race and Ethnicity  Risk of Breast Cancer

     Non-Hispanic American Indian and Alaska Native 9.9%

     Hispanic                                             10.8%

     Non-Hispanic Asian and Pacific Islander              11.7%

     Non-Hispanic Black                                   12%

     Non-Hispanic White                                   13.8%

     TABLE 8.2 Risk of Breast Cancer Based on Race and Ethnicity (National Cancer Institute,
     2023b)

     The incidence of breast cancer has declined since the year 2000 (Breastcancer.org, 2023) and is thought to be the
     result of aggressive screening and better targeted treatment options. These factors are also believed to be
     responsible for the 43 percent decline in mortality rates from 1989 through 2020 (American Cancer Society,
     2023b). Regardless, a new diagnosis of breast cancer is devastating. It affects not only the person diagnosed but
     also their family, career, and overall well-being.

     Breast cancer can affect transgender persons as well. Transgender men (persons AFAB and identify as male) may
     still have breast tissue and must be aware of their risk for breast cancer. Transgender women (persons AMAB but
     identify as female) also have breast tissue and can be at risk for breast cancer. Transgender persons with a family
     history of breast cancer should be offered genetic testing to evaluate their risks. Transgender persons should

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                  8.2 · Cancer of the Breast                                                           353

discuss their risks for breast cancer due to use of certain hormones.

This module will delve into the comprehensive and holistic care of the person diagnosed with breast cancer,
including screening options, diagnostic testing, medical management, and nursing supportive care. Woven
throughout are ways that the nurse can provide support not only to the patient but to their family and loved ones, as
well.

Breast Cancer Screening

Regular screening is an important step in the early diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer. How often and when
that screening should occur is patient specific, but evidence-based guidelines have been developed by several
organizations, including the American Cancer Society and the U. S. Preventive Services Task Force, to help providers
make those clinical decisions. These guidelines continue to evolve as the evidence changes, and decisions are
based on a person's individual risk and health.

Risk Factors
The primary risk factors for breast cancer are having been assigned female at birth and increasing age; however,
several other factors are also associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. Risk factors are modifiable
(meaning they can be changed by behavior) or nonmodifiable (they cannot be changed). Table 8.3 presents both
types of risk factors specific to breast cancer.

Type of Risk Factor Risk Factors

Modifiable     · physical inactivity
               · being overweight or obese after menopause
               · taking hormone replacement therapy or hormonal contraceptives
               · drinking alcohol
               · having a first pregnancy after 30 or never carrying a full-term pregnancy
               · not breast-feeding
               · smoking cigarettes
               · working night shifts
               · being exposed to certain chemicals

Nonmodifiable  · age/gender
               · presence of genetic mutations
               · personal history of breast cancer or certain benign breast diseases
               · exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES)
               · having had treatment with radiation therapy before age 30
               · having dense breast tissue
               · family history of breast or ovarian cancer
               · menarche before age 12 or menopause after age 55

         TABLE 8.3 List of Modifiable and Nonmodifiable Risk Factors for Breast Cancer

The nurse plays an important role in educating patients about these risk factors and how they interact, as well as
whether increased surveillance is necessary.

        LINK TO LEARNING

The National Cancer Institute provides access to an online calculator that allows health-care professionals or
women to calculate their approximate risk of developing invasive cancer (https://openstax.org/r/77cancercalc) in
the next 5 years and through their lifespan.
354  8 · Disorders of the Breast

     Breast Self-Exam
     Once the mainstay of breast cancer screening, monthly breast self-exams are no longer recommended by most
     medical organizations. This recommendation was removed from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force in their
     2009 breast cancer screening guidelines due to the risk of false positives and the potential harm that could result
     (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists [ACOG], 2017). Instead, providers now suggest that patients
     become familiar with their breasts, how they look and feel, and the signs and symptoms of breast cancer. Patients
     should be encouraged to contact their health-care provider about any changes to their breasts or concerning
     symptoms.

     Clinical Breast Exam
     The American Cancer Society (2022) no longer recommends regular clinical breast exams by a health-care
     professional as a valuable part of screening for breast cancer, citing concerns about the lack of effectiveness in
     finding breast cancer, particularly when a person is getting regular mammograms. However, the National
     Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) does recommend regular clinical breast exams every 1 to 3 years beginning
     at age 25 and increasing to once a year by age 40 (Susan G. Komen, 2022a). For persons at high risk, the NCCN may
     recommend more frequent clinical breast exams, depending on the person's age and specific risk factors (Susan G.
     Komen, 2022b). It is important for the provider and patient to discuss these recommendations in the context of the
     person's health and individual risk profile before deciding on a screening plan.

     Screening Tests
     The development of screening tests like the mammogram have been very successful in detecting breast cancers
     early in their development and reducing mortality. Like the self-exam and clinical breast exams, the decision about
     when to start regular screening and how often should be made based on a discussion between the person and
     health-care provider. The results of both mammography and ultrasound are reported using standardized language,
     known as the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) (American Cancer Society, 2022a). BI-RADS
     scores range from zero to 6, with 6 being proven malignancy. The mammogram report should also note whether the
     patient has dense breasts, which can interfere with the ability of the radiologist to see small masses.

     Mammography
     The x-ray visualization of the breast tissue, obtained by compressing the breast between two plates, is called
     mammography (Figure 8.7). Images are typically obtained from multiple views, ensuring that all areas of the breast
     tissue are evaluated.

     FIGURE 8.7 Mammogram A mammogram is performed by compressing the breast tissue between two imaging plates. (credit:
     Access for free at openstax.org
8.2 · Cancer of the Breast                                                                                                           355

"MammographyinprocessGraphic" by Alan Hoofring, National Cancer Institute/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Traditional film mammograms present the tissue as a series of black and white images:

    · Low-density tissue like fat appears translucent (darker shades of gray against the black background).
    · Higher-density tissue, like connective tissue, glandular tissue, and tumors, appears white.

Newer mammography procedures use digital technology, allowing the images to be sent directly to a computer.
While the different types of tissue appear the same as with film mammography, using digital images does have
several advantages:

    · ability to manipulate the image to get a better view
    · decreased need to retake images
    · easy transmission of files to another provider for a second opinion
    · production of better images for people with dense breasts
    · the ability to use computer programs that help with the detection of tissue abnormalities (National Institute of

        Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, n.d.).

Mammograms can be performed for screening or for diagnostic purposes, such as when a person or health-care
provider feels a lump or mass that requires additional testing. Mammograms can also be used to identify a calcium
deposit in the breast tissue, or a calcification (Figure 8.8). Calcifications are usually a benign finding, certain
patterns of calcification can be an early sign of breast cancer.

    · Macrocalcifications: Found in about half of women over the age of 50, macrocalcifications appear as large
        white dashes or dots on the mammogram; these are completely benign and do not require any additional
        testing.

    · Microcalcifications: These appear as small flecks or grains of salt on the mammogram. Calcifications that are
        tightly clustered together or have irregular edges may be an early sign of breast cancer and should trigger
        additional testing.

FIGURE 8.8 Mammography Images Breast calcifications are calcium deposits, which can sometimes be indicative of early breast cancer.
(credit: "These images are examples of breast changes that may be seen on a mammogram" by National Cancer Institute, Public Domain)

Different recommendations for screening mammography are outlined in Table 8.4.
356  8 · Disorders of the Breast

     Group                            Recommendations
     American Cancer Society1
                                          · age 40-44: yearly mammogram is optional
                                          · age 45-54: should have yearly mammogram
                                          · age 55 and older: can continue having yearly mammograms or change to

                                              every other year

     U.S. Preventive Services         · age 40-49: an individual choice, though it is believed that younger women
     Task Force2                         are more likely to have a false positive.

                                      · age 50-74: should have a mammogram every other year

     National Comprehensive           · age 40 and older: mammogram every year
     Cancer Network3

     1Data from American Cancer Society, 2022.

     2Data from Breast Cancer Screening, 2016.

     3Data from Breast Cancer Screening: Average Risk, n.d.

     TABLE 8.4 Mammography Screening Recommendations for People of Average Risk

     Ultrasound
     Ultrasound of the breast is not a procedure used for routine cancer screening. It can be used, however, as an adjunct
     to mammography. The uses for breast ultrasound include the following:

     · to better visualize dense breast tissue
     · to get a better look at lesions not well visualized on mammography
     · to distinguish between fluid-filled and solid cysts
     · to guide the needle during a biopsy

     The test is painless and noninvasive and uses high-frequency sound waves to generate images of the breast tissue.
     The patient is not exposed to any radiation during this test.

     Genetic Testing
     Several genetic mutations have been identified with an increased risk of breast cancer. The most well-known
     genetic mutations associated with an increased risk of breast cancer occur in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, though
     other mutations in the PALB2, CHEK2, ATM, CDH1, PTEN, and TP53 genes are also associated with an increased risk
     of breast cancer (American Cancer Society, 2021d). People with a family history of breast cancer can be offered
     genetic testing to identify if they carry these gene mutations. Genetic testing can be performed using blood drawn in
     the health-care provider's office. Nurses can explain that if the genetic testing is positive, the provider will discuss
     preventive techniques to decrease the patient's risks. Both men and women can have the BRCA gene mutation.
     When present, this mutation causes a condition known as hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome. Persons
     AFAB with this mutation may have an increased risk of breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, and ovarian cancer. Persons
     assigned male at birth (AMAB) with this mutation are at an increased risk of breast cancer, prostate cancer, and
     pancreatic cancer.

     Only about 5 percent to 10 percent of breast cancers are linked to a genetic mutation (Susan G. Komen, 2023b).
     Having a family or personal history of breast or other cancers may prompt a person to be tested for the BRCA
     mutations to determine their risk or to potentially guide treatment decisions. If it is determined that they carry the
     mutation, more aggressive screening or monitoring protocols can be implemented to detect a growing cancer early
     in its development.

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.2 · Cancer of the Breast                                                                                              357

        LINK TO LEARNING

Breastcancer.org offers a great deal of content about breast cancer diagnosis and treatment (https://openstax.org/r/
77breastcandxtx) that includes a list of breast cancer facts and myths.

Breast Cancer Diagnosis

When a person presents to the health-care provider with a lump or other symptoms or when a suspicious lesion is
found on a screening mammography, additional testing is required before a diagnosis can be reached.

Imaging Procedures
Along with screening, both mammograms and ultrasound testing can be used diagnostically. If a suspicious lesion is
found on mammogram, an ultrasound scan may be indicated to get a better view. In some cases, magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) may be necessary, though this is usually performed only when a patient has signs or
symptoms of cancer or has had an inconclusive mammogram or ultrasound. MRI can also be used after breast
cancer has been diagnosed to determine the exact location and size of a tumor or to look for other tumors.

Breast MRIs typically use contrast and are performed while the patient is face down, with the breasts placed in a
special opening in the table to avoid compression of the tissue during the scan. In addition to ensuring that the
consent form is signed and preparing the patient and room for the test, the nurse should ask about allergies,
especially to contrast dye, and ensure that the patient does not have any metal on or inside them, including
pacemakers, piercings, aneurysm clips, or cochlear implants. The test typically takes about 30 to 45 minutes.

Biopsy
In many cases, biopsy of the suspicious lesion or mass is the next step in diagnosis. During this procedure, a small
sample is removed and sent to the pathologist for analysis. Several different biopsy procedures can be performed,
depending on the size and location of the lesion, the patient's health and preferences, and whether multiple lesions
are present.

    · During fine needle aspiration (FNA), a small needle (21 g to 25 g) is placed into the lesion to obtain a tissue
        or fluid sample. This procedure can be done with ultrasound guidance or without if the lesion is palpable
        below the skin surface. The procedure should be performed using sterile technique. A local anesthetic can be
        injected if the lesion is deep, the patient is anxious about the procedure, or the provider anticipates making
        multiple passes with the needle.

    · A core needle biopsy (CNB) is similar to an FNA but removes a larger amount of tissue because it uses a
        hollow needle with a larger gauge than the one used for the FNA (Figure 8.9). CNB is typically the biopsy of
        choice when breast cancer is suspected because more tissue can be removed and analyzed. Like the FNA, it
        can be performed with or without ultrasound guidance, depending on the lesion's size and location. Local
        anesthetic is injected before this type of biopsy because a larger amount of breast tissue, called a core, is
        removed by the needle. A tissue marker, or clip, may be placed in the location where the biopsy was taken to
        guide in identifying the area for monitoring or further follow-up. This clip can be visualized in imaging
        procedures so that the provider can quickly find the area in question.
358  8 · Disorders of the Breast

              FIGURE 8.9 Core Needle Biopsy The core needle biopsy procedure removes a small sample of cells from an unidentified lesion so
              that the cells can undergo histologic evaluation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

         · Surgical biopsy: In rare cases, surgical biopsy may be indicated. This is usually performed when an FNA or a
             CNB is inconclusive. An incisional biopsy removes only part of the lesion; an excisional biopsy removes the
             entire lesion and sometimes a small margin around it to ensure that all the suspicious tissue is removed. This
             procedure is usually performed in a hospital or outpatient surgery center with the patient under intravenous
             (IV) sedation or general anesthesia.

         · Lymph node: If breast cancer is identified, the next step may be to biopsy the nearby lymph nodes to
             determine whether the cancer has spread to other parts of the body. If the axillary lymph nodes are enlarged,
             small samples may be removed using FNA or CNB. If they are not enlarged, they will still need to be biopsied,
             usually during the surgical procedure to remove the breast cancer.

     During a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB), only a few lymph nodes, the ones most likely to have cancer spread to
     them, are removed. A special dye or radioactive substance is injected into the tumor or the area around it. The
     lymph will carry the dye through the lymph vessels to the nearby nodes, allowing the provider to identify the
     sentinel nodes and remove them for biopsy.

     An axillary lymph node dissection is the other option for lymph node biopsy and involves the removal of around 10
     to 20 lymph nodes from the axilla to be checked for cancer. This can be performed during the cancer-removing
     surgery or later if an SLNB is positive for three or more lymph nodes or if FNA/CNB showed cancer in the nodes.

     Tumor Characteristics
     Once breast cancer is diagnosed, it is important to evaluate the tumor characteristics to identify how best to treat it.
     During biopsy or surgery, any cells identified as cancerous may be checked to determine whether the cells have
     receptors for estrogen or progesterone on the surface. The presence of these receptors means that the cells are
     responsive to estrogen and progesterone and can be treated using hormone therapy.

         · If a tumor has receptors for estrogen and progesterone, it is known as hormone receptor positive (ER positive
             for estrogen and PR positive for progesterone).

         · If a tumor does not have receptors for estrogen and progesterone, it is known as hormone receptor negative
             (ER negative for estrogen and PR negative for progesterone).

     Most of the time, cancers that are ER positive tend to also be PR positive, and cancers that are ER negative tend to
     also be PR negative. Most cancers, around 70 percent to 80 percent, are hormone receptor positive (Susan G.
     Komen, 2023d).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        8.2 · Cancer of the Breast        359

Another biomarker often used in the diagnosis and staging of breast cancer is a protein known as HER2 (human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2). This protein is important in cell growth: When it is found in high levels in
breast cancer cells, the cancer tends to grow more quickly and spread more aggressively. However, it is also more
likely to respond to certain types of medications that specifically target that protein.

    · If cancer cells have high levels of HER2, they are known as HER2 positive.
    · If cancer cells have low levels of HER2, they are known as HER2 negative.
    · Cancer that is positive for HER2 protein and estrogen/progesterone receptors is triple positive cancer.
    · Cancer that is negative for HER2 protein and estrogen/progesterone receptors is triple negative cancer.

Triple negative breast cancers are more difficult to treat because hormone targeted therapies and HER2 targeted
therapies will not be effective in treating the cancer. These types of tumors also tend to grow and spread more
aggressively than other types of cancers. Triple negative breast cancers are more common in women younger than
40, women who are Black, and women with the BRCA1 gene mutation (American Cancer Society, 2021a).

Some providers may also measure the cell proliferation rate, or how quickly the breast cancer cells are dividing and
growing. In general, cancers with a high proliferation rate (percentage of cells actively dividing) tend to be more
aggressive and have a worse prognosis (Susan G. Komen, 2023d).

Clinical Manifestations
The clinical manifestations associated with breast cancer depend on the type of cancer (Table 8.5).

Type of Cancer                           Description                                    Clinical Manifestations

                                                       · localized cancer of the ducts  · often asymptomatic
                                                       · noninvasive or preinvasive     · may be found on

(credit: modification of "Breast Cancer                                                    mammogram as small white
Ductal Carcinoma in Situ" by Don Bliss/                                                    spots
National Cancer Institute (NCI), Public                                                 · may cause a palpable lump
Domain)                                                                                    or nipple discharge

                                         · IDC is the most common type                  · swelling or irritation of the
                                            of breast cancer:                              breast
                                               forms in the cells of the
                                                  milk ducts and spreads                · nipple retraction
                                                  into nearby tissues                   · peau d'orange
                                               able to metastasize to                   · nipple discharge
                                                  other tissues via                     · skin changes of the breast,
                                                  lymphatic and circulatory
                                                  systems                                  including thickening and
                                                                                           redness
                                         · ILC is much rarer than IDC:                  · nipple or breast pain
                                               starts in the milk glands                · swelling or lump in the axilla
                                                  and can spread to other
(credit: modification of "Breast Cancer           parts of the body
Ductal Carcinoma in Situ" by Don Bliss/        more likely to affect both
National Cancer Institute (NCI), Public           breasts
Domain)

TABLE 8.5 Clinical Manifestations by Type of Breast Cancer
360  8 · Disorders of the Breast

                 Type of Cancer                            Description                Clinical Manifestations

     (attribution: Copyright Rice University,  · rare and aggressive disease       · swelling or inflammation of
     OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)           that progresses quickly             the breast

                                               · are mostly IDC cancers            · changes to the skin of the
                                               · lymphatic vessels blocked by         breast, including dimpling,
                                                                                      pitting, welts, hives, warmth,
                                                  cancer cells, leading to edema      and discoloration
                                                  and swelling
                                                                                   · nipple flattening or inversion
                                                                                   · enlarged lymph nodes
                                                                                   · pain, tenderness, or itching

                                                                                      of the breast tissue

                                               · rare cancer of the nipple and     · crusty, red, or scaly skin in
                                                  areola that usually                 affected area
                                                  accompanies another form of
                                                  breast cancer (DCIS or IDC)      · nipple discharge made out of
                                                                                      blood or yellow fluid

                                                                                   · sometimes initially confused
                                                                                      with eczema

     (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
     OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

                                               · rare breast tumor that initiates  · firm and painless breast
                                                  in the breast connective tissue     lump

                                               · mostly benign and                 · may be painful occasionally
                                                  noncancerous but can also be     · may be large enough to
                                                  borderline or malignant
                                                                                      stretch the skin
                                                                                   · may be seen first on

                                                                                      mammogram or ultrasound

     (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
     OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     TABLE 8.5 Clinical Manifestations by Type of Breast Cancer

     Stages of Breast Cancer
     Staging a breast cancer helps the provider to understand the patient's prognosis and how the cancer should be
     treated. Several criteria are considered when staging breast cancer, including the hormone and HER2 receptor
     status and other characteristics of the tumor. The tumor is staged pathologically using the TNM system:

         · T: Tumor size
         · N: Nodes (degree of lymph node spread)
         · M: Metastasis

     The patient is assigned a clinical stage, which informs prognosis and treatment decisions. The clinical stage is
     between 0 and IV, whereby a patient with stage 0 cancer has a localized tumor with a good prognosis for full
     recovery, and a patient with stage IV cancer has an aggressive tumor that has spread to distant organs and has a
     poor prognosis for survival.

     Nursing Support of Patients Who Have Just Been Diagnosed with Breast Cancer
     The nurse has a complex role in caring for a person who is undergoing testing for breast cancer or whose cancer is
     newly diagnosed. In addition to clinical nursing interventions involved in patient care, such as preparing for surgery
     and prepping for and assisting during diagnostic testing, the nurse must provide patient education and emotional
     support. This time in a person's life is difficult; they face their own mortality, the loss of health and well-being,
     changes in body image and sexual function, financial and career concerns, and loss of role or function within the
     family and community. This can trigger feelings of shame, helplessness, hopelessness, anxiety, and fear. The nurse

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.2 · Cancer of the Breast                                                                                                     361

acts as a key member of the health-care team by teaching the patient about the various types of diagnostic testing,
helping the patient navigate the complex world of breast cancer diagnosis, and answering questions and listening to
concerns.

If cancer is the diagnosis, the patient and family may go in and out of periods of anger, shock, denial, and disbelief.
Initiating education at this time will not be effective because it is unlikely that the patient will be able to retain any of
the teaching. It is important to provide all information in terms families can understand and to be prepared to repeat
or reinforce it as needed. As time goes on and the person begins to adjust to the diagnosis, the nurse can initiate
more education and involve the patient with care planning. This is also a great time to refer the patient and family to
counseling that will support them through the different stages, leading to acceptance through the diagnosis and
treatment phases.

If the patient tests negative for cancer, the nurse still has an important role in supporting this patient in their next
steps, whether that consists of planned follow-up or routine screening. The nurse can also help the patient work
through their feelings of relief that they are cancer free and possible anxiety about the future.

Medical Management of Breast Cancer

The medical management of breast cancer depends on the specific diagnosis and stage of the cancer. The many
options for treatment include surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, hormonal therapy, and other types of medications.

Surgery
Surgical removal of the tumor is often recommended for patients newly diagnosed with breast cancer. Options
include breast-conserving surgery (BCS), mastectomy, and, eventually, reconstruction. The nurse can provide
anticipatory guidance on preparation and recovery related to these procedures.

Breast-Conserving Surgery
Breast-conserving surgery, or BCS, is an option for patients with small tumors or early-stage cancer, such as when
there is only one tumor and that tumor is smaller than 50 percent of the breast tissue. One such procedure is the
lumpectomy, which removes the tumor, a small ring of healthy tissue around the tumor (to ensure that all cancer
cells are removed), and possibly some axillary lymph nodes. Another type of BCS is the segmental mastectomy or
partial mastectomy. As with the lumpectomy, the tumor and a ring of healthy tissue around it are removed, though
the amount of tissue is greater than that removed during lumpectomy. Both procedures allow the retention of much
of the breast tissue, minimizing scarring and other tissue loss. Some patients require radiation therapy to the breast
after BCS to ensure that all the unhealthy tissue was removed and to reduce the risk of recurrence.

Mastectomy
Removal of the entire breast, including the nipple and areola, is called mastectomy. Patients who are better
candidates for mastectomy rather than BCS are those with larger or multiple tumors that occupy a large area of the
breast, those with invasive cancer, or those who have had radiation to the breast. In addition to treating an existing
breast cancer, mastectomy can be performed as a preventive measure, usually in patients at high risk or who carry
the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene.

There are several different ways that mastectomy (Figure 8.10) can be performed:

    · Total simple mastectomy: Removes the entire breast, nipple, areola, and sentinel lymph nodes.
    · Modified radical mastectomy: Removes the entire breast, nipple, areola, and axillary lymph nodes but leaves

        the chest wall intact.
    · Skin-sparing mastectomy: Removes the breast tissue, nipple, and areola but leaves the skin of the breast

        intact, similar to an empty balloon. This allows the placement of an implant for immediate reconstruction
        during the procedure or a tissue expander for reconstruction later.
    · Nipple-sparing mastectomy: Removes the breast tissue, but leaves the skin, areola, and nipple intact. This
        allows for reconstruction during surgery or later, using an implant or fat tissue from elsewhere on the body. A
        tissue expander can be placed in the pocket if the patient is having reconstruction later. For this type of
        procedure, the tumor must be at least 2 cm away from the nipple and areola.
362  8 · Disorders of the Breast

     FIGURE 8.10 Mastectomy Options Mastectomy can be performed in several ways, depending on the clinical picture and the patient's
     preference for reconstruction. The main types are (a) simple mastectomy, (b) modified radical mastectomy, (c) skin-sparing mastectomy,
     and (d) nipple-sparing mastectomy. (modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University,
     OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Like BCS, mastectomy is often combined with chemotherapy or radiation once the patient has recovered from
     surgery. There is a lot of debate about whether mastectomy or BCS gives a better chance at survival. A study
     published in the Journal of the American Medical Association followed close to 50,000 people in Sweden for 6 years
     after they had been diagnosed with breast cancer (de Boniface et al., 2021). The researchers found a higher survival
     rate among people treated with BCS and radiation therapy than among people with a mastectomy (when accounting
     for key confounders; de Boniface et al., 2021). A study published by Mburu et al. in 2022 supported these results,
     finding that BCS with radiation was more effective at treating people with triple negative breast cancer than BCS
     alone, mastectomy alone, or mastectomy with radiation. While further research is needed, patients should discuss
     with their providers whether BCS may improve their prognosis.

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.2 · Cancer of the Breast                                                                                                          363

  CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

  Evaluating Outcomes

  The nurse teaches the patient about the process of mastectomy and recovery from the surgery. The following
  are ways to determine if the patient understands the teaching in order to evaluate the outcomes of the teaching.

     1. Teach-back: Ask the patient to explain the process of the mastectomy in their own words.
     2. Ask open-ended questions, such as what to expect before, during, and after surgery.
     3. Summary: Ask the patient to summarize the information provided by the nurse.

Breast Reconstruction
Surgical breast reconstruction can occur during the mastectomy or later. It is important for the patient to consult
with their providers to discuss the different options and which would be most appropriate for the specific clinical
scenario. Several factors can influence which option is best:

    · overall health status
    · size/location of tumor
    · breast size and shape
    · type of breast cancer surgery
    · amount of tissue available for reconstruction
    · insurance coverage and costs
    · Personal preferences (desire to closely match the other breast, preference for surgery on one or both breasts,

        willingness to have more than one surgery) (American Cancer Society, 2021c)

There are two main types of breast reconstruction:

    · Implants: Implants made of saline or silicone are placed under the skin and muscle. These can be inserted at
        the time of mastectomy or later.

    · Flap procedures: Flap procedures are highly technical procedures performed by plastic microsurgery
        specialists. Fat and tissue from elsewhere on the body (abdomen, hips, back, buttocks, etc.) are taken and
        used to recreate the appearance of a breast (Figure 8.11). Many centers still use the abdominal, latissimus
        dorsi, or gluteal muscle to create the flap, which can cause the patient to have weakness at the donation site
        and lifting restrictions for the rest of their life.

FIGURE 8.11 Breast Reconstruction Surgery: The Flap Procedure The flap procedure removes a flap of tissue from a different area on
the body to re-create and reconstruct a new breast. TRAM, transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
364  8 · Disorders of the Breast

     A patient who has had these procedures may require nipple reconstruction later, depending on what type of
     mastectomy was initially performed. Some people may also choose to have a tattoo to create the image of areolar
     tissue. Other options may include the use of a prosthesis or an aesthetic flat closure of the mastectomy scar.

     It is important for the nurse to recognize that breast reconstruction is a very personal decision. What's right for one
     patient may not be right for the next. Some people may choose to have immediate reconstruction (if a candidate),
     while others may elect to avoid reconstruction altogether. The nurse should support the patient's decision, whatever
     that may be. The nurse should also prepare the patient for the outcomes of those decisions. For example, a flap
     procedure will cause scarring, not only of the reconstructed breast, but also at the site of the donated tissue.

     Chemotherapy
     Chemotherapy is the administration of cytotoxic medication that kills cancer cells. These drugs are most commonly
     given before or after surgery and in combination regimens to improve survival outcomes. Chemotherapy given
     before surgery, known as neoadjuvant chemotherapy, is used to reduce the size of the tumor so that the surgery is
     less extensive. It is also used to determine the best therapeutic regimen before removing the tumor or to delay
     surgery, giving people time to complete genetic testing or discuss reconstructive surgery. Chemotherapy given after
     surgery is known as adjuvant chemotherapy. This type of chemo is used to destroy any cancer cells that were left
     behind after surgery or that have metastasized but have not yet been seen on imaging tests. Both neoadjuvant and
     adjuvant chemotherapies reduce the risk of cancer coming back or metastasizing to other organs.

     Chemotherapy is most often administered as a combination of drugs to be most effective in treating both early and
     advanced breast cancer. Chemotherapy is usually administered intravenously, in a hospital setting or infusion
     center. It can occasionally be administered subcutaneously or orally. How frequently the medication is administered
     and for how long depends on the specific dose and regimen. When given IV, it is most commonly given through a
     large central line due to the risks of tissue damage if extravasation occurs. Long-term administration will require the
     placement of a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line or a port placed on the side opposite from the
     breast cancer. The nurse must monitor this access point for patency and signs of infection and teach the patient how
     to care for it at home. Informed consent for both the access procedure and administration of chemotherapy will also
     need to be signed. While the nurse is not responsible for obtaining informed consent, they are required to ensure
     that the form has been signed and that the patient understands the procedure they are undergoing and medication
     they are taking.

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     QSEN Competency: Safety during Chemotherapy

     Oncology nurses are trained in the safe handling of hazardous drugs. Government agencies have created guidelines
     to protect persons working with hazardous drugs. Some of these recommendations follow.

     Personal protective equipment should be used during the following:

       1. discontinuing an IV and disposing of medications
       2. deconstituting, mixing, or manipulating chemotherapy medications
       3. cleaning a spill
       4. measuring urine output

     Specific personal protective equipment is as follows:

       1. chemotherapy-tested gloves
       2. chemotherapy-tested gowns
       3. shoe covers
       4. eye protection such as goggles or full face shield
       5. respiratory protection
       6. Transporting medications in a closed-system transfer device

     Persons pregnant or trying to conceive must notify their supervisors. Supervisors are required to offer alternative
     duties.

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.2 · Cancer of the Breast                                                                                               365

(Oncology Nursing Society, 2018)

Chemotherapy can have several side effects, depending on the drug, dose, and length of treatment. Because these
medications work on rapidly dividing cells, their side effects include

    · hair loss,
    · nausea/vomiting,
    · fatigue,
    · diarrhea,
    · hot flashes,
    · loss of appetite or weight loss, and
    · mouth sores.

The nurse should assess for these side effects during and after each treatment and intervene as necessary. For
example, if the patient becomes nauseated after therapy, the nurse can collaborate with the provider to order an
antiemetic and provide education about strategies to minimize nausea/vomiting with future treatments. Ongoing
evaluation is necessary to ensure that these interventions are successful or to adjust the care plan to try other
interventions as needed. Most side effects resolve after chemotherapy has been completed.

Because chemotherapy cannot specifically target cancer cells, the medications can affect normal tissue as well.
This is particularly true in the cells of the immune and hematologic systems, leading to increased risk of infection,
bleeding, and anemia. Regular monitoring of blood counts will be needed to monitor these parameters. As a result,
the patient will need to be extra cautious about exposure to illness by wearing a mask in public or avoiding crowded
spaces. Other potential complications could include:

    · cardiomyopathy
    · neuropathy
    · myelodysplastic syndromes
    · infertility

While infertility is a common consequence of chemotherapy, the nurse must inform the patient of the significant risk
of birth defects if conception does occur. While receiving chemotherapy treatment, the patient and partner must use
birth control if there is any chance that sex will result in pregnancy.

Biologic Response Modifiers
A medication that uses the patient's own immune system to recognize and get rid of cancer cells is called a biologic
response modifier. This therapy is often combined with chemotherapy to treat triple negative breast cancer. The
main class of drugs used to treat breast cancer comprises checkpoint inhibitors. Checkpoints are found in the
immune system and help the immune system to distinguish "self" from "foreign." These checkpoints can be turned
on or off to initiate the immune response against foreign or tumor cells. However, some breast cancers have
developed the ability to bind with these checkpoints and turn them off so that the immune system does not attack
them. Checkpoint inhibitors turn on the immune response against the breast cancer tumor cells.

Biologic response modifiers are used along with chemotherapy to treat triple negative breast cancer. These drugs
can cause an infusion reaction, which can include fever, chills, flushing, wheezing, shortness of breath, rash/itching,
and dizziness (American Cancer Society, 2021e). It is important for the nurse to monitor the patient for these
symptoms frequently during and after the infusion. The patient should also be educated about this reaction and
instructed to notify the provider immediately if they start feeling unwell. If symptoms occur during treatment, the
nurse should stop the infusion immediately and notify the provider. The nurse can also discuss premedication for
the patient's symptoms.

Hormonal Therapy
Cancers that are hormone receptor positive for estrogen and progesterone can often be treated with hormone
therapy. These medications block the hormone receptors, which prevents the cancer cells from growing. The
medications are often started after surgery to remove the tumor and are taken for about 5 years, and sometimes
longer if it is determined that a patient has a high chance of the cancer returning. Cancers that are hormone receptor
negative will not respond to these types of medications. These drugs can be used in many ways, and the exact
366  8 · Disorders of the Breast

     protocol or regimen will depend on the provider, the patient, the cancer, and a number of other factors.

     Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators (SERMs)
     Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to cancer cells, preventing them
     from growing and dividing. These medications have an antiestrogen effect on the breast tissue. Drugs in this class of
     medications include tamoxifen (Soltamox), raloxifene (Evista), and toremifene (Fareston). Tamoxifen is an oral
     medication that is used to treat pre- or postmenopausal women with breast cancer. It can be used to treat hormone
     receptor-positive DCIS or other invasive cancers by reducing the risk that the cancer will return, decreasing the
     chance that the cancer will develop in the other breast or metastasize through the body, and slowing or stopping the
     growth of cancer that has already metastasized elsewhere (American Cancer Society, 2023a). Raloxifene is a SERM
     often used to treat osteoporosis, but it is also used to reduce the risk of invasive breast cancer in postmenopausal
     women with or without osteoporosis. Toremifene works similarly to tamoxifen but is approved to treat only
     postmenopausal women with metastatic breast cancer.

     Selective estrogen receptor modulators can cause early menopause, with side effects such as hot flashes and other
     vasomotor symptoms, weight gain, mood swings, vaginal dryness, and irregular menstrual cycles. There is also a
     risk of serious complications, including deep vein thrombosis, stroke, endometrial cancer, and pulmonary embolism.
     Nursing interventions focus on educating patients about these drugs and how to take them, assessing for interaction
     or side effects, and counseling patients about maintaining preventive care, such as having a regular Papanicolaou
     (Pap) smear, annual eye exam, liver function testing, and bone density testing.

             PSYCHOSOCIAL CONSIDERATIONS

     Tamoxifen

     Tamoxifen is a very common hormonal medication used in the treatment of hormone receptor-positive breast
     cancer. Because of the length of time the patient will be taking it as well as the potential side effects of
     complications, it is crucial for the nurse to provide teaching about what to expect and how to use the medication
     safely.

         · Generic Name: tamoxifen citrate
         · Trade Name: Nolvadex, Soltamox
         · Class/Action: selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM)
         · Route/Dosage: Tamoxifen is available as 10 or 20 mg tablets or an oral solution (10 mg/5 mL). For cancer

             prevention after chemotherapy, patients will take 20 mg daily for 5 to 10 years. For metastatic breast cancer,
             the dose may increase to 20 mg to 40 mg daily. The dose is 20 mg daily for prophylaxis in patients who are at
             higher risk.
         · High Alert/Black Box Warning: Tamoxifen comes with a higher risk of fatal uterine cancer, stroke, and
             pulmonary embolism in patients at high risk for cancer or those with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). Patients
             should discuss the risks and benefits with their provider.
         · Indications: Tamoxifen is used in the treatment of hormone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer and
             node-positive breast cancer after mastectomy. In patients with DCIS, tamoxifen can be used to reduce the
             risk of breast cancer in the opposite breast and invasive breast cancer. In some patients at high risk,
             tamoxifen can be used to reduce their risk of breast cancer.
         · Mechanism of Action: Tamoxifen selectively binds to estrogen receptors and has both estrogenic and
             antiestrogenic effects in different parts of the body. In the breast tissue, it competes with estrogen at the
             receptor sites, leading to decreased estrogenic activity in tumor cells and a slowing of tumor growth.
         · Contraindications: Tamoxifen is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity to the drug, patients
             who are taking certain anticoagulant therapies, or patients with a history of deep vein thrombosis or
             pulmonary embolus.
         · Adverse Effects/Side Effects: hot flashes, irregular periods, vaginal discharge, hypertension, weakness,
             nausea/vomiting, mood changes, peripheral edema, arthralgia, lymphedema, and skin changes/rashes
         · Nursing Implications: Counsel patients about the more serious side effects of tamoxifen and how to report
             concerns to the care team. Assess patients for side effects and report them as needed to the provider.

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.2 · Cancer of the Breast                                                                                               367

    · Patient/Family Education: Patients should be advised to not become pregnant and may need to discontinue
        breast-feeding. Barrier contraceptives should be used to prevent pregnancy.

(Nursing Drug Handbook, 2023)

Selective Estrogen Receptor Degraders (SERDs)
Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) have an antiestrogen effect throughout the body. They work by
attaching to estrogen receptor cells and causing them to break down. These drugs are most commonly used in
postmenopausal women. When used in premenopausal women, they need to be combined with ovarian suppression
drugs. The two drugs in this class that are most commonly used are fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant
(Orserdu). Side effects of these drugs include hot flashes, night sweats, nausea, fatigue, loss of appetite, muscle/
joint pain, and headache. Nursing interventions for these drugs are similar to those for SERMs.

Aromatase Inhibitors
Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) are a class of medications that inhibit estrogen production in postmenopausal women.
Aromatase is an enzyme responsible for producing estrogen that is found in the body fat; aromatase inhibitors block
this mechanism. These drugs can be combined with ovarian suppression drugs when used in premenopausal
women. AIs are oral medications that are taken daily for 5 to 10 years, depending on the cancer and risk of
recurrence. The most common side effect of AIs is joint and muscle pain similar to arthritis. This can usually be
managed with the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), gentle exercise, or switching to a different
AI. Other side effects include hot flashes and vaginal dryness. These drugs also increase the risk of osteoporosis
and fractures. The patient should be advised to have bone density screenings every 2 years; some women should
also take bisphosphonates to increase bone density (Bischof et al., 2022). The most common drugs in this class of
medication are letrozole (Femara), anastrozole (Arimidex), and exemestane (Aromasin).

Ovarian Suppression
In premenopausal women, the ovaries are the primary source of estrogen production. Suppressing the ovaries
essentially makes them act as if they are postmenopausal by reducing estrogen production. This allows the health-
care provider to use treatments and medications that have been approved for use in postmenopausal women, such
as aromatase inhibitors and SERDs, in women who are premenopausal. This strategy can also be used in women
with a high risk of cancer recurrence. Ovarian suppression can be done with the surgical removal of the ovaries,
through the administration of chemotherapeutic gonadotoxic drugs, or through luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone agonists, which temporarily suppress luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone and induce a temporary
menopause.

        LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

Nurse's Response to a Patient Refusing Chemotherapy

Imagine that you are a nurse in an oncology clinic and currently care for several patients with breast cancer. You are
seeing a new 45-year-old patient who was recently diagnosed with stage 3 breast cancer. The provider has
recommended neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by mastectomy followed by radiation therapy and additional
chemotherapy.

You sit down with the patient and support person to discuss the upcoming procedures, and the patient is sitting
quietly. As you discuss what to expect from chemotherapy, the patient states that they are okay with the surgery if
the reconstruction can occur at the same time but that they will not have chemotherapy. When you ask about
concerns with chemotherapy, the person replies they do not want to lose their hair and throw up all the time,
"especially if the surgery will just remove the cancer anyway." You start your education by describing the side effects
that can be expected from the specific chemotherapy drugs, including hair loss and nausea and vomiting, and you
include information about how to manage and minimize those side effects. You go on to explain that the
neoadjuvant chemotherapy will help to reduce the size of the tumor and make the surgery easier. Finally, you also
explain that stage 3 cancer indicates that the cancer cells have spread to other parts of the body--surgery alone
cannot adequately treat it.
368  8 · Disorders of the Breast

     After extensive counseling and education, the patient still refuses the chemotherapy and says that decision is final.
     You know that not having chemotherapy as recommended by the provider will significantly decrease the patient's
     likelihood of having a positive outcome, even though the person is young and otherwise healthy. You struggle with
     this patient's decision, as you know that they have a good prognosis for recovery with the recommended treatment
     plan. What is your next step?

     Ultimately, the person is a competent adult and can make their own medical decisions. As the nurse, you must
     inform the provider, support the person's autonomy to make decisions, and document all your teaching. Ethical
     issues arise regularly in the oncology specialty, and there may be times that you disagree with a patient's decision.
     However, it is important to remember that the role of the nurse includes being a patient advocate, which means
     supporting their decisions and not what we would choose to do for ourselves.

     Radiation
     Radiation therapy is used frequently after lumpectomy or breast-conserving surgery (BCS) to remove any remaining
     cancer cells. Some patients with large tumors may have radiation before surgery to reduce the size of the tumor and
     make the surgery easier. There are two main types of radiation therapy for breast cancer: external beam radiation
     therapy and brachytherapy.

     External Beam Radiation Therapy
     External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) directs radiation at the breast or other structures (Figure 8.12). Which areas
     of the body receive radiation depend on what type of surgery was done and what type of cancer is present. Someone
     who had a mastectomy and no cancerous lymph nodes will likely have radiation to the mastectomy scar, the chest
     wall, and the locations of drains after surgery. If cancer is found in the lymph nodes, radiation may be directed to the
     areas containing the axillary, supraclavicular, infraclavicular, or internal mammary lymph nodes as well. Someone
     who had BCS or lumpectomy will likely have whole-breast radiation therapy.

     FIGURE 8.12 External Beam Radiation Therapy EBRT is usually used in conjunction with surgery for early-stage breast cancers. (credit:
     "COL. (Dr.) Ghaed, right, and Technician J. Butler prepare a patient for cancer treatment on a linear accelerator at the Fitzsimmons Army
     Medical Center" by Theodore Moore, NARA & DVIDS Public Domain Archive/The U.S. National Archives, Public Domain)

     Radiation is typically started after the mastectomy site has healed or, if chemotherapy is prescribed, after the
     chemotherapy. Radiation is given 5 days a week for 6 or 7 weeks, depending on the provider's prescribed regimen.
     Some providers also use accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI), which consists of higher doses of radiation
     that are limited to the wound bed to reduce the risk of cancer coming back at the site of the original tumor.

     The nurse must advise the patient of potential side effects, which can include:

         · swelling in the breast
         · fatigue

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.2 · Cancer of the Breast                                                                                               369

    · skin changes similar to a sunburn
    · heaviness in the breast
    · lymphedema if radiation is used in the axillary lymph nodes

Some side effects do not appear until later; the breast may become smaller and firmer over time. Radiation can
affect the ability to breast-feed or the ability to have reconstruction later due to changes in the skin and breast
tissue. Brachial plexopathy (nerve damage causing numbness and pain in the upper limb), lymphedema, and
weakening of the ribs leading to fracture can result from radiation (Demarco, 2023).

The primary nursing intervention when caring for a patient undergoing radiation is education and support. It is
important to teach the patient and support persons what to expect during radiation therapy, what side effects are
common, how they can be alleviated or managed, and what symptoms need to be reported to the provider. The
nurse may also implement and teach the patient and the family about comfort measures for the skin after radiation
treatment. These can include:

    · keeping the skin well moisturized and hydrated
    · using hydrogel pads to reduce heat and irritation
    · avoiding underwire, nylon, or lace bras
    · avoiding shaving the armpits to reduce irritation to the skin

The nurse must continue to monitor and assess the patient regularly for pain, fatigue, and other side effects. Nurses
should wear monitor badges measuring their exposure to radiation.

Brachytherapy
Brachytherapy is internal radiation, where radioactive seeds or pellets are placed in a small device inside the tumor
bed. The use of brachytherapy is limited by the size of the tumor and its location. There are two types of
brachytherapy:

    · Intracavitary brachytherapy: The radioactive pellets are placed in a special balloon that is inserted in the
        empty space after BCS. They will remain there until after treatment is completed. The end of the catheter
        remains outside the breast so that additional pellets can be placed into the device at prescribed intervals
        (usually twice a day for 5 days on an outpatient basis) (American Cancer Society, 2021f).

    · Interstitial brachytherapy: Small catheters are placed into the breast tissue and left in place. Radioactive
        pellets are placed directly into these catheters for a short time each day before being removed (American
        Cancer Society, 2021f).

Nursing care during radiation therapy focuses on assessing for side effects, measuring and monitoring radiation
safety, and providing patient education and support. The nurse must also be careful to implement safety measures
to protect the patient, the health-care team, and the patient's family or visitors. Additional training is required for
the nurse to safely handle radioactive material, dispose of it properly, calculate the total dose of radiation, and
ensure that all appropriate protective personal equipment is used correctly.

In addition, the use of brachytherapy requires that the nurse provide ongoing wound care due to the placement of
catheters and other devices into the skin. The nurse will need to monitor for infection, change dressings according to
policy or provider orders, and use sterile technique when handling all devices. The nurse should also teach the
patient how to care for those devices in the outpatient setting and at home.

Finally, the nurse must assist the patient with managing side effects from the radiation, including assessing for side
effects, administering PRN medications as ordered, collaborating with the health-care provider to ensure that the
patient's needs are being met, and teaching the patient about what to expect and how to manage anticipated side
effects.

Nursing Care of Patients Undergoing Mastectomy

The pre- and postoperative care of the patient undergoing a mastectomy will depend on the surgical procedure
being performed, whether reconstruction will also occur, and the health and medical needs of the patient.

Preoperative Nursing Care
Preoperative care of the patient before a mastectomy is the same as before any other surgical procedure. The nurse
370  8 · Disorders of the Breast

     will do the following:

         · Ensure that the consent form has been signed and witnessed and that the patient has had all of their
             questions answered.

         · Schedule any required preoperative testing, such as chest x-ray, additional imaging, blood testing (complete
             blood count [CBC], blood chemistry, and blood typing).

         · Assist with scheduling the surgery with the surgery center or hospital.
         · Provide preoperative teaching, including what to expect during recovery, pain management, equipment that

             will be in place during the recovery and postoperative period, signs or symptoms that require follow-up care,
             and any restrictions that may be in place after surgery.
         · Provide preoperative instructions, such as staying NPO after midnight, what time to arrive at the surgery
             center, if there are oral medications that can be taken or should be skipped on the morning of surgery, and
             wearing comfortable clothing that morning.
         · Ensure that the patient has all the equipment and medication they will need in the postoperative period.
         · Teach the patient how to deep-breathe and cough and why these actions are important.

     On the morning of the surgery, in the immediate preoperative period, the nurse will do the following:

         · Perform the initial nursing assessment, including vital signs, medical history, and physical exam.
         · Ensure that the patient fully understands the procedure and has no remaining questions and that the consent

             form has been signed.
         · Ask about advance directives. If the patient has them in place, ensure that the medical provider and surgeon

             are aware of them and that they are in the chart.
         · Assess for allergies.
         · Ensure that the patient has been NPO and has taken any and all preoperative medications as instructed.
         · Administer preoperative medications as ordered.
         · Help the patient cope with any preoperative fear or anxiety.
         · Ensure that someone is available to take the patient home if they will be discharged the same day.

     Specific tasks may vary depending on facility, so the nurse must be aware of the policies and procedures at their
     specific institution.

     Postoperative Nursing Care
     In the immediate postoperative period, priority nursing interventions center on the safe recovery from anesthesia
     and surgery. Vital signs must be checked according to policy, usually every 5 to 15 minutes in the first hour after
     surgery and then decreasing in frequency with time. The patient must be assessed frequently, with a focus on the
     management of pain, nausea, and vomiting, particularly in the immediate postoperative period. Breath sounds
     should also be auscultated, drains examined, and assessment for signs of shock, hemorrhage, or infection
     completed. Abnormal assessment findings should be reported to the provider promptly. Other nursing care activities
     may include encouraging the patient to turn, cough, and deep-breathe, assisting with active range of motion
     exercises, reinforcing and assessing surgical dressings as needed, assisting with ambulation and personal care
     needs, and providing parenteral fluids as ordered. The nurse should anticipate and plan for discharge early in the
     recovery process. For expected times of discharge, see (Table 8.6).

                                              Procedure                Discharge Interval

                                  Lumpectomy                           The same day

                                  Mastectomy without reconstruction    Less than 24 hours

                                  Mastectomy with tissue expander placement About 24 hours

                                  Mastectomy with flap reconstruction  3 to 5 days

     TABLE 8.6 Discharge after Breast Cancer Surgery

     Before discharge, extensive patient teaching should occur for both patient and support person. Ideally, this should

     Access for free at openstax.org
8.2 · Cancer of the Breast                                                                                                371

reinforce any preoperative teaching that was done, including:

    · how to manage and care for dressings and any drains that are in place
    · how to take all prescribed medication, including PRN medications for pain or nausea
    · when to return to the hospital for emergency care or follow-up
    · how to perform arm exercises that should be done at least 4 times a day after axillary lymph node dissection;

        physical therapy may be ordered for some patients
    · When to return for routine follow-up care with the oncologist, breast surgeon, and, if applicable, the plastic

        surgeon (usually within 1 week after surgery)

It is also incredibly important to teach the patient about what to expect when they remove the bandages,
particularly if this has not happened in the hospital. Losing a breast can affect a person's self-image, and seeing the
surgical site can be an emotional time. If the patient sees the wound for the first time in the hospital, the nurse
should ask who they would like to be present. The nurse can provide emotional support as needed. If this will
happen at home, the nurse should prepare the patient and support person for what they will see so that it will not be
as shocking. The patient should be reassured that the wound and scar will improve and that ongoing reconstruction
procedures will also continue to improve body image and breast appearance over time. The nurse can suggest using
an external prosthesis as a temporary measure (or a permanent one if the patient has declined reconstruction),
advising the patient to seek the assistance of a company that specializes in this service and can provide additional
support for the patient.

Posttreatment Care of Breast Cancer Survivors and Their Support Persons

New and better technology and medications, along with improved treatment protocols, have led to an increase in
the number of people surviving breast cancer. Ongoing surveillance, support, and education are the focus of this
period in a patient's recovery.

Supportive Posttreatment Care
The patient's need for support does not end with discharge from treatment. Considerable time must be spent on
education and preparation for the transition to posttreatment life. Discharge planning should start early and be a
comprehensive overview of what the patient will need for this next stage in their life.

        CULTURAL CONTEXT

Syria and Mastectomies

Cultures can react differently to the loss of the breast. In Syria, breasts represent femininity, beauty, and
motherhood, and losing a breast can be a loss of identity (Hasan et al., 2023). Patients having a mastectomy can
experience distorted body image, loss of self-esteem, loss of confidence, and changes in relationships. In the Arabic
culture, cancer is considered a death sentence, which additionally stigmatizes the patient. Some Syrian people have
described difficulty in looking in the mirror because they feel "ugly." Reconstruction is rare in Syria due to financial
difficulties. Some patients have made their own prosthetic breast from different materials available to them. In a
male-dominated culture, psychologic care of patients who have undergone a mastectomy is not a priority. These
patients must find support from family and friends to help heal the psychologic and physical pain of losing a breast.

Posttreatment Surveillance Protocols
Posttreatment surveillance protocols will depend on the specific type of cancer and stage at diagnosis, treatment,
and prognosis.

    · It will include a history and physical exam every few months initially, and eventually lengthen to once a year.
    · Persons who have had BCS will need regular mammography to detect any new breast cancers. After having a

        unilateral mastectomy, the person will need a mammogram only on the unaffected breast.
    · Regular pelvic exams and bone density screenings may be needed after certain types of treatment (e.g.,

        hormone therapies or aromatase inhibitors) due to an increased risk for endometrial cancer and osteoporosis.
    · Persons taking anthracycline-based regimens (doxorubicin [Adriamycin], epirubicin [Ellence]) or taxanes

        (Taxol, Taxotere) may be at greater risk for cardiotoxicity, requiring regular cardiac care.
372  8 · Disorders of the Breast

     Post-Cancer Treatment Side Effects
     Many breast cancer survivors deal with ongoing side effects after completing treatment, particularly after
     chemotherapy. These patients should be monitored for depression and mental health issues. Other ongoing
     concerns include the following:

         · Vasomotor symptoms, like hot flashes, are more common with hormonal treatments that reduce estrogen
             levels. Patients should be advised to avoid consuming spicy food, keep room temperatures cool, dress in
             layers, and use fans or air conditioners whenever possible.

         · Weight gain often results from reduced activity due to fatigue and lean muscle loss. Participating in regular
             exercise can help to combat weight gain and improve energy levels.

         · Cancer-related fatigue and brain fog are especially common after treatment and may be particularly hard to
             deal with. Associated with both radiation and chemotherapy, these symptoms can also lead to cognitive
             issues, such as poor concentration and memory. These symptoms may last well into the survivorship period.

         · Sexual dysfunction, such as poor libido, decreased arousal or lubrication, and painful intercourse, can occur
             due to hormonal changes associated with treatment and sometimes due to body image issues after cancer.

     The nurse can help the person understand what to expect and how to deal with the side effects. Being prepared for
     some of these issues can help patients cope.

     Fertility and Pregnancy
     Fertility and pregnancy after breast cancer are complicated issues. Many types of chemotherapy can impact a
     person's fertility by causing premature ovarian failure. Ovulation and conception would be very difficult, if not
     impossible, in this situation. Some patients can freeze their eggs after diagnosis and before chemotherapy is
     started. It is important for the nurse and provider to advise patients of this risk and to offer a consultation with an
     infertility specialist before initiating any fertility-toxic therapies. Patients with frozen eggs are advised, in general, to
     wait at least 2 years after completion of treatment before trying to conceive. This time frame may allow providers to
     detect an early return of the cancer before pregnancy. There is also some concern that the high levels of estrogen
     produced during pregnancy may cause a cancer to come back, though studies have yet to demonstrate this
     (American Cancer Society, 2022c).

     Hormone therapies are often continued for 5 to 10 years after diagnosis, which can make conception difficult,
     especially in an older person who may not be fertile by the time therapy is complete. Some people may be able to
     stop treatment after at least 2 years to pursue pregnancy and then wait a few months before attempting conception
     (American Cancer Society, 2022c). Hormone therapy would then resume after the birth. However, this decision
     needs to be made after a conversation with the health-care provider. In some people, cancer can return after the
     2-year mark, putting the patient and potential pregnancy at risk (American Cancer Society, 2022c).

     Patient Education: Community Agencies and Other Resources
     In addition to providing direct patient support, the nurse can and should provide a list of community resources that
     the patient and support person can also access. Table 8.7 lists and describes several community and Internet
     resources that the nurse can suggest to patients who are in treatment for cancer.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          8.2 · Cancer of the Breast                      373

Resources                                Description

American Cancer Society                      · offers peer-to-peer support from volunteers who have also
(https://openstax.org/r/                         been treated for breast cancer
77amcancersoc)
                                             · provides education about breast cancer treatment and other
                                                 available resources

Susan G. Komen (https://openstax.org/    · offers information about local support groups, counseling,
r/77komen)                                  online and telephone support groups

                                         · also provides information about getting support as a caregiver
                                            and for family/friends of someone diagnosed with breast cancer

                                         · offers patient navigators to help assist patients navigate the
                                            complex world of breast cancer diagnosis and treatment

Breastcancer.org (https://openstax.org/  · offers online forums so that patients can connect with others
r/77brcancerorg)                            going through similar treatments

National Breast Cancer Foundation        · offers education and research findings
(https://openstax.org/r/                 · provides support in the form of support groups, metastatic
77NatnlBrCanFd)
                                            breast cancer retreats, and a patient navigator program
                                         · will ship HOPE kits, containing items helpful for treatment days,

                                            to patients diagnosed with cancer

Living Beyond Breast Cancer              · provides a helpline for patients to call for additional support
(https://openstax.org/r/                 · offers a listing of local support groups, as well as volunteer and
77beyondBrCancr)
                                            fundraising opportunities

Cancer Care (https://openstax.org/r/     · provides free professional counseling and support services for
77cancercare)                               patients undergoing breast cancer treatment

                                         · provides limited financial support for cancer-related costs
                                         · offers support groups and resource navigation services

TABLE 8.7 Community Resources for Patients with Breast Cancer

Many of these organizations also offer support and resources for caregivers, as well as patients. It can be difficult to
manage the care of someone who is sick or undergoing chemotherapy. In addition to the exhausting physical
challenges of providing care, such as tending to medical needs and helping with activities of daily living, the
caregiver is also dealing with stress and fear of the unknown. As a result, it is important for the nurse to assess not
only the patient at each visit but also the caregiver. How are they doing? What do they need on this journey? Do they
have any questions or needs that can be met by the medical or social work team? It is important for the caregiver to
find ways to cope and manage their stress, as well as find a supportive community to help them through their
challenges.

        REAL RN STORIES

Nurse: Nicole, MSN, RN Senior Managing Editor: Digital Nursing Education
Years in practice: 8
Clinical setting: large infertility center
Geographic location: California
374  8 · Disorders of the Breast

     It can be difficult to contradict the medical provider that you are working with, but it is very important to do so
     (respectfully!) when it involves advocating for your patients. Several years ago, I was working at a large, well-known
     infertility center. I had been working there only a few weeks when a patient called the nursing hotline to inquire
     about fertility preservation care before she began treatment for breast cancer. I overheard the IVF coordinator
     informing the patient that she was sorry but there was nothing that we could possibly do in such a short time frame
     because the patient had just had her period and was not in a hormonally appropriate time to start an egg freezing
     protocol. I quickly interrupted the IVF coordinator and told her to get the patient's contact information.

     After she hung up, I asked some pointed questions about the patient's clinical scenario and knew that we could
     help, based on my own years of experience in caring for patients undergoing fertility preservation. I also went online
     to look up fertility-preservation protocols from resources well known within the infertility field. I compiled all this
     information and brought it into a meeting with the provider. When the doctor repeated what the IVF coordinator had
     told the patient--that there was nothing that could be done to help the patient--I was able to provide evidence-
     based research with strategies that would help the patient undergo treatment very quickly, regardless of where she
     was in her menstrual cycle.

     The provider was impressed with my research and asked me to call the patient back so that they could come in for
     an immediate consultation to plan for treatment. As nurses, we build our own breadth of wisdom and knowledge,
     and it is important to have confidence in that and in ourselves. We must always remember that we are collaborative
     partners in a health-care team and that we owe it to our patients to contribute to the experience guiding their care.

     Nurses working in cancer care must be aware of other local resources for patient and caregiver support. It may be
     helpful to curate a list of local programs available at community centers, churches, and even the medical or cancer
     center. The nurse can also consider volunteering for these organizations to increase their community involvement
     and be more aware of what is actually available for patients. This may lead to finding opportunities for the nurse to
     initiate such programs in the community or at the medical center.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Health Disparities and Breast Cancer

     Distrust of the health-care system, especially in the breast cancer continuum of care, is a known phenomenon. A
     large literature review of studies from 1990 through 2018 was published in 2020 and found that "Health-care
     system distrust is prevalent across many different racial and ethnic groups and operates across the entire breast
     cancer continuum of care" (Mouslim et al., 2020, p. 33). Other studies have demonstrated the disparity in breast
     cancer care that has existed between White people and Black people for many years. Black people have a
     significantly higher mortality rate and are more likely to be diagnosed at a younger age, at a more advanced stage,
     and with aggressive types of breast cancer (Stringer-Reasor et al., 2021). The mortality rate for Black people with
     breast cancer is also 42 percent higher. While the exact cause for this health disparity is unknown, many health-care
     professionals and researchers attribute it to a combination of factors, including social determinants of health, such
     as socioeconomic status, racial bias, and access to care. According to several sources, Black people experience
     higher rates of death from breast cancer because of a combination of factors, including barriers to early diagnosis
     and high-quality treatment, the aggressive nature of certain breast cancer diagnoses occurring more often in Black
     people, lack of high-quality care, genetics, discrimination, and systemic racism (Susan G. Komen, 2023c).

     Black people under 40 have the highest rate of breast cancer in their age group (McDowell, 2022). In addition, many
     studies have found high levels of health-care mistrust among Black people, which may result in an unwillingness to
     have regular breast cancer screenings, which can ultimately impact both care and outcomes (Mouslim et al., 2020).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                8 · Summary 375

Summary

8.1 Benign Disorders of the Breast

A common fear of people experiencing a change in their breasts is that they have cancer, especially because many
benign changes mimic symptoms of breast cancer. However, benign breast changes encompass several different
conditions, including trauma, breast pain, infection, skin changes, nipple discharge, and tumors. These changes are
often associated with fluctuations in estrogen, which may explain why they are more common in persons of
childbearing age. Nurses play a role in educating the person on the difference between their diagnosis and breast
cancer. The nurse can offer reassurance and support to the patient and family.

8.2 Cancer of the Breast

According to the CDC, more than 239,000 women were diagnosed with breast cancer in 2020, and nearly 43,000
women died from the disease (2023). Regular screening is an important step in the early diagnosis and treatment of
breast cancer. How often and when that screening should occur is patient-specific, but evidence-based guidelines
have been developed by several organizations, including the American Cancer Society and the U. S. Preventive
Services Task Force, to help providers make those clinical decisions with their patients. The development of
screening tests like the mammogram have been very successful in detecting breast cancers early in their
development and reducing mortality.

When a patient presents to the health-care provider with a lump or other symptoms, or a suspicious lesion is found
on a screening mammography, additional testing is required before a diagnosis can be reached. In many cases,
biopsy of the suspicious lesion or mass is indicated. Once breast cancer is diagnosed, it is important to evaluate the
tumor characteristics to identify how best to treat it. During biopsy or surgery, breast cancer cells may be checked to
determine receptors for estrogen or progesterone. Staging a breast cancer helps the provider to understand the
patient's prognosis and how the cancer should be treated.

The medical management of breast cancer depends on the specific diagnosis and stage of the cancer. Options for
treatment include surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, hormonal therapy, and other types of medications. The nurse
has a complex role in caring for a person newly diagnosed with or undergoing testing for breast cancer. In addition to
clinical nursing interventions such as preparing for surgery and prepping for and assisting during diagnostic testing,
the nurse must provide patient education and emotional support.

The breast cancer survivor's need for support doesn't end with discharge from treatment. Considerable time must
be spent on education and preparation for the transition to post-treatment life. Discharge planning should start early
and be a comprehensive overview of what the patient and support person will need for this next stage in their life.

Key Terms

benign breast changes umbrella term that encompasses several different noncancerous conditions that occur in
    the breast tissue, including trauma, breast pain, infection, skin changes, nipple discharge, and tumors

biologic response modifier medication that uses the patient's own immune system to recognize and get rid of
    cancer cells

BRCA1 gene associated with increased risk of breast cancer when mutations occur in it
BRCA2 gene associated with increased risk of breast cancer when mutations occur in it
calcification calcium deposit found in the breast tissue that is usually benign but can sometimes indicate an early

    breast cancer
core needle biopsy (CNA) procedure that removes a larger amount of tissue for analysis because it uses a larger

    hollow needle
fibroadenoma painless, noncancerous tumor found in the breast tissue
fibrocystic breast changes changes in either or both breasts that can cause lumpiness, or nodularity, or pain in

    the affected breast(s)
fibrosis thickening of the glandular tissue
fine needle aspiration (FNA) placement of a small needle (21 g to 25 g) into the lesion to obtain a tissue or fluid

    sample
HER2 (human epidermal growth factor receptor 2) protein important in cell growth that, when found in high
376 8 · Assessments

    levels in breast cancer cells, causes the cancer to grow more quickly and spread more aggressively
intraductal papilloma benign tumor that grows inside the milk ducts of the breasts
lumpectomy surgical procedure that removes the tumor, a small ring of healthy tissue around the tumor (to ensure

    that all cancer cells are removed) and, possibly, some axillary lymph nodes
mammary ductal ectasia (also: periductal mastitis) chronic inflammation of the breast tissue that also causes

    dilated mammary ducts with thickened walls; plasma cell infiltration; leakage of fluid into the surrounding tissue,
    leading to inflammation and fat necrosis; and sometimes the formation of an abscess
mammography the x-ray visualization of the breast tissue, obtained by compressing the breast between two
    plates
mastalgia breast pain
mastectomy the removal of the entire breast, including the nipple and areola
multiple papillomas papillomas found in the smaller milk ducts farther from the nipple
nonlactation mastitis an inflammation of the breast tissue in a non-breast-feeding person, which may or may not
    occur with an infection
periductal mastitis (PDM) (also: mammary ductal ectasia) chronic inflammation of the breast tissue that also
    causes dilated mammary ducts with thickened walls; plasma cell infiltration; leakage of fluid into the surrounding
    tissue, leading to inflammation and fat necrosis; and sometimes the formation of an abscess
solitary papilloma individual, single tumor that grows close to the nipple in the larger milk ducts
triple negative cancer cancer that is negative for HER2 protein and estrogen/progesterone receptors
triple positive cancer cancer that is positive for HER2 protein and estrogen/progesterone receptors

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. What assessment finding suggests that a patient may have fibrocystic breast changes?
           a. green-tinged nipple discharge
           b. ongoing breast pain
           c. firm, ropy feel of the breast tissue under the skin
           d. peau d'orange appearance of the skin

    2. What nursing intervention would the nurse include in the preoperative care plan for a patient scheduled for an
        outpatient lumpectomy of a fibroadenoma?
           a. Administer pain and antiemetic medications.
           b. Help the patient arrange for a cab home after the procedure.
           c. Advise the patient to avoid food or drink for 2 hours before surgery.
           d. Review discharge instructions.

    3. What is a patient statement that indicates effective teaching after a new diagnosis of nonlactational mastitis?
           a. "I will avoid wearing a bra until I feel better."
           b. "I should take steps to stop smoking cigarettes."
           c. "Applying an ice pack to my breasts can help reduce pain."
           d. "I should take the prescribed antibiotics until I feel better."

    4. What is a risk factor for breast cancer?
           a. menarche at age 15
           b. family history of diabetes
           c. alcohol use of at least 2 drinks per day
           d. history of three vaginal births by age 25

    5. What information would the nurse include when teaching a patient about core needle biopsy?
           a. It can be performed with or without ultrasound guidance.
           b. Local anesthetic is not needed before this procedure.
           c. It is usually performed in the outpatient surgery center.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           8 · Assessments 377

           d. A special dye is injected into the area around the tumor.

    6. The nurse is caring for a patient receiving chemotherapy. What nursing intervention would they provide?
           a. Administer antibiotics.
           b. Administer antiemetics.
           c. Encourage physical activity after infusion.
           d. Encourage eating a large meal.

    7. What type of mastectomy removes the entire breast but leaves the chest wall intact?
           a. total simple mastectomy
           b. modified radical mastectomy
           c. skin-sparing mastectomy
           d. nipple-sparing mastectomy

    8. The nurse would advise the patient to report what symptom immediately during a PD-1 (checkpoint inhibitor)
        infusion?
           a. nausea
           b. fatigue
           c. dizziness
           d. diarrhea

    9. What medication would the nurse include when teaching a patient about aromatase inhibitors?
           a. anastrozole (Arimidex)
           b. fulvestrant (Faslodex)
           c. tamoxifen (Novaldex)
           d. pembrolizumab (Keytruda)

  10. What hormonal medication can be used in a premenopausal patient without the concurrent use of ovarian
        suppression?
           a. letrozole (Femara)
           b. exemestane (Aromasin)
           c. elacestrant (Orserdu)
           d. tamoxifen (Soltamox)

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. Which teaching point would the nurse include when working with a patient newly diagnosed with fibrocystic
        breast changes?

    2. What possible treatment options would the nurse discuss when counseling a patient who presents to the
        emergency department with suspected nonlactational mastitis?

    3. Describe what information the nurse would include when a patient asks when they can have breast
        reconstruction surgery after mastectomy.

    4. Describe how you would respond when a patient asks if they will be able to get pregnant after completing
        breast cancer treatment.

Reflection Questions

    1. Describe how the nurse can support a patient who presents with a well-defined hard lump of the breast,
        along with nipple inversion, peau d'orange appearance of the skin, and ulceration and fistula.

    2. How would you respond to a 40-year-old patient who is at average risk for breast cancer and who asks
        whether she can wait to have a mammogram until she is 45?

    3. How would you describe the diagnosis of inflammatory breast cancer to a patient who believed they had a
378 8 · References

        rash on the breast?

What Should the Nurse Do?

Wanda, a 32-year-old female, seeks medical attention at the outpatient clinic due to concerns about her breast
health. She describes experiencing cyclic breast pain and tenderness over the past 6 months, with occasional
lumpiness and swelling, particularly in the upper outer quadrants of both breasts. No nipple discharge, skin
changes, or axillary lymphadenopathy are reported. Recently diagnosed with fibrocystic changes, Wanda expresses
worry about the persistence of symptoms. Her medical history is unremarkable, with no psychiatric issues, and she
is not currently taking any medication. Vital signs--blood pressure (120/80 mm Hg), heart rate (78 bpm), respiratory
rate (16 bpm), and temperature (98.6° F or 37° C)--fall within normal limits.

    1. Based on Wanda's symptoms, how would you differentiate between cyclic breast pain associated with
        fibrocystic changes and pain that might raise concern for a more serious condition like breast cancer? What
        specific features of fibrocystic changes contribute to the cyclic nature of her symptoms?

    2. If Wanda's symptoms were indicative of fibroadenomas rather than fibrocystic changes, how might her
        presentation differ? What diagnostic steps should be taken to confirm or rule out the presence of
        fibroadenomas, and how would the management plan vary?

    3. Considering Wanda's symptoms and medical history, how would you rule out nonlactation mastitis, especially
        the periductal mastitis form? What specific aspects of her presentation might guide the diagnosis, and what
        steps should be taken in the diagnostic process?

Lisa is a 45-year-old female who presents at the breast cancer screening clinic for her routine mammogram. Lisa
reports no specific breast-related symptoms but has a family history of breast cancer, with her mother being
diagnosed at the age of 50. She is generally healthy, with no significant medical or psychiatric history. Lisa's vital
signs are stable, and she appears calm but expresses mild anxiety related to her family history and the screening
process. Lisa's mammogram reveals suspicious findings in her left breast, prompting further diagnostic evaluation. A
subsequent biopsy confirms the presence of invasive ductal carcinoma. Lisa is shocked by the diagnosis and
expresses a range of emotions, including fear, sadness, and uncertainty about the future.

    4. What specific risk factors for breast cancer should Lisa be made aware of based on her family history? How
        might these factors influence her ongoing screening and preventive measures?

    5. As a nurse, how would you address Lisa's emotional responses, including fear, sadness, and uncertainty,
        following her breast cancer diagnosis? What supportive interventions could be implemented during this
        critical period?

    6. Based on Lisa's diagnosis of invasive ductal carcinoma, discuss the potential treatment modalities that might
        be recommended for her. How would you explain these options to Lisa and involve her in the decision-making
        process?

    7. What specific nursing interventions would you implement in the postoperative care of Lisa, who underwent a
        mastectomy? How can you address her physical and emotional well-being during this recovery period?

    8. How can nurses actively engage in referring patients like Lisa and their support people to community
        agencies? What local resources might be beneficial for Lisa, considering her diagnosis and emotional needs?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. Create a table that compares and contrasts the three types of benign breast changes.

    2. Write a policy that describes nursing responsibilities for an outpatient surgery center that will begin offering
        surgical lumpectomy for patients with fibroadenomas.

    3. Use the Internet to identify local breast cancer support resources near you. Discuss how these can be used to
        support breast cancer patients in your care.

    4. Develop a 10-minute presentation for the community that describes breast cancer screening options for
        people at high and average risk.

References

Ajmal, M., Khan, M., & Van Fossen K. (2022, October 6). Breast fibroadenoma. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK535345

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              8 · References 379

American Cancer Society. (2021a). Breast cancer hormone receptor status. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/
    breast-cancer/understanding-a-breast-cancer-diagnosis/breast-cancer-hormone-receptor-status.html

American Cancer Society. (2021b). Breast cancer stages. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/breast-cancer/
    understanding-a-breast-cancer-diagnosis/stages-of-breast-cancer.html

American Cancer Society. (2021c). Breast reconstruction options. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/breast-
    cancer/reconstruction-surgery/breast-reconstruction-options.html

American Cancer Society. (2021d). Genetic counseling and testing for breast cancer risk. https://www.cancer.org/
    cancer/types/breast-cancer/risk-and-prevention/genetic-testing.html

American Cancer Society. (2021e). Immunotherapy for breast cancer. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/breast-
    cancer/treatment/immunotherapy.html

American Cancer Society. (2021f). Radiation for breast cancer. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/breast-cancer/
    treatment/radiation-for-breast-cancer.html

American Cancer Society. (2022a). American Cancer Society recommendations for the early detection of breast
   cancer. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/breast-cancer/screening-tests-and-early-detection/american-
    cancer-society-recommendations-for-the-early-detection-of-breast-cancer.html

American Cancer Society. (2022b). Intraductal papillomas of the breast. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/
    breast-cancer/non-cancerous-breast-conditions/intraductal-papillomas.html

American Cancer Society. (2022c). Pregnancy after breast cancer. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/breast-
    cancer/living-as-a-breast-cancer-survivor/pregnancy-after-breast-cancer.html

American Cancer Society. (2023a). Hormone therapy for breast cancer. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/
    breast-cancer/treatment/hormone-therapy-for-breast-cancer.html

American Cancer Society. (2023b). Key statistics for breast cancer. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/breast-
    cancer/about/how-common-is-breast-cancer.html

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017, July; reaffirmed 2021). Practice Bulletin No. 179:
   Breast cancer risk assessment and screening in average-risk women. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-
    guidance/practice-bulletin/articles/2017/07/breast-cancer-risk-assessment-and-screening-in-average-risk-
    women

Bajaj, A. (2020). Acutely inflamed mamilla--mastitis and abscess. Journal of Medical Research and Surgery, 1(3),
    1-7. https://doi.org/10.52916/jmrs204012

Bischof, E., Schwab, F. D., Margarint, E. L. G., Montavon, C., Zünti, I., Schollback, A., Schötzau, A., Hirschmann, A.,
    Landin, J., Meier, C., Christian, K., & Vetter, M. Adherence to bone health guidelines in patience with hormone
   receptor-positive early breast cancer: Status and clinical impact in a Swiss cohort experience. Bone Reports, 16,
    102260. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bonr.2021.101160

Breastcancer.org. (2022a, June 29). Benign breast conditions. https://www.breastcancer.org/benign-breast-
    conditions

Breastcancer.org. (2022b, July 27). Fibroadenoma. https://www.breastcancer.org/benign-breast-conditions/
    fibroadenoma

Breastcancer.org. (2023). Breast cancer facts and statistics. https://www.breastcancer.org/facts-statistics

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023). Cancer statistics at a glance. https://gis.cdc.gov/Cancer/
    USCS/#/AtAGlance/

Chen, Y. Y., Fang, W. H., Wang, C. C., Kao, T. W., Chang, Y. W., Yang, H. F., Wu, C. J., Sun, Y. S., & Chen, W. L. (2018).
   Examining the associations among fibrocystic breast change, total lean mass, and percent body fat. Scientific
   Reports, 8(1), 9180. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-27546-3

Costa Morais Oliveira, V., Cubas-Vega, N., López Del-Tejo, P., Baía-da-Silva, D. C., Araújo Tavares, M., Picinin Safe, I.,
380 8 · References

    Cordeiro-Santos, M., Lacerda, M. V. G., & Val, F. (2021). Non-lactational infectious mastitis in the Americas: A
   systematic review. Frontiers in Medicine, 8, 672513. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2021.672513

de Boniface, J., Szulkin, R., & Johansson, A. L. V. (2021). Survival after breast conservation vs mastectomy adjusted
   for comorbidity and socioeconomic status: A Swedish national 6-year follow-up of 48 986 women. JAMA Surgery,
   156(7), 628-637. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamasurg.2021.1438

Demarco, C. (2023, January 19). Side effects of radiation therapy for breast cancer. https://www.mdanderson.org/
    cancerwise/side-effects-of-radiation-therapy-for-breast-cancer.h00-159615489.html

El-Essawy, M., Haidary, A. A., & Khan, A. L. (2020, May 6). Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) in breast fibroadenoma.
   Egyptian Journal of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, 51(73). https://doi.org/10.1186/s43055-020-00191-5

Gopalani, S. V., Janitz, A. E., Martinez, S. A., Gutman, P., Khan, S., & Campbell, J. E. (2020). Trends in cancer
    incidence among American Indians and Alaska Natives and non-Hispanic Whites in the United States,
   1999-2015. Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.), 31(2), 205-213. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    EDE.0000000000001140

Hasan, S., Chew, K. S., Balang, R. V., & Wong, S. S. L. (2023). Beyond the scars: A qualitative study on the
   experiences of mastectomy among young women with breast cancer in a country with crisis. BMC Women's
   Health, 23(1), 596. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s12905-023-02734-0

Li, J., Humphreys, K., Ho, P. J., Eriksson, M., Darai-Ramqvist, E., Lindström, L. S., Hall, P., & Czene, K. (2018). Family
   history, reproductive, and lifestyle risk factors for fibroadenoma and breast cancer. JNCI Cancer Spectrum, 2(3),
    pky051. https://doi.org/10.1093/jncics/pky051

Mburu, W., Kulasingam, S., Hodges, J. S., & Virnig, B.A. (2022). Breast-conserving surgery versus mastectomy for
   older women with triple-negative breast cancer: Population-based study. Journal of Comparative Effectiveness
   Research, 11(13). https://doi.org/10.2217/cer-2021-0273

McDowell, S. (2022, October 3). Breast cancer death rates are highest for Black women--again.
    https://www.cancer.org/research/acs-research-news/breast-cancer-death-rates-are-highest-for-black-women-
    again.html

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. (n.d.). Stages of breast cancer. https://www.mskcc.org/cancer-care/types/
    breast/diagnosis/stages-breast

Mouslim, M. C., Johnson, R. M., & Dean, L. T. (2020). Healthcare system distrust and the breast cancer continuum of
   care. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment, 180(1), 33-44. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-020-05538-0

National Breast Cancer Foundation. (n.d.). Stages. https://www.nationalbreastcancer.org/breast-cancer-staging/

National Cancer Institute. (2023a). All cancer sites combined: Recent trends in SEER age-adjusted incidence rates,
   2000-2020. https://seer.cancer.gov/statistics-network/explorer/application.html

National Cancer Institute. (2023b). SEER incidence data, 1975-2020. https://seer.cancer.gov/data/

National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering. (n.d.). Mammography. https://www.nibib.nih.gov/
    science-education/science-topics/mammography

North American Menopause Society. (2023). Other body changes affecting sexuality. https://www.menopause.org/
    for-women/sexual-health-menopause-online/changes-at-midlife/other-body-changes-affecting-sexuality

Nursing drug handbook. (2023). Wolters Kluwer.

Oncology Nursing Society. (2018). Toolkit for safe handling of hazardous drugs for nurses in oncology.
    https://www.ons.org/sites/default/files/2018-06/ONS_Safe_Handling_Toolkit_0.pdf

Sarkar, D. K., Banerjee, R., Gupta, S., Singhal, A. K., & Halder, A. (2023). Management of idiopathic granulomatous
   mastitis: A prospective study. Annals of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, 105(3), 218-224.
    https://doi.org/10.1308/rcsann.2022.0017

Stachs, A., Stubert, J., Reimer, T., & Hartmann, S. (2019, August 9). Benign breast disease in women. Deutsches

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              8 · References 381

   Arzteblatt International, 116(33-34), 565-574. https://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.2019.0565

Stringer-Reasor, E. M., Elkhanany, A., Khoury, K., Simon, M. A., & Newman, L. A. (2021). Disparities in breast cancer
   associated with African American identity. American Society of Clinical Oncology Educational Book, 41, E29-246.
    https://doi.org/10.1200/EDBK_319929

Susan G. Komen. (2022a). Breast cancer screening for women at average risk. https://www.komen.org/breast-
    cancer/screening/when-to-screen/average-risk-women/#breast-cancer-screening-recommendations

Susan G. Komen. (2022b). Breast cancer screening for women at higher risk. https://www.komen.org/breast-cancer/
    screening/when-to-screen/high-risk-women/

Susan G. Komen. (2023a). Chemotherapy drugs for early breast cancer. https://www.komen.org/breast-cancer/
    treatment/type/chemotherapy/drugs/

Susan G. Komen. (2023b). Genetic testing to learn about breast cancer risk. https://www.komen.org/breast-cancer/
    risk-factor/gene-mutations-genetic-testing/

Susan G. Komen. (2023c). Race and ethnicity. https://www.komen.org/breast-cancer/risk-factor/race-ethnicity/

Susan G. Komen. (2023d). Tumor characteristics: Hormone receptor status. https://www.komen.org/breast-cancer/
    diagnosis/factors-that-affect-prognosis/tumor-characteristics/

U. S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2016). Breast cancer: Screening.
    https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/breast-cancer-screening

Yadav, P., Sharma, A., Singh, L., & Gupta, R. (2020). Management of fibrocystic breast disease: A comprehensive
   review. Journal of Advanced Scientific Research, 11(4), 30-37. https://sciensage.info/index.php/JASR/article/
    view/552
382 8 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 9

Violence Against Women

FIGURE 9.1 Violence Against Women Act President Barack Obama signed the reauthorization of the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA)
in 2013, continuing significant legal changes that protected women's rights in the United States. Years later, the VAWA was allowed to
expire. (credit: "Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013" Official White House Photo by Chuck Kennedy/The White House
President Barack Obama, CC BY 3.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
9.1 Incidence, History, and Psychosocial Factors
9.2 Domestic and Intimate Partner Violence
9.3 Sexual Abuse and Assault
9.4 Human Trafficking
9.5 Social and Cultural Practices of Violence Against Women
9.6 Psychological Trauma of Violence Against Women

INTRODUCTION Violence against women targets all women: cisgender women (persons assigned female at birth
who identify as women), transgender women (persons assigned male at birth who identify as women), and
nonbinary persons who have female genitalia. Violence or abuse can take many forms and can occur in a variety of
settings, including at home, in the community, at work, and in schools. Violence against women can be sexual,
physical, emotional, and psychosocial. Additionally, violence against women occurs in all racial, ethnic, religious,
and socioeconomic groups. The nurse is in a unique position to help identify women being abused and provide help
to women under their care.

9.1 Incidence, History, and Psychosocial Factors

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Describe incidences and risk factors of violence against women
    · Identify populations of women particularly at risk for violence
    · Discuss psychosocial theories related to violence against women
384  9 · Violence Against Women

     The World Health Organization (WHO, 2021) defines violence against women as an act of violence that results in
     the suffering of women, whether physical, sexual, or mental, occurring in public or private life. The WHO (2021)
     estimates that 30 percent of women in the world have been subjected to violence in their lifetime. Certain
     populations of women are at a higher risk for violence than others. Research has been conducted and theories have
     been established in an attempt to understand patterns of violence against women.

     Incidences of Violence against Women

     In women over the age of 15, 45 percent to 55 percent have experienced sexual harassment, including contact
     harassment (grabbing, pinching, slapping, rubbing against a person in a sexual way) and noncontact harassment
     (comments about a person's body parts or appearance, sexually suggestive staring, stalking, exposure of sexual
     organs) (United Nations Women, n.d.). Globally, 72 percent of all trafficking victims are women and girls (United
     Nations Women, n.d.). In the United States, one in five women has been raped in their lifetime; 46.7 percent were
     raped by an acquaintance (National Coalition Against Domestic Violence [NCADV], 2020). According to the Bureau of
     Justice Statistics (2022), of female murder victims, 76 percent were killed by someone they knew (parent,
     grandparent, sibling, in-law, or other family member), and the majority were killed by a gun.

     According to the National Coalition Against Domestic Violence (2020), 10 million U.S. adults experience domestic
     violence annually. According to the WHO, 27 percent of women (aged 15 to 49 years) who have been in a
     relationship have experienced intimate partner violence (IPV), which can include sexual assault, stalking, and
     homicide (NCADV, 2020). One in 10 women in the United States has been stalked in their lifetime by an intimate
     partner (National Coalition Against Domestic Violence, 2020). Almost all domestic violence abusers commit
     financial abuse to keep the victim trapped in the relationship (National Network to End Domestic Violence, 2017).
     Financial abuse is defined as tactics to limit access to money or assets, such as not allowing a person to work,
     controlling how money is spent, refusing to pay bills, not allowing access to bank accounts (National Network to End
     Domestic Violence, 2017). Of the 30 percent of women subjected to violence worldwide, IPV is the most common
     form of abuse (WHO, 2021).

     Risk Factors for Violence against Women
     It is important for the nurse not to assume that abuse occurs only in certain socioeconomic, ethnic, educational, or
     racial groups. Violence occurs across all racial, socioeconomic, and religious groups; however, some groups are at
     higher risk. Some risk factors for violence against women include ideas and social practices that perpetuate gender
     inequality, lower levels of education, history of exposure to child maltreatment, harmful use of alcohol, financial
     difficulties, and communities in which higher status is given to men and lower status to women (WHO, 2021.) Some
     risk factors for perpetrators include low self-esteem, low education, heavy alcohol or drug use, lack of nonviolent
     problem-solving skills, impulsiveness, history of abuse, and witnessing violence as a child (Centers for Disease
     Control and Prevention [CDC], 2021b).

     Populations at a Higher Risk for Violence

     Some populations of women are at higher risk for violence than others. Native American, Alaska Native, and women
     of color are all at a higher risk for violence. Transgender men and women, LGBTQIA+ persons, and people with
     disabilities are also at higher risk for generalized violence. Women experiencing homelessness may have become
     homeless due to violence or may experience violence because of their homelessness. Pregnant women are at an
     increased risk for violence, especially if violence was occurring prior to pregnancy.

     Native Americans and Alaska Natives
     Native American women have been victimized and murdered to such an extent that the organization Missing and
     Murdered Indigenous Women (MMIW) was created (Jock et al., 2022). Because of indigenous laws, many Native
     Americans are limited in their ability to charge a non-Native person with a crime, and 90 percent of IPV against
     Native American women is perpetrated by non-Natives (Jock et al., 2022). Legal reform began in 2013, allowing
     tribes to criminally prosecute non-tribal people accused of violence against women; however, as of 2021, only 26
     out of 574 tribes have implemented these reforms (Jock et al., 2022). Native American women have expressed the
     importance of extended families and the help they provide in recovering from IPV.

     Alaska has the third highest rate of IPV and the highest rate of murder of women by men in the United States;
     almost half of all women in Alaska have experienced physical or sexual assault or stalking (Burrage et al., 2021).

     Access for free at openstax.org
9.1 · Incidence, History, and Psychosocial Factors                                                                       385

According to Burrage et al. (2021), approximately 45.9 percent of Alaska Native women experience IPV, which was
considered uncommon in precolonial families. The authors note that spiritual, economic, and social differences
since colonization have drastically increased IPV.

Women of Color
Women of color experience more IPV than any other racial or ethnic group in the United States, and they experience
more violent abuse that can lead to homicide (Waller et al., 2023). About 45.1 percent of Black women and 40.1
percent of Black men will experience IPV in their lifetimes (NCADV, 2020). NCADV (2020) notes that in 2017, Black
women had the highest rate of IPV homicides (2.55/100,000) and that more than half (57.7 percent) were killed by
a firearm. Black women also experience longer lasting effects of IPV, such as chronic neck or back pain,
cardiovascular disease, and disability, making them unable to work due to the prolonged exposure to more violent
behavior (Waller et al., 2023).

LGBTQIA+ Women
Violence against members of the LGBTQIA+ community has been the subject of recent research, and more
information continues to be discovered. Violence against women has been found to be more prevalent in LGBTQIA+
persons than in cisgender heterosexual persons (Scheer & Baams, 2021). LGBTQIA+ young adults have higher rates
of physical and psychologic victimization and sexual coercion than cisgender heterosexual young adults (Scheer &
Baams, 2021). Persons in same-sex relationships experiencing IPV suffer depression and anxiety more than
heterosexual persons (Savage et al., 2022).

Women with Disabilities
Women with disabilities experience higher rates of violence, including physical abuse, coercion, control, and
emotional abuse (Saleme et al., 2023). Unfortunately, persons with disabilities may rely on their abusive partner for
assistance for daily living. This dependence causes many women to remain in the abusive environment. Therefore,
women with disabilities are less likely to report the abuse (Saleme et al., 2023). While caring for a person with a
disability, nurses should be aware of signs of abuse, such as bruises, burns, missing teeth, cuts, or scars.

        CULTURAL CONTEXT

Black Women Seeking Support from the Church

According to a 2018 study, Black women are the most religious population of people in the United States. They have
long considered the church a place of refuge and trust. Many Black women will seek help from the church when
trying to leave a volatile relationship. Several studies suggest that Black women experience a great deal of racism
and discrimination in shelters for IPV; therefore, they may turn to the church to help with emergency housing and
emotional support.

(Waller et al., 2022)

Women Experiencing Homelessness
Homelessness is related to IPV in two ways: IPV can cause homelessness, and homelessness can cause more
violence. Research has shown that 80 percent of homeless women and children are survivors of IPV; furthermore,
these persons are at increased risk of violence while homeless (Jagasia et al., 2023). Homelessness is also related
to higher morbidity and shorter life expectancy because these persons utilize fewer preventive health services,
experience more injuries, and suffer from posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (Jagasia et al., 2023). The
combination of homelessness and IPV increases health risks due to the high-risk behaviors some use to cope with
their situation, such as smoking, alcohol, and drug use (Jagasia et al., 2023). Nurses in community health can help
provide much needed health care and preventive health services to the homeless. Nurses can also provide survivors
of IPV with referrals to community resources for shelter and protective services from violent partners.

Transgender Women and Men
According to a study by Peitzmeier et al. (2020), transgender people, regardless of sex assigned at birth,
experienced more violence than cisgender persons. The study found that transgender persons are 1.7 times more
likely to be a victim of IPV, 2.2 times more likely to have experienced physical IPV, and 2.5 times more likely to have
a history of sexual IPV. The study also found that abuse was associated with sexual risk-taking behavior, substance
386  9 · Violence Against Women

     use, and poor mental health; and lack of legal protection against discrimination made transgender persons at higher
     risk for violence.

       CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

       Recognizing Cues

       When the nurse is caring for a transgender person, they understand this person is at higher risk for violence. The
       nurse should recognize cues of violence by

          1. taking a social history;
          2. getting the patient alone to ask if they feel safe at home or with their partner;
          3. recognizing signs of abuse, such as bruises, cuts, and burns, especially in areas hidden by clothes; and
          4. determining if the patient is in immediate danger of violence from their partner or someone else.

     Pregnant Women
     Pregnant people experiencing IPV receive less prenatal care or enter care later than those not experiencing IPV
     (National Partnership for Women and Families, 2021). These persons also have an increased risk for low-birth-
     weight infants, preterm birth, depression, and perinatal death (National Partnership for Women and Families, 2021).
     The severity of violence increases during pregnancy and the postpartum period. Physical violence occurs in 2 to
     35percent of all pregnant women, and sexual IPV occurs in 9 to 40 percent of pregnant women; this statistic is
     broad due to the fear of reporting (Selwyn, 2020). Homicide accounts for 31 percent of maternal deaths caused by
     injuries (National Partnership for Women and Families, 2021). Table 9.1 reveals the specific cause mortality rate for
     pregnancy and up to 42 days after birth. The nurse can observe pregnant patients for signs of abuse, eating
     disorders, sleep disorders, and delay in seeking treatment (National Partnership for Women and Families, 2021).
     The nurse can screen pregnant women for IPV to provide comfort and resources.

     Cause                                                     Deaths per 100,000 Live Births up to 42 Days
                                                               after Birth

     Homicide                                                  2.21

     Hemorrhage and placental disorders                        1.1

     Hypertensive disorders in pregnancy, childbirth, and the  0.9

     puerperium

     Sepsis and other infections                               0.3

     TABLE 9.1 Reasons for Maternal Death up to 42 Days Postpartum (Wallace et al., 2021)

     Psychosocial Theories Related to Violence against Women

     Theories have been developed to understand IPV and violence against women. The Cycle of Violence Theory
     discusses the three phases of abuse. The Power and Control Wheel is a graphic showing the techniques used to gain
     power and control through violence. Finally, the Intergenerational Transmission of Violence Theory proposes that
     children exposed to violence are more likely to later become involved in violence as an adult.

     Walker Cycle of Violence Theory
     The Cycle of Violence Theory developed by Lenore Walker explains the process of violence and includes three
     phases of an abusive relationship: tension-building, acute battering incident, and the honeymoon phase (Goodmark,
     2011). In the tension-building phase, the woman is abused verbally and emotionally, with minor physical abuse. The
     tension escalates to an acute battering incident, resulting in serious assault and severe injury. The honeymoon
     phase then begins, characterized by the abuser begging for forgiveness, declaring love for the partner, giving gifts,
     and grand gestures. This cycle of violence continues until the woman leaves the relationship or dies (Goodmark,
     2011).

     Access for free at openstax.org
9.1 · Incidence, History, and Psychosocial Factors                                                                              387

Power and Control Wheel
Ellen Pence was the founder of the Domestic Abuse Intervention Project and developer of the Power and Control
Wheel theory (Goodmark, 2011). The graphic shows the hub of the wheel being the abuser's power and control over
their partner, which is the goal of abuse (Goodmark, 2011). The spokes of the wheel contain tactics used by abusers
to reinforce the power and control over their partner that leads to physical and sexual violence (Goodmark, 2011).
Survivors of violence were interviewed, and eight tactics were used among almost all abusers. These tactics make
up the spokes of the wheel: isolation, peer pressure, emotional blackmail, using social status, intimidation, threats,
sexual coercion, and denial of abuse (Figure 9.2).

FIGURE 9.2 Power and Control Wheel The Power and Control Wheel demonstrates abusers' need for absolute control and the tactics
they use to obtain it. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

        LINK TO LEARNING

Domestic Abuse Intervention Programs provides several videos that explain how the Power and Control Wheel
(https://openstax.org/r/77PowrCtrlWheel) is used to explain domestic violence.

Intergenerational Transmission of Violence
The Intergenerational Transmission of Violence Theory proposes that experiencing or witnessing violence,
especially during childhood, increases the likelihood of a person's involvement in a violent relationship (Powers et
al., 2020). This theory explains that when a child experiences or witnesses domestic violence, it becomes a normal
and acceptable pattern of behavior. The child learns that violence is an acceptable behavior for conflict resolution
(Powers et al., 2020). When the child becomes an adult, they are more likely to be involved in violence, as a victim or
as a perpetrator (Powers et al., 2020).
388  9 · Violence Against Women

     9.2 Domestic and Intimate Partner Violence

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Summarize the definition and identifying signs of domestic violence and IPV
         · Discuss associated factors of domestic violence and intimate partner violence
         · Discuss how a nurse can recognize victims and perpetrators of IPV

     Domestic violence occurs in the home, a place where everyone should feel safe. Domestic violence and its
     subcategory IPV can be difficult to identify because it often occurs behind closed doors with only people inside the
     family being aware of the abuse.

     Abusers can incorporate physical, financial, and sexual violence into their abuse. Just as pediatric nurses are trained
     to notice signs of child abuse, the women's health nurse must screen all patients for IPV and be aware of signs that
     a person is a victim or perpetrator of IPV. The nurse is in a special position of providing support and resources for
     these women.

     Domestic Violence

     Also known as family violence, domestic violence is a form of abuse that occurs within a family or household. It can
     take many forms, including physical, emotional, sexual, and financial abuse. Anyone can be at risk of family
     violence, regardless of their gender, age, or socioeconomic status. However, women and children are
     disproportionately affected, with women being the most common victims of domestic violence. Identifying family
     violence can be challenging. Some signs that family violence may be occurring include unexplained injuries or
     bruises, isolation from family and friends, changes in behavior or personality, or a partner who tries to control or
     dominate their partner's thoughts or actions.

     Physical or sexual violence, stalking, and psychologic or coercive aggression by a current or former intimate partner
     is considered intimate partner violence (IPV) and is widespread across the United States. Victims can be of any
     gender and sexual orientation. The nurse is often the initial health-care professional to encounter a victim of IPV,
     and it is often the nurse's assessment that identifies the patient experiencing IPV. Compassion and understanding
     are important. Effective communication is necessary to help survivors come forward and share their experiences of
     abuse. IPV is a complex issue, and the patient may not initially consider leaving the abuser as an option. The nurse's
     responsibility is not to advise the person to leave the abuser. It is the nurse's responsibility to listen, be supportive,
     and supply resources for the time when the survivor is ready to act. In some states, nurses are required to take a
     course on mandatory reporting to understand instances where reporting violence is mandatory.

     Associated Factors

     Domestic violence and IPV are related to other types of abuse. Abusers use physical abuse to force control. They
     can also use sexual abuse to humiliate and physically harm persons. Financial abuse takes control of a person's
     ability to leave the abuser and gains total control over that person. All of these types of abuse are focused on control
     of the person by the abuser.

     Physical Abuse
     Any use of force or violence to cause physical harm, such as hitting, kicking, or choking is called physical abuse. It
     can cause serious injuries or even death. Physical abuse can occur regardless of age or gender. Physical abuse may
     look different across the lifespan; for instance, higher rates of physical abuse are reported by pregnant women
     (National Partnership for Women and Families, 2021). Serious maternal and neonatal complications occur as a
     result of IPV during pregnancy. These risks include miscarriage, hypertension, preeclampsia, premature rupture of
     membranes, preterm birth, low birth weight, and perinatal death (Eikemo et al., 2023). Other risks include vaginal
     bleeding, vomiting, dehydration, anxiety, depression, and PTSD (Selwyn, 2020). After the birth, many women will
     experience postpartum depression, anxiety, and posttraumatic stress disorders due to the violence experienced
     during pregnancy. As with other types of IPV, women of color experience more IPV during pregnancy than any other
     group of women, which leads to higher rates of maternal morbidity and mortality (Selwyn, 2020). Transgender
     persons also have higher incidences of IPV and physical abuse. In a survey conducted in 2016, 24 percent of
     transgender persons reported severe physical IPV, and 16 percent reported sexual IPV (Sherman et al., 2023).

     Access for free at openstax.org
9.2 · Domestic and Intimate Partner Violence                                                                            389

A person who is experiencing physical abuse may have visible wounds, bruising, or unexplained injuries
(Washington State Department of Social and Health Services, n.d.). However, the nurse should not assume that a
lack of an apparent wound means the patient is not a victim of abuse. Often abusers will purposely use force on
body areas that can be covered with clothing to prevent any questions from being asked. The nurse may notice
bruises in different stages of healing, a health history of frequent "falls or accidents," and fear of answering
questions especially in front of their partner. Abusers will not want their partners to be alone with health-care
providers or nurses. They are afraid the person will expose the abuse. The partner might answer questions for the
person, belittle the person or their symptoms, and make excuses for injuries such as the person being clumsy. Other
signs of physical abuse may include social isolation and withdrawal. It is important to ensure the patient is alone
when initiating any conversation about abuse to prevent angering the abuser. The nurse must also be aware of
reporting requirements in their state or organization.

        LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

Law Enforcement and Domestic Violence

After the introduction of Walker's Cycle of Violence Theory, the legal system understood more about domestic
violence, specifically intimate partner violence. Persons within the legal system were taught to look for the cycle of
violence to help identify when violence was occurring. Expert testimony used the cycle, specifically the honeymoon
phase, to explain how a woman being abused could stay with her abuser. This theory was successful in bringing light
to violence against women.

(Goodmark, 2011)

Financial Abuse
The exploitation or misuse of a person's financial resources, often by a trusted person, such as a family member or
caregiver is called financial abuse. This type of abuse can take many forms, including theft, fraud, coercion, or the
misuse of financial accounts or assets. The impact of financial abuse on a person can be severe because it can leave
them potentially destitute. Leaving the abusive partner may lead to poverty, debt, or even homelessness for the
victim of abuse. Financial abuse can also have a significant impact on a person's mental health and well-being
because it can erode their sense of trust and security, as well as their confidence in their own judgment and
decision-making abilities. Some signs of financial abuse include sudden changes in a person's financial situation,
such as unexplained withdrawals or transfers, missing funds or assets, or unpaid bills. Other red flags may include a
caregiver who seems overly interested in a person's finances, refuses to let the person make their own financial
decisions, or insists on managing all financial matters without input from the person.

Sexual Violence
The continuum of sexual activity that ranges from unwanted kissing, touching, or fondling to sexual coercion and
rape is considered sexual violence. It can expose a partner to a sexually transmitted infection (STI) or human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Reproductive coercion refers to behavior by the perpetrator that leads to
power and control over reproductive health, such as control of a pregnancy (forcing the woman to continue the
pregnancy, have an abortion, or miscarry because of injury), forbidding of sterilization, or control over access to
family planning (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists [ACOG], 2012). A partner may sabotage
contraception by intentionally not using a condom (ACOG, 2012). Of women seeking care in a family planning clinic,
20 percent reported a history of abuse through pregnancy coercion, and 15 percent reported birth control sabotage
(ACOG, 2012).

Misinformation about Intimate Partner Violence
Because many survivors of IPV do not report violence for fear of retribution, misinformation regarding IPV occurs.
Common myths include that IPV is a private family matter, that it is not a serious problem in the United States, that
IPV is an anger management problem, or that it is easy for a victim to leave their partner. Other misinformation is
that IPV occurs only in younger women; however, IPV occurs at all ages. Sometimes people do not consider IPV
abuse unless it includes physical violence. The most common myth is that the woman did something to provoke the
partner. This type of thinking is detrimental to women and perpetuates the cycle of abuse.
390  9 · Violence Against Women

             LINK TO LEARNING

     The Danger Assessment Tool (https://openstax.org/r/77dangerassmt) is a self-administered survey that is free to
     use and is available in several languages. Nurses can refer patients experiencing IPV to the National Center on
     Domestic Violence, the Trauma and Mental Health database for resources, and the National Domestic Violence
     Hotline for free, confidential support.

     How Nurses Can Recognize Victims and Perpetrators of IPV

     Health-care providers and nurses screen women for IPV; however, many women are afraid or ashamed to admit to
     being victimized. Therefore, when assessing every patient, the nurse should be alert to signs of IPV, such as
     unexplained contusions, lacerations, bite marks, or burns (Cleveland Clinic, 2023). Other signs may be less obvious,
     such as delay in seeking care, repetitive medical visits for chronic complaints, or repeat visits for anxiety or
     depression (Cleveland Clinic, 2023). The nurse can recognize a potential perpetrator if the partner speaks for the
     patient or does not leave the patient alone at any time. Perpetrators of IPV are usually hostile toward women,
     jealous, controlling, hypersensitive, and critical of the partner (Kippert, 2022).

     Several organizations have published opinions on screening for IPV. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
     recommends IPV screening for all women of childbearing age at any clinic visit; the Association of Women's Health,
     Obstetric, and Neonatal Nurses adds that women should be screened in private annually; and the Joint Commission
     requires hospitals to have written criteria for IPV screening (Bermele et al., 2018). ACOG (2012) recommends that
     all women be screened for IPV regardless of their reason for the health-care visit. See Table 9.2 for
     recommendations on screening women for IPV.

     Clinic Procedure                              Sample Statements and Questions

     Screen in a private, safe setting with the    Framing statement:
     woman alone, away from her partner,           "We've started talking to all of our patients about safe and
     friends, family, or caregiver; to get the     healthy relationships because it can have such a large impact on
     person alone, ask the patient to follow you   your health."
     to the restroom.

     Use professional language interpreters, not   Confidentiality:
     family members.                               "Before we get started, I want you to know that everything said
                                                   here is confidential, meaning that I won't talk to anyone else
                                                   about what is said unless you tell me that ... [insert the laws in
                                                   your state about what is necessary to disclose]."

     At the beginning of the assessment, tell the  Sample questions:
     woman this screening is universal and         "Has your current partner ever threatened you or made you feel
     confidential.                                 afraid?"
                                                   (That is, has your partner ever threatened to hurt you or your
                                                   children if you did or did not do something, controlled whom you
                                                   talked to or where you went, or gone into rages?)
                                                   "Has your partner ever hit, choked, or physically hurt you?"
                                                   ("Hurt" includes being hit, slapped, kicked, bitten, pushed, or
                                                   shoved.)

     TABLE 9.2 Suggestions for Screening for IPV (ACOG, 2012)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              9.3 · Sexual Abuse and Assault               391

Clinic Procedure                             Sample Statements and Questions

Incorporate IPV screening into routine       For women of reproductive age:
medical history questions.                   "Has your partner ever forced you to do something sexually that
                                             you did not want to do, or refused your request to use
                                             condoms?"
                                             "Does your partner support your decision about when or if you
                                             want to become pregnant?"
                                             "Has your partner ever tampered with your birth control or tried
                                             to get you pregnant when you didn't want to be?"

Establish relationships with community       For women with disabilities:
resources.                                   "Has your partner prevented you from using a wheelchair, cane,
                                             respirator, or other assistive device?"
                                             "Has your partner refused to help you with an important personal
                                             need such as taking your medicine, getting to the bathroom,
                                             getting out of bed, bathing, getting dressed, or getting food or
                                             drink, or threatened not to help you with these personal needs?"

Keep printed resource material with hotline
numbers and safety procedures in a
privately accessible area only available to
patients.

  Ensure all staff receives IPV training.

TABLE 9.2 Suggestions for Screening for IPV (ACOG, 2012)

How a Nurse Can Help a Person Being Abused
An important role of the nurse is to show empathy and support. The most essential way the nurse can help is to
assist the person with creating a safety plan. A safety plan is a practical, specific plan to prepare the person to leave
the abusive situation. The nurse can also assist the person in considering where to live once they have left, what to
do about children and their school, what to do about pets, and what safety precautions may be needed at the
person's place of work. The nurse can offer resources to shelters or counselors specializing in IPV or provide a social
worker consult. Nurses should never tell the patient to leave the partner; instead, providing resources will empower
the person to make her own plans and decisions regarding her future.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Nurses can share this page from the National Domestic Violence Hotline (https://openstax.org/r/77DVhotline) when
a person desires to create a safety plan.

9.3 Sexual Abuse and Assault

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Summarize the definition of sexual abuse or assault, misinformation about it, and different types of
        sexual assaults

    · Verbalize the characteristics of Rape Trauma Syndrome
    · Describe the role of the nurse trained as a SANE and what the postassault exam entails

Any unwanted sexual behavior, such as touching, groping, or rape, that violates a person's bodily autonomy and
consent is considered sexual assault or sexual abuse. It can occur within relationships, in the workplace, or in
institutions such as schools or care facilities. Survivors of sexual abuse often experience long-term psychologic and
392  9 · Violence Against Women

     emotional trauma, as well as physical injuries. Sexual abuse is a criminal act in most countries and can result in
     serious legal consequences for the perpetrator.

     Sexual assault comes in various forms, and many misconceptions surround these assaults. The rape victim will
     experience many physical and psychologic consequences of her attack. Survivors go through a process described as
     rape trauma syndrome and can experience PTSD. Nurses can be trained to assist in caring for rape survivors and
     collecting evidence to prosecute perpetrators.

     Rape

     Any vaginal or anal penetration, or oral penetration by a sex organ without consent is considered rape (U.S.
     Department of Justice, 2012). Signs of rape may be physical or psychologic. Physical signs of sexual abuse can
     include bruises around the breasts or genital area, unexplained STI, or unexplained vaginal or anal bleeding
     (Washington State Department of Social and Health Services, n.d.). Psychologic signs can be emotional distress,
     fear, anxiety, shame, and psychologic trauma, such as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) or dissociative
     disorders. The person may report they have been sexually abused. If the nurse suspects sexual abuse, they should
     follow state and agency guidelines regarding reporting. Sexual abuse may require police reports, so it is essential to
     be aware of legally required steps nurses must take.

     Types of Rape
     The definition of rape by the U.S. Department of Justice (2012) does not mention gender when defining the victim
     and perpetrator, demonstrating that rape is not always male against female. It also states that rape can be
     performed with an object, not only a body part. Rape is penetration without consent; this lack of consent could be
     caused by drugs or alcohol, by mental or physical incapacitation, or by the victim's age being below the age of
     consent (United States Department of Justice Archives, 2012).

     Types of rape include date or acquaintance rape, intimate partner rape, diminished capacity rape, age-related rape,
     incest, aggravated rape, and other types of rape (Someplace Safe, n.d.; Tracy, 2021). Two-thirds of rapes are
     committed by someone the victim knows (Tracy, 2021). This type of rape is called date rape or acquaintance rape,
     which occurs between two people who know one another. When a partner or previous partner sexually assaults the
     other partner, it is called intimate partner rape. It can include physical assault, torture, perverse sexual acts, and
     power/control over the other partner (Tracy, 2021). When a person cannot consent to a sexual act because of
     physical or intellectual disability or intoxication, the sexual act is considered diminished capacity rape. Also known
     as statutory rape, age-related rape occurs when one sexual partner is below the age of consent, which is
     determined by each state (Tracy, 2021). Rape of a close family member (e.g., parent and child, uncle and niece or
     nephew, etc.) is considered incest. Rape that includes a threat of death or bodily harm is called aggravated rape.
     Other types of rape include gang rape or rape as part of a hate crime (Tracy, 2021).

     Common Misinformation about Rape
     Rape myths are false beliefs about rape that are widely held and perpetuated (Tilton, 2022). According to Tilton
     (2022), these myths include denying the existence of rape, excusing the behavior, and denying that rape is a serious
     crime. She discusses the mistaken beliefs that women routinely lie about rape, that they could resist rape if they
     wanted to, and that consent cannot be withdrawn after it has been given. She further describes the myth that
     women who dress provocatively or who get drunk are "asking for it." These myths blame the victim and overlook the
     role of the perpetrator. Other myths include that rape always involves physical force, always happens in dark alleys
     at night, is committed by strangers, and is committed by a person incapable of caring for women (Tilton, 2022).
     These myths are debunked by the facts that most rapes are committed by someone close to the victim and do not
     always involve physical force.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Purity Culture and Rape Myths

     A study conducted by Owens et al. (2021) reviewed the relationship between the culture of valuing purity and
     culture members' acceptance of rape myths. Purity culture was described as a Christian movement focused on
     preserving female virginity. The study listed six characteristics of purity culture:

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                            9.3 · Sexual Abuse and Assault                                             393

  1. emphasis on virginity
  2. prohibition of physical affection
  3. need for modesty
  4. sexual gatekeeping
  5. denial of female bodily autonomy
  6. lack of education on sexual consent

These characteristics can be dangerous to women. Women in this culture are taught to dress modestly so that men
will not "stumble in lust." This places the burden of responsibility for men's lust on the woman and causes her
shame about her body. Women are taught sexual gatekeeping: that it is their job to deny sex to men, who
"inherently have a reduced sexual self-control." In purity culture, a woman's body belongs to her future husband,
and her worth depends on her virginity until marriage. The purity culture creates an environment where sexual
consent is not discussed. Women are taught to refuse sexual encounters prior to marriage but to never refuse their
husband's desire for sex. The purity culture actually denies the existence of spousal rape or sexual assault.

Characteristics of Rapists
Characteristics of rapists are difficult to generalize; however, one study identified the following common
characteristics among rapists: lack of empathy, narcissism, and feelings of hostility toward women (Aqel, 2020).
Perpetrators use sexual assault to dominate women because rape is a crime of power and violence (Aqel, 2020).
Rapists may see women as there to fulfill their sexual needs; women are objects instead of people. Rapists might
believe that when a woman says no, they are just "playing hard to get" or challenging him but really mean yes (Aqel,
2020). Men called incels, "involuntary celibates," believe they are entitled to a romantic or sexual relationship and
are known for extreme misogynistic ideas and promotion of violence against women (Trotta, 2022). Several types of
rapists exist: the rapist who loses self-control under the influence of drugs or alcohol; the sadist who wants to
humiliate victims; the vindictive rapist who shows anger and aggression toward women, believing he has been
rejected or wronged by past relationships with women; and rapists who deny rape and justify their actions (Aqel,
2020). The CDC (2021b) suggests the characteristics of an intimate partner perpetrator are low self-esteem, low
income, heavy drug and alcohol use, anger and hostility, and having strict gender role ideas of male dominance.

Roles of Substances in Sexual Assault
Drug-facilitated sexual assault occurs when the use of a substance (drugs or alcohol) compromises the victim's
ability to give consent for sex. Intoxication of the partner allows the perpetrator to commit sexual acts with little
resistance and can also prevent the survivor from remembering the rape. "Date-rape drugs" are used to incapacitate
victims. Alcohol is the most common "date-rape drug" and is easily accessible (Rape, Abuse & Incest National
Network [RAINN], n.d.). Other drugs include sleep aids, anxiety medications, muscle relaxers, tranquilizers, and
street drugs such as GHB, Rohypnol, ecstasy, and ketamine (RAINN, n.d.). Warning signs that a person has
unknowingly been given drugs include difficulty in breathing, feeling drunk when little to no alcohol has been
consumed, loss of bladder or bowel control, nausea, sudden change in body temperature, dizziness, disorientation,
blurred vision, and waking with no memory or missing large portions of memories (RAINN, n.d.).

Date Rape and Violence on the College Campuses
Sexual assault on college campuses is a common problem. One in five women in college experiences sexual assault,
with the highest risk in the first few months of their first or second semester in college (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services' Office on Women's Health [USDHHS/OWH], 2021). Sexual assault includes any unwanted
sexual activity, from unwanted touching to rape, and often involves alcohol or drugs. Nurses can teach college-aged
persons to get to know someone prior to spending alone-time with them, to go to parties with friends instead of
alone, to meet dates in public places, to be aware of alcohol or drug intake, to keep control of their drinks, to be
aware of their surroundings, and to always have a plan for how to get home (USDHHS/OWH, 2021).

        LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

Rape in College Communities

Why is rape so common on college campuses?
394  9 · Violence Against Women

       1. Alcohol and drugs: Assaults on campus many times involve alcohol and drugs. Many college students will
             experiment with substances for the first time in college. This can lead to incapacitation and rape.

       2. Lack of reporting sexual assault: Few college-aged women report assault. This allows perpetrators to go
             unpunished and continue to assault others.

       3. Peer pressure: College students may feel pressured to use substances, go to parties, and engage in sexual
             activities that make them uncomfortable.

     (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' Office on Women's Health, 2021)

     Rape Trauma Syndrome

     Rape trauma syndrome is the human reaction to a rape or sexual assault. There are three phases to this syndrome,
     which can be traversed in a forward and backward direction during the time of healing (Rape trauma syndrome,
     2020).

     Phases of Rape Trauma Syndrome
     The three phases of rape trauma syndrome include the acute phase, outward adjustment phase, and resolution
     phase. The acute phase occurs immediately after the assault, lasting a few days to several weeks (Rape trauma
     syndrome, 2020). The person experiences three categories of reactions:

         · expressed (the person is openly upset, cries, has anxiety attacks),
         · controlled (emotionless, acts as if nothing happened), and
         · shocked disbelief (strong sense of disorientation, difficulty in concentrating and making decisions, may have

             poor recall of the assault).

     The person then experiences the outward adjustment phase. This phase occurs once the person appears to resume
     normal life but is experiencing extreme inner turmoil (Rape trauma syndrome, 2020). The person uses minimization
     ("everything's fine"), dramatization (the attack dominates their life and identity), suppression (refuses to discuss the
     attack), explanation (analyzes what happened), and flight (moving, changing appearance) as coping mechanisms
     (Rape trauma syndrome, 2020). Nurses should be aware of the following symptoms of this phase: severe mood
     swings, fear, depression, rage, insomnia, eating difficulties, withdrawal from friends or family, difficulty in
     concentrating, and flashbacks.

     The resolution phase occurs when the attack is no longer the person's main life focus. The person has not forgotten
     the assault but has dealt with and accepted the rape as part of their life history (Rape trauma syndrome, 2020). The
     person's pain and symptoms lessen over time.

     Posttraumatic Stress Disorder after Rape
     Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) can occur after a sexual assault, and women have a higher incidence of PTSD
     after rape than men do (Nöthling et al., 2022). Nöthling et al. (2022) found a lifetime PTSD prevalence rate of 36.2
     percent in those who experienced rape. The study found that women who were younger and single and who had a
     lower level of education and lower income developed PTSD more often than those without these risk factors.
     Positive reliance (having a positive perspective of the world and oneself, positive beliefs about one's coping
     mechanisms, positive perceived control over one's emotional recovery) was found to be protective against
     developing PTSD. They also found that women with childhood trauma, depression, and alcohol use disorder also
     had a higher incidence of PTSD. Finally, the study suggested that the severity of the rape (multiple perpetrators,
     multiple sex acts, physical injuries, and longer duration of assault) can influence the degree of a survivor's PTSD.

     Care and Support of the Sexual Assault Survivor
     Sexual assault survivors can experience a variety of adverse health consequences, such as mental health problems,
     suicidal ideation, PTSD, eating disorders, sexual and reproductive health problems, and chronic illnesses (Cannon et
     al., 2023). They also are at risk for STIs, pregnancy, and risky behaviors. Nurses help these persons cope with the
     health consequences of their assault by listening and by providing referrals for mental health providers, resources
     for support groups, and suicide hotlines.

     Long-term effects of sexual abuse can be profound. Survivors may struggle with low self-esteem, trust issues, and
     difficulty in forming healthy relationships. They may also be at higher risk for developing mental health disorders,

     Access for free at openstax.org
9.3 · Sexual Abuse and Assault                                                                                          395

such as depression, anxiety, or substance misuse. In some cases, the impact of abuse can be so severe that it can
lead to suicidal thoughts or behaviors.

It is essential for anyone who has experienced sexual abuse or assault to seek help and support from trained
professionals, as well as from family and friends, to begin the healing process and move forward with their lives.
With the right help and support, healing from sexual abuse is possible.

Start by Believing Campaign
Start by Believing (SBB) is a campaign created by End Violence Against Women International (EVAWI). EVAWI (n.d.)
found that most survivors of sexual assault never report it to authorities due to the response they receive from
friends and family. The SBB campaign focuses on preparing professionals and loved ones to respond appropriately
to persons discussing their sexual assault. The EVAWI found that negative responses worsen the trauma to
survivors and allow perpetrators to go unpunished for their crimes. By others believing the survivor's story, the
person is more likely to talk about their attack and feel heard. The survivor feels that someone believes them, which
overcomes the myth that women lie about rape. Women might feel strong enough to report and prosecute the
perpetrator if they know they have support. SBB was launched in 2011, and now 701 campaigns exist around the
world. These campaigns teach everyone to believe and support the survivor.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Start by Believing emphasizes the importance of supporting survivors of sexual assault and provides guidance on
what to say (https://openstax.org/r/77Believing) to someone who says they have experienced sexual violence.

Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner

Sexual assault nurse examiner (SANE), also known as forensic nurse examiner (FNE), programs were developed to
improve services for rape survivors by training nurses to perform forensic exams with the focus on emotional,
physical, and legal ramifications of sexual assault (Cannon et al., 2023). SANE programs provide psychologic
support, comprehensive health care, forensic evidence collection, expert testimony, and coordination of
multidisciplinary services. The SANE also recommends follow-up appointments at 7 to 15 days and again at 12
weeks after the assault. SANE professionals are considered mandatory reporters.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Nurses who wish to be trained as a SANE are drawn to helping adults and children who have experienced sexual
violence. This website provides online training to become a SANE (https://openstax.org/r/77SANEtraining) from the
International Association of Forensic Nurses.

Detailed History
The SANE collects a detailed record of the person's current health history, medications, social history, and family
history. The SANE also takes a detailed history of the assault. Guidelines recommend the survivor seek care within
120 hours of the assault to ensure prevention of STIs, prescription for emergency contraception, and adequate
evidence collection (Cannon et al., 2023).

Evidence Collection
Sexual assault nurse examiners perform a medical forensic exam, a thorough head-to-toe exam to document
trauma to any part of the body for the purpose of treating trauma, treatment of possible STIs, referral for counseling
and medical follow-up, and the collection of evidence to be used in legal proceedings (Paxton, n.d.). The SANE uses
an evidence collection kit to gather physical evidence. Evidence collection usually takes place in a hospital
emergency department by trained SANEs because it offers a safe environment and is open 24 hours a day. Some
colleges and community centers provide SANE collection sites (Cannon et al., 2023). The SANE is trained in
collecting the appropriate evidence, and studies have shown that prosecutors have increased the number of guilty
pleas from perpetrators because of better evidence collection and evidence of force noted by SANEs (Ledray &
396  9 · Violence Against Women

     Simmelink, 2020).

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Preparing for the SANE Exam

     A patient who has been raped may come to the emergency department in unstable condition. They may have
     injuries that need attending to prior to the SANE exam.

     The nurse should:

       1. Assess if the patient has cuts or broken bones that need immediate care.
       2. Determine any language barriers or cultural considerations.
       3. Discuss consent for the SANE exam.
       4. Administer medications as ordered.

     Prevention of Sexually Transmitted Infections
     The evidence kit collected by the SANE includes testing for STIs. The most frequently diagnosed STIs are gonorrhea,
     chlamydia, and trichomoniasis; however, HIV, hepatitis B, and syphilis testing is also completed (Ragpa et al., 2019).
     Prophylactic antibiotics are given for gonorrhea, chlamydia, and trichomoniasis; and postexposure prophylaxis for
     HIV is administered (Ragpa et al., 2019). Postexposure hepatitis B vaccination along with immune globulin is
     recommended in persons previously unvaccinated (Ragpa et al., 2019).

     Prevention of Pregnancy
     A pregnancy test is performed with the evidence collection. If the result is negative, emergency contraception will
     be offered to prevent pregnancy after a sexual assault. The nurse explains that emergency contraception is not an
     abortion pill; it delays ovulation to prevent fertilization of the egg. (See Chapter 5 Family Planning for more
     information on emergency contraception.)

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     Emergency Contraception

         · Emergency Contraception: Ella
         · Generic Name: ulipristal
         · Trade Name: Ella
         · Class/Action: emergency contraceptive/progesterone agonist-antagonist
         · Route/Dosage: oral, 30 mg
         · High Alert/Black Box Warning: none
         · Indications: emergency contraception
         · Mechanism of Action: binds to progesterone receptor, thereby inhibiting or delaying ovulation; alters

             endometrium, possibly preventing implantation
         · Nursing Implications: Discuss side effects of headache, abdominal pain, nausea, dysmenorrhea, fatigue,

             and/or dizziness. The nurse should provide information on a contraceptive method if patient is not already
             using a method. The nurse should evaluate patient's use of their typical contraception to determine if an
             alternative method would be more effective.

     Prosecution of the Perpetrator
     The U.S. Department of Justice refers to publications by the Rape, Abuse, & Incest National Network (RAINN) that
     state the rape survivor can make an initial report, and the police can decide to move forward with the investigation;
     however, only the state can decide to press charges (RAINN, n.d.). Even if the state does not press charges,
     reporting the crime can help shed light on the perpetrator for future crimes. If the case goes to trial, the survivor will
     most likely be asked to testify; however, every state decides on rules and resources to protect rape survivors.
     Advocates are usually assigned to survivors to help with this process.

     Access for free at openstax.org
9.4 · Human Trafficking                                                                                                    397

Self-Care for Nurses of Rape Survivors
Caring for women surviving rape can result in nurses developing their own stress and trauma. Those nurses must
engage in activities that will allow them to let go of stress and trauma caused by discussing assaults and performing
rape exams. Self-care is the action of promoting physical, emotional, intellectual, and spiritual wellness. Nurses,
especially those caring for women after rape, must practice self-care. Self-care includes caring for the mind, body,
and spirit in an individual way that brings that person peace. Activities of self-care can be meditation, exercise, yoga,
art, music, and so on. To care for others, nurses must care for themselves.

9.4 Human Trafficking

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Discuss the definition of human trafficking, and describe at-risk populations, traffickers, and regional
        trafficking trends in the United States

    · Describe the nursing care for the person who has been trafficked, including how to recognize and treat
        those people

    · Construct a nursing care plan for the person who has been trafficked

Human trafficking is a crime that involves the exploitation of people for forced labor or commercial sex (United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 2020). Human trafficking is a global problem that includes women, children, and
men. Nurses and health-care providers should identify and provide help for people being trafficked.

Human Trafficking: Definition

The targeting, relocation of, detention of, or receiving of a person by any means possible to achieve control over that
person for exploitation is considered human trafficking (WHO, 2012). The National Human Trafficking Hotline
(NHTH; 2024, p. 1) defines trafficking as "stealing freedom for profit." People are trafficked for many different forms
of forced labor and sexual exploitation. Victims of human trafficking are forced to work excessively long hours, live in
overcrowded or unsafe conditions, experience physical abuse and malnourishment, and are unable to move freely or
leave their place of work or residence (Hodge & Lietz, 2018; Piscitelli & Pienaar, 2019). Consequences of human
trafficking include physical and relationship problems, psychologic issues, and chronic health conditions (CDC,
2022b).

Factors Related to Human Traffickers
Human traffickers do not have a common background, race, gender, or nationality. Traffickers can be strangers,
family members, partners, or acquaintances. Signs of possible trafficking for labor situations include the following: a
person in an overwhelming romantic relationship is suddenly showered with gifts and money by a person with a
large age difference or large difference in financial status; a person is developing a close relationship with a person
solely known on social media; a person is being offered a job that seems too good to be true; and a person is being
recruited for a job that requires the person to move far away, but the recruiter is vague and reluctant to answer
questions about the job (NHTH, 2023). People who are being trafficked for sex may want to stop participating in
commercial sex but cannot leave the situation; they live where they work or are transported between home and
workplace by guards. They may work in a strip club or illicit massage business where they are pressured to perform
sex acts for money; or they have a controlling person (parent, guardian, partner, etc.) who will not allow them to
speak or be alone with anyone (NHTH, 2023).

Populations at High Risk for Human Trafficking
Some groups are at higher risk for human trafficking, such as women and children. One-third of adolescents who
have run away from home are recruited into sex trafficking within 48 hours of being homeless (Camak 2022). People
living in poverty or unsafe situations, undocumented immigrants, and those with a history of abuse or trauma are at
higher risk (CDC, 2022b; International Labour Organization, 2022). People of color and LGBTQIA+ persons are also
at higher risk than other demographic groups (NHTH, 2023). Traffickers recognize and target people who are at
higher risk, such as runaways, those with drug or alcohol use issues, or those with a caregiver or family member with
substance use issues (NHTH, 2023). Identifying victims of human trafficking can be challenging because they may
be kept in isolation, have limited contact with others, or be forced to deny their situation. Traffickers prey on
populations at high risk for trafficking by developing trust, rescuing them from bad situations, helping them, and
398  9 · Violence Against Women

     then demanding they "repay" the kindness through servitude (Camak, 2022).

     Regional Trends in the United States of America
     Human trafficking occurs everywhere; however, Asia and the Pacific region have the highest number of victims of
     human trafficking (McGeough & Van Schooneveld, 2023). Asia and the Pacific reported 29.3 million cases of human
     trafficking, while the Americas reported 5.1 million cases (McGeough & Van Schooneveld, 2023). In North America,
     most human trafficking victims are women subjected to sexual trafficking (McGeough & Van Schooneveld, 2023).

     In 2020, 2,198 people were referred to the U.S. Attorneys' Department of Justice for human trafficking, which is a
     62 percent increase in 10 years. Human trafficking cases have been reported in all 50 states, with an increase in
     trafficking by a family member, guardian, or intimate partner (U.S. Department of State, 2022). California, Texas, and
     Florida have the highest numbers of reported cases of human trafficking (National Human Trafficking Hotline, n.d.),
     likely due to their large populations, international borders, and transportation networks. Other areas with major
     urban centers (New York, Michigan, and Georgia) also attract traffickers (National Human Trafficking Hotline, n.d.).

     Preventing Human Trafficking
     Programs to increase community awareness of human trafficking and to address exploitation are designed to
     prevent trafficking (CDC, 2022b). Strategies to encourage healthy relationship behaviors, foster safe homes and
     neighborhoods, identify and address vulnerabilities during health-care visits, reduce demand for commercial sex,
     and end business profits from trafficking-related transactions have been suggested by the CDC (2022b). The United
     States enacted the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 in an effort to prevent human
     trafficking (2000).

     Nursing Care for the Person Who Has Been Trafficked

     Nurses can help women subjected to trafficking by providing sensitive, empathetic care. The nurse is trained to
     recognize the signs of a person who is being trafficked in order to care for the person but also to report the
     trafficking incident. Nurses are required by law to report trafficking victims under the age of 18 years; unfortunately,
     nurses are not required to report adult victims of trafficking (Byrne et al., 2019; Camak, 2022). Intervening in cases
     of human trafficking is crucial to prevent further harm to victims. In some cases, it may be necessary to involve a
     professional interpreter, as victims may not speak the local language or be hesitant to share their experiences.
     Overall, nurses can raise awareness about human trafficking and take steps to identify victims and provide help.

     How to Recognize Victims of Human Trafficking
     Recognizing victims of human trafficking can be difficult for nurses and health-care providers due to the victims
     being threatened with physical violence or other consequences if they are discovered. Training can help nurses
     recognize signs of human trafficking, such as by looking closely at a patient's location and occupation, by being
     attentive to behavioral and physical signs, and by using screening tools. For example, sex trafficking victims have
     been found on the street, in massage parlors, at escort services, at truck stops, and in hotels, brothels, and strip
     clubs (Camak, 2022). Behavioral signs that a person may be a victim of trafficking include acting fearful, anxious,
     depressed, submissive, or tense around someone they know; deferring to another person to speak for them; and
     avoiding eye contact (Department of Human Services [DHS], 2020). Physical signs can include evidence of physical
     or sexual abuse; signs of physical restraint, confinement, or torture; or signs of being harmed or deprived of food,
     water, sleep, medical care, or personal possessions (DHS, 2020). Table 9.3 provides nurses with examples of red
     flags of potential victims of human trafficking.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          9.4 · Human Trafficking        399

Patient                             Red Flags

Physical signs of trafficking           · branding or tattoos on the back of the neck, under arms, under breast
victims                                     tissue

                                        · tattoos showing ownership
                                        · bite marks
                                        · petechiae on wrists
                                        · wounds in various stages of repair
                                        · untreated infections
                                        · burn marks
                                        · malnutrition

Characteristics of trafficking      · vulnerability
victims                             · runaways
                                    · homelessness
                                    · abused children and adolescents
                                    · substance misuse

Child/adolescent trafficking        · parent possibly a victim of trafficking
victims                             · sex worker under the age of 18
                                    · younger children possibly belligerent or withdrawn

Other signs of trafficking victims  · scripted stories or explanations not matching the situation or injury
                                    · avoidance of eye contact
                                    · resistant to touch
                                    · inability to identify a home address
                                    · lack of identification
                                    · gaps in memory

Characteristics of traffickers      · verbal insults
                                    · known as "Daddy" or "my boyfriend"
                                    · speaks for the patient

TABLE 9.3 Red Flags for Human Trafficking (Camak, 2022)

Nursing Assessment and Diagnosis

Recognizing a person who has been trafficked is the first goal of nursing care; 50 percent to 80 percent of trafficked
people have seen a health-care provider while being trafficked (Byrne et al., 2019). The nurse must develop a level
of trust prior to assessing for signs of abuse. Many times, a person being trafficked is not allowed to speak for
themselves; therefore, the nurse should find a way to interview the patient in private. The nurse must create a safe,
nonthreatening environment for the interview. The nurse assesses the patient's living and working conditions,
amount of control over their life, mental health status, physical health, and psychosocial health (Byrne et al., 2019).
The nurse can ask the following questions during the interview:

  1. Can you leave your job if you want?
  2. Can you come and go as you please?
  3. Have you been threatened or physically harmed in any way?
  4. Where do you sleep or eat?
  5. Do you sleep in a bed, on a cot, or on the floor?
  6. Do you have to ask permission to go to the bathroom, eat, or sleep?
  7. Has anyone threatened your family?
400  9 · Violence Against Women

       8. Is anyone forcing you to do anything you do not want to do? (Camak, 2022)

     Nursing assessment findings may include physical and emotional red flags. A person's medical history might also
     have clues to a history of human trafficking, such as repeat abortions; lack of medical care; and history of PTSD,
     suicide attempts, and alcohol or drug addiction (Byrne et al., 2019).

     Nursing diagnoses are centered on the actual or potential needs related to the physical and psychologic needs of
     the person being trafficked. The most common nursing diagnoses include:

         · risk for injury related to physical abuse
         · ineffective coping related to fear, stress, and lack of support
         · hopelessness related to feelings of wanting to escape trafficking
         · risk for injury related to lack of shelter

             LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

     The Action-Means-Purpose Model

     The nurse can use the Action-Means-Purpose Model (AMP Model) to determine if a patient meets the federal
     definition of human trafficking. If the nurse can confirm one element from each area of the model, the legal
     definition has been met. The elements are as follows:

     Action: induces, recruits, harbors, transports, provides, or obtains
     Means: force, fraud, coercion
     Purpose: commercial sex, labor, or services

     (National Human Trafficking Hotline, 2024)

     Nursing Plan and Implementation
     The nursing plan for persons being trafficked includes a team approach with health-care providers, social workers,
     counselors, and possibly law enforcement. Nursing interventions should be individualized and compassionate,
     helping the patient to reestablish control, a sense of safety, and independence (Camak, 2022). The nurse provides
     supportive care and reassurance. Interventions can include providing resources for shelters and support groups,
     encouraging counseling, educating the person on legal assistance, and preventing further abuse.

     9.5 Social and Cultural Practices of Violence Against Women

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Describe social violence and the populations affected
         · Define the different types of hate crimes
         · Identify the inequality in child and forced marriages

     Violence against women can be directed against women in general, or it can be focused on a group of women or an
     individual. Violence against women can be perpetrated as social violence, hate crimes, acid attacks, forced child
     marriages, and more. Social violence includes violence against groups such as members of the LGBTQIA+
     community. Hate crimes include violence based on race, religion, gender, and so forth. Acid attacks, honor killings,
     and female genital mutilation are types of hate crimes. Child and forced marriages are types of gender-inequality
     crimes. Nurses should be knowledgeable of these practices and empower their patients through education.

     Social Violence

     Also known as community violence, social violence refers to the intentional use of force or power to harm
     individuals or groups within a community (CDC, 2022c). This can take many forms, including gang violence, hate
     crimes, and mass shootings. Those who are at risk of social violence may include persons who belong to
     marginalized communities, such as racial or ethnic minorities, the LGBTQIA+ community, or those who are
     homeless or living in poverty (CDC, 2022c). Incels, who have extreme misogynistic views, are perpetrators of social
     violence by inciting violence against women.

     Access for free at openstax.org
9.5 · Social and Cultural Practices of Violence Against Women                                                             401

        LINK TO LEARNING

Incels are men who are involuntary celibates (https://openstax.org/r/77incels) who believe they are entitled to
relationships with or sexual access to women. Because of the online activity of many incel communities, incels are
viewed as having potential to pose a danger to others.

Identifying social violence can be challenging because it often occurs suddenly and unpredictably. Some signs that
social violence may be imminent include threats or acts of violence, the presence of weapons or other dangerous
objects, or social media posts or other communications that indicate an intent to harm. Nurses play a crucial role in
identifying signs of violence or abuse while patients are under their care. Beyond reporting the abuse, nurses may
not be able to help a particular patient. But nurses can help society by implementing comprehensive violence
prevention programs, providing training and education to health-care workers regarding signs of violence and abuse,
improving communications between staff and patients when abuse is suspected, and ensuring that appropriate
support is available to those who have experienced violence. Nurses can provide support and resources to those
who have been impacted by social violence, including counseling, mental health care, and other forms of support to
help them heal from the trauma of violence.

Hate Crimes

A hate crime is a criminal offense motivated by prejudice or bias against an individual or group based on their
perceived race, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity, or other characteristic (Levin & Nolan, 2019).
For example, LGBTQIA+ persons are nine times more likely to be victims of violent hate crimes than non-LGBTQIA+
persons and are more likely to have a white assailant (88 percent vs. 54 percent) (UCLA School of Law, Williams
Institute, 2022). Hate crimes can take many forms, including physical assault, verbal harassment, property damage,
or even murder (U.S. Department of Justice, 2024). Anyone who belongs to a group that is historically marginalized
or discriminated against can be at risk of being the target of a hate crime.

Acid Attacks
An acid attack is premeditated attacks in which acid is thrown like a weapon on someone, usually a woman, to
torment, hurt, burn, and disfigure them. Acid attacks are hate crimes and are sometimes known as acid violence.
Sulfuric acid is the most common acid used in these crimes. Acid attacks are not meant to kill; instead, they are
meant to permanently scar the victim and leave a lifelong reminder of the violence. When acid is thrown on the
body, it causes the skin to melt. If the acid is not washed off quickly, it can dissolve bone and cause disfigurement,
hair loss, blindness, and hearing loss (Goswami & Handa, 2020). Globally, acid attacks are most commonly found in
India, Pakistan, Norway, Malaysia, the Gambia, South Africa, Jamaica, and Egypt, although they can occur anywhere
(Goswami & Handa, 2020). Documented causes of acid attacks include a male-dominated society, domestic
violence, peer jealousy, vengeance by rejected and rebuffed lovers, and safeguarding the honor of the family
(Goswami & Handa, 2020). To combat acid attacks, various measures are being implemented globally, including
stricter regulations on the sale and purchase of acid, increased public awareness campaigns, and enhanced legal
penalties for perpetrators. Survivors, like Natalia Ponce de León of Colombia (Figure 9.3), have campaigned for
stricter legal penalties.
402  9 · Violence Against Women

     FIGURE 9.3 Acid Attack Natalia Ponce de León (right) of Colombia received the 2017 International Women of Courage Award. As the
     survivor of an acid attack, Ponce de León campaigned for stricter laws to punish perpetrators of acid attacks. (credit: "First Lady Melania
     Trump Poses for a Photo With International Women of Courage Awardee Natalia Ponce de Leon of Colombia" by U.S. Department of State/
     flickr, Public Domain)

     Honor Killings
     An honor killing, the killing of a family member, usually a woman, who has brought "shame" on the family, has been
     practiced for hundreds of years and is most commonly seen in North Africa and the Middle East, with the highest
     number of honor killings in Pakistan (AlQahtani et al., 2022). In medieval Europe, the male head of a household had
     the right to kill an unmarried daughter who was sexually active or a wife found cheating on her husband
     (Government of Canada, 2021). Today, men continue to practice honor killings for the same reasons; however, the
     woman does not need to actually commit a transgression. The mere suspicion of "improper" behavior brings shame
     to the family, causing the family member to kill the woman to eliminate the source of shame (Government of
     Canada, 2021). Other behaviors for which honor killings are committed include getting pregnant outside marriage,
     being a rape survivor, refusing an arranged marriage, wanting a divorce, and attending college against the male head
     of the household's will (AlQahtani et al., 2022). Causes of honor killings include deep-rooted patriarchal dominance,
     desire to maintain social status, poor education, and a sense that violence against women can be justified
     (AlQahtani et al., 2022).

     Female Genital Mutilation
     Female genital mutilation (FGM), also known as female circumcision, is the act of removing part or all of the external
     female genitalia for nonmedical reasons, and it is a form of violence against women (WHO, 2024; Williams-Breault,
     2018). FGM is usually performed between birth and adolescence and generally occurs in western, eastern, and
     northeastern areas of Africa, the Middle East, and Asia (WHO, 2024). Approximately 200 million women alive today
     have experienced FGM (WHO, 2024). Historically, this practice was seen as a cultural rite; however, the WHO (2024)
     notes that FGM is an international violation of human rights and is a brutal form of discrimination against the female
     gender. Acute complications of FGM include severe pain, hemorrhage, fever, infections, urinary problems, shock,
     and death (Williams-Breault , 2018). Long-term complications can include vaginal infections, urinary infections, pain
     with intercourse, difficulty with childbirth, scar tissue, depression, anxiety, and PTSD (Williams-Breault, 2018).
     Nurses may encounter more patients who have had FGM due to the immigration of people from areas where it is

     Access for free at openstax.org
9.6 · Psychological Trauma of Violence Against Women                                                                    403

common. Nurses can provide compassionate care and education on urinary and vaginal health to prevent infections.

Child Marriages and Forced Marriages

Child marriage is the marriage of a person under 18 years of age to an adult. Child marriage is the result of gender
inequality where girls are seen as property or as not having a voice. Married girls under 18 are at high risk for
domestic violence, poor economic and health outcomes, and pregnancy during adolescence (UNICEF, 2023).
Factors enabling child marriage include poverty, lack of education, limited access to health care, and a culture
where families marry off their daughters to reduce economic burden or to secure their daughter's future (UNICEF,
2023). In the United States, many child marriages occur in religiously conservative areas as a result of a young
person becoming pregnant and the parents insisting they are married to not bring shame on the family (Padilla,
2023). Most states have minimum age limits for marriage (10 states: 17 years; 23 states: 16 years; 2 states: 15
years; 5 states: no minimum age); however, most states make exceptions to the minimum age limit with parental
consent (Padilla, 2023).

Forced marriage is similar to child marriage because many forced marriages occur in girls under 18. Forced marriage
can occur at any age, however, and includes the lack of consent of one or both persons (U.S. Department of State,
2024). In 2021, 22 million people in the world were living in a forced marriage, an increase of 6.6 million people
between 2016 and 2021 (International Labour Organization, 2022). In many forced marriages, younger girls are
made to marry older men. Girls are not allowed to stay in school, are often isolated, and lose their freedom (Save the
Children, n.d.). With forced marriage comes forced pregnancy. Girls giving birth at very young ages have more
complications due to their immature bodies and lack of knowledge or education. Girls in forced marriages also
experience more poverty and domestic violence, with approximately 84 percent of victims of forced marriage being
physically abused (Lindner, 2023).

        LINK TO LEARNING

United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) is committed to ending the practice of child marriage. UNICEF and United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) have joined together to create a global program to end child marriage
(https://openstax.org/r/77childmarriage) in 12 of the most high-prevalence areas.

9.6 Psychological Trauma of Violence Against Women

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Discuss the definition of psychologic abuse and the role of the nurse
    · Identify clinical manifestations of IPV
    · Describe programs to assist women who have been victimized

Safety is a basic human need and always receives priority in patient care. Nurses typically use Maslow's Hierarchy of
Needs (Figure 9.4) to prioritize urgent patient needs, with the bottom two rows of the pyramid receiving top priority.
Safety is intertwined with basic physiologic needs.
404  9 · Violence Against Women

     FIGURE 9.4 Abraham Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs suggests that safety is a fundamental requirement for
     persons to fulfill their basic physiologic and psychologic needs, making it a crucial component of the pyramid of human needs.
     (modification of work from Psychiatric-Mental Health Nursing. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Psychologic abuse violates a person's feelings of safety and self-worth, inhibiting their basic human needs. Because
     their basic human needs are not met, the overall health of the victim declines. Abuse eventually affects a woman's
     reproductive and mental health. Violence also destroys relationships and decreases the victim's confidence. Nurses
     can lobby organizations and lawmakers to help stop violence against women.

     Psychologic Abuse

     The type of abuse that can include harassment; verbal abuse such as name calling, degradation, and blaming;
     threats; stalking; and isolation with the intent to attack the person's self-esteem and self-worth, making the person
     reliant on their abuser is psychologic abuse (National Network to End Domestic Violence, 2021). Abusers often
     isolate their partner from family members and friends. They may deprive them of essentials, such as food, money,
     transportation, and access to health care (National Network to End Domestic Violence, 2021). The abuser thrives on
     control and manipulation. The abuser can be a coworker, boss, family member, intimate partner, or acquaintance.
     Name-calling, insults, belittling or threats can lead to long-term psychologic harm to the person (National Network
     to End Domestic Violence, 2021). Signs of psychologic abuse may include being withdrawn or isolated, emotional
     reactions that are not consistent with the situation, or other behavior outside the norm for that person (Washington
     State Department of Social and Health Services, n.d.).

     The nurse who suspects a patient is experiencing psychologic abuse should take steps similar to those for
     suspected physical abuse. The patient should be given resources and referrals. The nurse should also educate the
     patient that psychologic abuse is as significant a health concern as physical abuse.

     Clinical Manifestations of Psychologic Abuse

     Psychologic abuse leads to outward manifestations of the abuse, such as mental health problems, cognitive issues,
     reproductive issues, and relationship problems. Many times, abusers will threaten to hurt themselves if the person
     decides to end the relationship (National Network to End Domestic Violence, 2021). Victims of psychologic abuse
     become fearful of ending their relationship or disagreeing with the abuser. Victims can isolate, become depressed,
     or feel anxious around the abuser (National Network to End Domestic Violence, 2021). These manifestations of
     violence and abuse may be the red flags needed for nurses, health-care providers, and family members to recognize

     Access for free at openstax.org
9.6 · Psychological Trauma of Violence Against Women                                                                      405

that abuse is occurring.

Effects of Violence on Mental Health
Psychologic abuse can lead to depression, anxiety, and suicidal ideation. People can feel confusion, shame, and
guilt over being in the relationship (National Network to End Domestic Violence, 2021). The victim feels there is no
way out of the horrible situation except death. Suicidal ideation can be a response to mental health conditions, life
events, substance use problems, and violence. People at risk of suicide may be more likely to engage in risky
behaviors due to their underlying mental health crisis. Nurses may recognize their patient is depressed, using drugs,
and feels hopeless. These could be signs of abuse leading to thoughts of suicide. It is important to provide support
and a safety plan for people who are at risk for suicide. Referrals to mental health providers are essential for these
patients.

Effects of Violence on Cognition
Survivors of violence experience immediate consequences, but they also suffer long-term consequences. Violence
can affect short-term memory, cognitive control, and emotion regulation by altering brain organization and
communication between brain regions (Mattheiss et al., 2022). This leads to lower grades in school, poor
performance at work, and financial issues. Survivors of violence may have difficulty in making decisions. In children,
violence can impact the development of their mental functions and can increase the risk of developing personality
disorders during adolescence (Zucchelli & Giuseppe, 2019).

Effects of IPV on Reproductive Health
Women who experience violence undergo stress. Stress induces the release of cortisol, which then causes
inflammation. Recent research has shown a correlation between chronic stress and a dysregulation of endocrine-
inflammatory-epigenetic changes, which may lead to the development and progression of endometriosis
(Hutchinson et al., 2023). Infertility has been linked to IPV (Stellar et al., 2016). IPV has also been associated with
unintended pregnancies, abortions, miscarriages, and STIs.

        CULTURAL CONTEXT

Infertility and IPV in Iran

Iran's infertility rate is 24.9 percent, and its IPV frequency varies between 14 percent and 61 percent (Alijani et al.,
2022). Alijani et al.'s 2022 study focused on women being treated at an infertility clinic at a university medical
center. They were interviewed for IPV using a questionnaire-screening. According to this study, 88.9 percent of the
infertile women reported physical violence, and 85.8 percent reported psychologic violence.

Effects of Violence on Families
People who experience IPV can struggle to be good parents due to their low self-esteem and lack of confidence.
They often lack support because of the isolation that some perpetrators cause; therefore, when children are sick or
mothers need help with small children, they have very few people to ask for help. Preschool children who observe
domestic violence may experience nightmares, developmental delays, and loss of memory functioning (U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs, 2021). Children may have difficulty expressing their emotions, show signs of PTSD,
and have a difficult time making friends (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2021). Adolescents may be forced into
the role of adult and become the caretaker of younger children. They may feel ashamed or embarrassed about their
family; possibly act out and make poor choices; explore sex, drugs, or alcohol; and shut down emotionally (U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs, 2021). Nurses should consider resources for the whole family when discussing IPV
with patients.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Interventions on Behalf of Women

The CDC has developed violence prevention programs (https://openstax.org/r/77violnceprev) to address IPV. Their
site also includes facts about IPV, risks and protective factors, prevention strategies, discussions of different types
of IPV, and specific programs for dating and teen violence (CDC, 2021a). The CDC's prevention strategies include
teaching safe and healthy relationship skills, engaging influential adults and peers, disrupting the developmental
pathways toward partner violence, creating protective environments, strengthening economic supports for families,
and supporting survivors to increase safety and lessen harm. The CDC (2021a) also developed the National Intimate
406  9 · Violence Against Women

     Partner and Sexual Violence Survey (NISVS) (https://openstax.org/r/77NISVS) to collect the most current and
     comprehensive data on IPV, sexual violence, and stalking in the United States. These data are collected to help
     create violence prevention strategies.

     Violence Prevention Timeline
     The CDC has developed a timeline devoted to mapping the progression of violence as a public health problem. The
     timeline begins in 1979 with the U.S. Surgeon General's Report, Healthy People, which identified violence as one of
     15 priority areas for improvement for the nation (CDC, 2022a). The CDC established the Division of Injury
     Epidemiology and Control to study injuries and violence in 1986. In 1994, Congress passed the Violence Against
     Women Act that aided in preventing IPV and provided grants for rape prevention and education (CDC, 2022a).

     In 2000, the WHO also created a Department of Injuries and Violence Prevention. The timeline then presented the
     release of evidence showing the effects of IPV on public health and the programs that were developed in response
     to this research. The timeline continues to this day as the CDC continues to find ways to battle violence against
     women.

     National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey
     In 1998, a joint project between the National Institute of Justice and the CDC was created to discover more about
     IPV and sexual violence in the United States. The National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey was
     launched. The investigators used telephone surveys to learn more information about violence against women. The
     results showed the prevalence and incidence of rape, physical assault, and stalking; the rate of injury among those
     incidences; and injured victims' use of health-care services (U.S. Department of Justice, 1998). The survey found
     that women from underrepresented groups had higher incidences of IPV and rape, that rape is more common for
     women under the age of 18, and that stalking is a significant social problem (U.S. Department of Justice, 1998). The
     survey provided data so that programs would be aimed at improving the negative data results.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                9 · Summary 407

Summary

9.1 Incidence, History, and Psychosocial Factors

Violence against women is a worldwide problem, and some populations are at a higher risk. To understand and
prevent violence against women, theories have been developed and integrated into the health-care and legal
systems. Nurses have integrated IPV screening into their assessments and are trained to recognize signs of IPV.
Nurses can provide referrals to shelters, offer emotional support, provide education, and in some states contact
authorities in cases of IPV.

9.2 Domestic and Intimate Partner Violence

Violence in the home affects all members of the household. Intimate partner violence can include physical,
financial, and sexual violence. The perpetrator's aim is to control the partner by any means possible. Some
misinformed people believe that IPV is a private family issue. Nurses can educate people that IPV is a serious
problem that can lead to death. Nurses will screen all patients for IPV privately. Nurses can provide support,
empathy, and resources to help empower the woman to develop a plan of safety for her and her family.

9.3 Sexual Abuse and Assault

Rape is a violation of a person's bodily autonomy and consent. Rapists target victims of any age and in any
environment. College campuses typically have high rates of sexual assault. Survivors of sexual abuse must go
through the process of dealing with their trauma and often experience long-term psychologic and emotional issues if
they do not have assistance with healing. Rape occurs in different ways, and nurses can educate their patients on
how to reduce their risk in certain situations. SANEs can help sexual assault survivors mentally and physically. The
job of caring for rape survivors is taxing, and the nurse must practice self-care to avoid burnout.

9.4 Human Trafficking

Human trafficking involves the exploitation of people. Traffickers prey on those who are at risk and alone, develop
trust, and then recruit them into a life of servitude. Nurses must be educated on getting the person alone to identify
red flags for trafficking. The health-care system must work as a team to provide care and resources for these victims
as well as develop policies for screening for trafficking.

9.5 Social and Cultural Practices of Violence Against Women

Social violence is violence aimed at groups. Hate crimes focus violence on people due to their perceived race,
religion, gender, or sexuality. The purpose of acid attacks is to permanently disfigure the woman to remind her of her
"transgression" against the perpetrator; honor killings focus on killing the family member who has brought shame
on the family. Forced marriages are often child marriages. These women lose their childhood and are forced to live
in poverty and have children at very young ages. Nurses can educate the public on these types of violence and
support women who have experienced such events.

9.6 Psychological Trauma of Violence Against Women

Safety is a human right. When a woman is victimized and stripped of her safety, she has lost a basic human right. As
seen with Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, safety is a foundational, basic component to one's well-being. Psychologic
abuse removes a person's feelings of safety and self-worth. IPV and abuse cause stress, which can manifest as
physical and psychologic symptoms. A woman's reproductive and mental health can be compromised. Family
relationships suffer. Cognitive functioning in victims of IPV and in children observing IPV is affected. The CDC has
helped develop programs to shed light on IPV and to provide data to help focus efforts on IPV prevention programs.
Nurses can assist in community programs, education, and advocacy for women's safety.

Key Terms

acid attack premeditated attack in which acid is thrown on someone to torment, hurt, burn, and disfigure them
acquaintance rape (also: date rape) occurs between two people who know one another
age-related rape also known as statutory rape; occurs when one sexual partner is below the age of consent,

    determined by each state
aggravated rape rape that includes the threat of death or bodily harm
408 9 · Assessments

date rape (also: acquaintance rape) occurs between two people who know one another
diminished capacity rape occurs when the victim cannot consent to a sexual act because of physical or

    intellectual disability or intoxication
domestic violence form of abuse that occurs within a family or household; can take many forms, including

    physical, emotional, sexual, and financial abuse
financial abuse exploitation or misuse of a person's financial resources, often by a trusted person, such as a

    family member or caregiver
hate crime criminal offense motivated by prejudice or bias against an individual or group based on their race,

    ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity, or other characteristic
honor killing killing of a family member who has brought shame on the family
incest rape of a close family member (e.g., parent and child, uncle and niece or nephew, etc.)
intimate partner rape occurs when a partner or previous partner sexually assaults the other partner
physical abuse any use of force or violence to cause physical harm, such as hitting, kicking, or choking
psychologic abuse abuse that can include harassment; verbal abuse such as name-calling, degradation, and

    blaming; threats; stalking; and isolation
rape any vaginal or anal penetration, or oral penetration by a sex organ without consent
sexual abuse (also: sexual assault) any unwanted sexual behavior, such as touching, groping, or rape, that

    violates a person's bodily autonomy and consent
sexual assault (also: sexual abuse) any unwanted sexual behavior, such as touching, groping, or rape, that

    violates a person's bodily autonomy and consent
sexual violence continuum of sexual activity that covers unwanted kissing, touching, or fondling; sexual coercion;

    rape; and control of the outcome of a pregnancy and the forbidding of sterilization or reproductive health services
violence against women any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual,

    or mental harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion, or arbitrary deprivation of liberty,
    whether occurring in public or private life

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. The nurse is educating a patient on what constitutes IPV. What is an example of an act of IPV?
           a. child endangerment
           b. stalking
           c. workplace harassment
           d. legal allegations

    2. Alaska Natives experience higher levels of violence, poverty, and drug and alcohol use, and fewer resources.
        How can the nurse help these patients?
           a. Tell the patient to stop using substances.
           b. Provide resources that are specific for this population.
           c. Tell the patient to call the police.
           d. Report the abuse to the social worker.

    3. The nurse understands that many patients who experience violence become homeless to escape their
        situation. How can the nurse help these patients?
           a. Tell the patient to go back home in order to have a place to live.
           b. Tell the patient to get a job in order to have a place to stay.
           c. Refer the patient to a shelter.
           d. Refer the patient to the police.

    4. The nurse is caring for a woman with a broken arm. Her partner brings in flowers and balloons and is overly
        affectionate. What phase of the cycle of violence would the nurse suspect?
           a. tension-building
           b. acute battering incident

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        9 · Assessments 409

         c. honeymoon phase
         d. loving phase

 5. A nurse is caring for a patient who discloses they are experiencing family violence. What nursing action
      should the nurse take to support the patient and promote their safety?
         a. Provide a safe environment for the patient to further disclose their experience.
         b. Converse with the patient's partner and ask why IPV is occurring in their home.
         c. Report the patient's accusations to other members of the family.
         d. Propose a plan to leave the abuser today.

 6. A nurse is caring for a patient who is a victim of intimate partner violence. The patient has indicated they do
      not wish to address the violence in their relationship at this time. What should the nurse do to ensure the
      patient's safety and well-being?
         a. Call the police and report the abuse.
         b. Encourage the patient to stay in the abusive relationship to prevent further harm.
         c. Provide the patient with information about community resources and support groups.
         d. Ignore the signs of abuse and focus on providing medical intervention.

 7. The nurse talks with the patient about her bank statement being much less than it should be. The patient
      shares with the nurse that her partner has been stealing money from her account. What should the nurse do
      to help the patient?
         a. Explain that she can work more to make more money.
         b. Explain this is a form of abuse called financial abuse.
         c. Call the police and report the partner.
         d. Encourage the patient to confront the partner.

 8. The nurse is caring for a patient and notices bruises around the breasts and genital area and anal bleeding.
      How should the nurse address this?
         a. "It looks like you might have had an accident."
         b. "Is it common for you to have bruises?"
         c. "From your bruises and bleeding, it appears you might have been sexually assaulted."
         d. "Do you get into fights with your family?"

 9. The nurse hears a person in the hallway saying that women routinely lie about rape and that they could resist
      rape if they wanted. What does the nurse know about these types of statements?
         a. These are myths that blame the victim and overlook the perpetrator.
         b. These statements are common among people knowledgeable about rape.
         c. These statements are true, and people should also know that rape always involves physical force.
         d. These are myths that should be taught as facts.

10. The nurse has determined the patient is in the acute stage of rape trauma syndrome. What led the nurse to
      this diagnosis?
         a. The survivor may experience intense fear, helplessness, and disorganization.
         b. Symptoms such as nightmares, flashbacks, and avoidance behaviors persist for an extended period
              after the assault.
         c. The survivor exhibits a return to normal functioning and may minimize or deny the impact of the
              assault.
         d. Physical injuries and forensic evidence are typically present and are prioritized for immediate medical
              attention.

11. Long-term effects of sexual abuse can be common. What is an example of a long-term effect of sexual abuse?
         a. suicidal thoughts or behaviors
         b. bipolar disorder
410 9 · Assessments

           c. high self-esteem
           d. increased trust in family

  12. The SANE collects samples during the forensic exam. How does the nurse describe how the samples will be
        used?
           a. The samples will be sent to the police department for prosecution.
           b. The samples will help us know if you have been exposed to an STI.
           c. The samples tell us if you told the truth about your attack.
           d. The samples cannot be used in the legal system because they are obtained by a nurse.

  13. What treatment should the SANE provide for prophylaxis?
           a. abortion
           b. antivirals for gonorrhea and chlamydia
           c. postexposure treatment for HIV
           d. antibiotics for hepatitis B

  14. The nurse explains how to identify human traffickers. What does the nurse say?
           a. Traffickers are older men that are menacing.
           b. Traffickers are found in countries other than the United States.
           c. Traffickers can be a partner, stranger, or acquaintance.
           d. Traffickers cannot be family members.

  15. What group of people is at higher risk for human trafficking?
           a. people of color and LGBTQIA+ persons
           b. people with high levels of education and income
           c. people with no history of abuse in their past
           d. people from Europe who immigrated to the United States

  16. What can the nurse do to prevent human trafficking?
           a. Encourage all women to leave abusive relationships regardless of consequences.
           b. Stop prostitution.
           c. Deny support to programs addressing exploitation of men.
           d. Support programs to increase community awareness of human trafficking.

  17. A woman living on the streets was attacked by a group of gang members. The perpetrators hit and kicked her
        while yelling that homeless people are worthless. What type of violence is being demonstrated?
           a. forced homelessness
           b. social violence
           c. gender violence
           d. intimate partner violence

  18. The nurse is describing an acid attack to a group of women at a community group. She educates the group on
        why acid attacks occur. What does the nurse say to the group?
           a. Acid attacks are meant to kill women who are hated.
           b. They are meant to scar the victim as a lifelong reminder of the violence.
           c. Acid attacks are accidental and not premeditated.
           d. Perpetrators want women to marry into the family.

  19. A nurse is caring for a woman in the emergency department who has been shot. While getting the report, the
        nurse learns that the patient's father shot her in an honor killing attack. What is a cause of honor killings?
           a. deep-rooted patriarchal dominance
           b. high education levels
           c. high financial status

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           9 · Assessments 411

           d. belief that marriage should not be forced

  20. A 12-year-old pregnant patient is in labor and delivery for blood pressure monitoring. She is married to a
        38-year-old man. You know that child marriages have certain risk factors. What should the nurse be prepared
        for?
           a. potential for newborn complications
           b. potential complications during birth because of the patient's immature body
           c. weight gain due to intake of excess calories
           d. need for a doula

  21. The nurse is aware that a psychologic abuser thrives on control and manipulation. What sign would the nurse
        see with a woman who is the victim of psychologic abuse?
           a. a woman who is withdrawn and isolated
           b. a woman who is boisterous and chatty
           c. a woman who has a healthy self-esteem
           d. a woman who exudes confidence

  22. The nurse is aware her patient is a victim of domestic violence. What is an important psychologic symptom
        the nurse should immediately report to the health-care provider?
           a. flat affect
           b. fear
           c. suicidal ideation
           d. anxiety

  23. The nurse is educating a group of primary care providers regarding ways to help reduce IPV. What is one
        strategy the CDC recommends for reducing IPV?
           a. teaching safe and healthy relationship skills
           b. making survivors of IPV speak to members of Congress
           c. revealing names of perpetrators to their employers
           d. encouraging survivors to forgive their partners

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. The nurse sees signs of abuse with her patient who has spina bifida. The woman denies the abuse but looks
        fearful. Discuss why this person would not want to report their abuse.

    2. Describe some identifying signs of IPV.

    3. Describe how a person would feel if they had unknowingly been given "date- rape" drugs.

    4. How does the Start By Believing campaign help survivors of sexual assault?

    5. Describe the behavioral and physical signs of trafficking abuse.

    6. Name the groups at higher risk for social violence.

    7. Describe how IPV and endometriosis are associated.

Reflection Questions

    1. Describe the Intergenerational Transmission of Violence Theory.

    2. Discuss the associated factors of IPV.

    3. The nurse is completing an assessment on a patient who is a survivor of sexual assault. The patient wants to
        know what will happen during the exam. How does the nurse explain it?

    4. Describe the different types of rape.

    5. Describe the care plan for a person experiencing human trafficking.
412 9 · Assessments

    6. Describe the negative side effects of forced child marriage.

    7. Discuss how the NISVS helped develop IPV prevention programs.

What Should the Nurse Do?

Mercedes, a 32-year-old female originally from Uruguay, arrives at a community health clinic in a state of distress,
seeking support for various mental health symptoms. Her anxiety is evident as she fidgets in her seat, and her facial
expressions reflect deep-seated concern. Mercedes discloses a history of childhood and domestic violence, a
traumatic experience that has left an indelible mark on her emotional well-being. The effects of this violence are
apparent in her vulnerability, manifesting as heightened anxiety and persistent fear. As the nurse explores
Mercedes's symptoms further, Mercedes describes the overwhelming sadness that engulfs her, leading to disturbed
sleep and recurring nightmares. The weight of her past experiences has contributed to a diagnosed episode of major
depressive disorder in her psychiatric history. Mercedes's vital signs tell a physiologic story of her mental anguish,
with an increased heart rate and elevated blood pressure underscoring the somatic impact of her psychologic
distress. Her recent migration to the area adds another layer of complexity to Mercedes's situation. Being in an
unfamiliar environment exacerbates her anxiety, making her acutely aware of her vulnerability and further
intensifying her fears. Mercedes's concerns extend beyond herself; she is deeply worried about the safety and well-
being of her children, indicating a complex interplay of maternal instincts and the instinct for self-preservation.

    1. How do Mercedes's experiences align with the global prevalence of violence against women, as mentioned in
        the chapter? Identify specific risk factors that are evident in Mercedes's case.

    2. In Mercedes's case, her membership in which population, as discussed in the chapter, can be identified as
        making her at a particularly high risk for violence? How do these vulnerabilities contribute to Mercedes's
        situation?

    3. How does the psychosocial theory of Intergenerational Transmission of Violence Theory help in
        understanding Mercedes's experiences? Identify specific elements from this theory that resonate with
        Mercedes's case.

Siti, a 28-year-old female, arrives at a local community health clinic with complaints of persistent headaches and
unexplained injuries. Her medical history reveals a concerning pattern of frequent emergency department visits for
various injuries, including bruises and fractures. As the nurse delves deeper into Siti's concerns, she observes
several signs of emotional distress. Siti exhibits symptoms such as frequent tearfulness, difficulty in establishing eye
contact, and visible anxiety when discussing her home life. Additionally, the nurse notices that Siti is unusually
submissive and hesitant to express her opinions. During the examination, Siti is excessively apologetic and overly
concerned about inconveniencing the health-care staff.

    4. What specific signs of physical, emotional, and financial abuse does Siti exhibit, as discussed in the chapter?
        How might the nurse differentiate between apparent and hidden signs of abuse in this case?

    5. How do the associated factors of domestic violence discussed in the chapter relate to Siti's case? Identify
        specific factors contributing to her vulnerability and reluctance to express her opinions.

    6. In Siti's case, what are the observable behaviors or patterns that might help the nurse recognize her as a
        potential victim of IPV? How can the nurse distinguish a potential perpetrator, as mentioned in the chapter?

Dian, a 22-year-old female, presents at the emergency department seeking medical assistance following a sexual
assault. She reports feelings of extreme distress, fear, and confusion. Dian appears anxious and tearful, exhibiting
symptoms indicative of acute trauma. Her medical history reveals no significant preexisting conditions, and she has
no prior psychiatric history. However, vital signs show an elevated heart rate and blood pressure. Dian is
accompanied by a friend who provides emotional support during this difficult time. As the nurse begins the
assessment, Dian discloses the nature of the assault, expressing concerns about potential injuries and the risk of
sexually transmitted infections.

    7. Given Dian's case, describe the specific elements that qualify her experience as sexual assault. How does the
        chapter's definition align with Dian's situation?

    8. Analyze Dian's reactions and emotional state in the context of rape trauma syndrome. How do her acute
        distress, fear, and confusion align with the phases and categories described in the syndrome?

    9. Explain how a sexual assault nurse examiner (SANE) could contribute to Dian's care. What aspects of the
        postassault exam are particularly relevant to Dian's situation?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           9 · Assessments 413

Rahma, a 28-year-old female, presents at a community health clinic after escaping from a human trafficking
situation. She exhibits signs of physical and emotional distress, with evident bruises and malnourishment. Rahma
appears withdrawn and hesitant to disclose details of her past. Her medical history indicates a lack of consistent
health care, and there is no available psychiatric history. Vital signs reveal a slightly elevated heart rate and low
blood pressure. Rahma's fear and anxiety are palpable, emphasizing the trauma she endured.

  10. Based on Rahma's case, identify specific elements that align with the definition of human trafficking. How do
        her signs of physical distress, emotional withdrawal, and reluctance to disclose contribute to recognizing her
        situation as human trafficking?

  11. Describe the nursing care Rahma might require immediately after escaping from a human trafficking
        situation. What specific assessments and interventions should the nurse prioritize, given Rahma's physical
        and emotional state?

  12. Develop a nursing care plan for Rahma, addressing her physical and psychologic needs. Consider nursing
        diagnoses, interventions, and strategies to support Rahma in her journey to recovery.

Chijioke, a 17-year-old female, seeks care at a community health center due to concerns related to forced marriage.
She appears distressed, with visible signs of emotional turmoil, such as tearfulness and anxious body language.
Chijioke's medical history is unremarkable, and there is no documented psychiatric history. Vital signs reveal an
elevated heart rate and blood pressure, reflecting the emotional distress she is experiencing. Chijioke expresses
fear about her family's intentions and emphasizes her desire to pursue her education instead.

  13. How does social violence impact marginalized communities, and what role can nurses play in identifying and
        addressing violence within these groups? Discuss specific examples from the case of Chijioke, considering her
        concerns about forced marriage.

  14. Explain the concept of hate crimes and their impact on populations at an increased risk for violence. Using
        examples from the chapter, discuss the unique challenges faced by LGBTQIA+ persons in terms of hate
        crimes.

  15. Analyze the inequality inherent in child and forced marriages. Consider factors contributing to child marriage
        in the United States and globally. How can nurses empower persons like Chijioke, who wishes to pursue
        education instead of marriage?

Sakura, a 28-year-old female, presents at a local community health clinic seeking assistance for psychologic abuse.
She experienced harassment, threats, and isolation. She appears withdrawn, with evident signs of emotional
distress, such as frequent tearfulness and anxious behaviors. Sakura reports symptoms including persistent
sadness, feelings of worthlessness, and a decline in self-esteem. Her medical history reveals no significant physical
health issues, but she discloses a history of depression and anxiety. Vital signs indicate an increased heart rate and
blood pressure, reflective of her emotional state. Sakura expresses a desire for support and resources to cope with
the psychologic abuse she has been experiencing in her relationship.

  16. How does psychologic abuse impact Sakura's feelings of safety and self-worth? Provide examples of
        psychologic abuse from Sakura's case. How can nurses play a role in addressing psychologic abuse and
        promoting safety?

  17. Discuss specific clinical manifestations of intimate partner violence (IPV) that Sakura may be experiencing
        due to psychologic abuse. How can nurses recognize these manifestations, and what potential long-term
        consequences should they be aware of?

  18. How can the CDC's violence prevention programs contribute to assisting victims of psychologic abuse, like
        Sakura? Discuss specific strategies and resources that nurses can leverage to support persons experiencing
        psychologic abuse.

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. Explain the global prevalence of violence against women according to the WHO. What are the risk factors
        associated with violence against women, and how do they contribute to the occurrence of intimate partner
        violence (IPV)?

    2. Discuss populations of women susceptible to violence.

    3. Explain the theories developed to understand violence against women. Provide an overview of the Cycle of
        Violence Theory, the Power and Control Wheel, and the Intergenerational Transmission of Violence Theory.
414 9 · References

        How do these theories contribute to our understanding of the dynamics of abuse?

    4. Define domestic violence and intimate partner violence (IPV). What are the various forms of abuse involved in
        domestic violence? List at least three signs that may indicate a person is a victim of domestic violence.

    5. What factors contribute to the occurrence of domestic violence and IPV? Provide at least five associated
        factors for domestic violence and explain how they perpetuate the cycle of abuse.

    6. How can a nurse recognize potential victims of IPV? List at least three signs or behaviors that might indicate a
        person is experiencing IPV. Additionally, what behaviors or characteristics may suggest that someone is a
        potential perpetrator of IPV?

    7. Define sexual abuse or assault and provide examples of unwanted sexual behaviors. Discuss the
        misinformation surrounding sexual assault, including at least two rape myths. List and briefly explain three
        types of sexual assault mentioned in the chapter.

    8. Explain the three phases of rape trauma syndrome and provide characteristics or reactions associated with
        each phase. How might a nurse recognize symptoms of the outward adjustment phase in a survivor of sexual
        assault?

    9. Explain the role of a sexual assault nurse examiner (SANE) and the components of a postassault exam. What
        information does a SANE collect during the detailed history of the assault, and why is it important for a
        survivor to seek care within 120 hours of the assault?

  10. Define human trafficking and provide examples of how persons can be exploited for forced labor or
        commercial sex. Identify three signs that may indicate a person is being trafficked for labor situations. Which
        groups are considered at higher risk for human trafficking, and why is it challenging to identify victims?

  11. What is the goal of nursing care for a person who has been trafficked? List three behavioral signs and three
        physical signs that a person may be a victim of trafficking. Why is it important for the nurse to develop trust
        before assessing signs of abuse in a potential trafficking victim?

  12. What are common nursing diagnoses for a person who has been trafficked? Provide at least two nursing
        diagnoses and their related needs. Outline interventions in a nursing care plan for a trafficked person,
        focusing on reestablishing control, safety, and independence.

  13. What is social violence, and how does it manifest in communities? Identify three forms of social violence
        mentioned in the chapter. Who are the populations at risk of social violence, and why are they at risk?

  14. What constitutes a hate crime, and what are the motivations behind it? Provide examples of hate crimes
        based on characteristics mentioned in the chapter. How are LGBTQIA+ persons disproportionately affected
        by hate crimes?

  15. Differentiate between child marriage and forced marriage. What factors contribute to child marriage, and
        what risks do married girls under 18 years of age face? According to Save the Children, what are the key
        consequences of forced marriage, and how many girls worldwide are estimated to be in forced marriages?

  16. What is psychologic abuse, and how does it impact a person's health? Provide examples and explain the
        nurse's role.

  17. How does psychologic abuse manifest, and what are the consequences? Discuss clinical manifestations and
        outcomes.

  18. What programs aid victims of psychologic abuse or intimate partner violence? Describe CDC programs and
        the NISVS.

References

Alijani, F., Khosravi, A., Mousavi, M. S., Delarosa, V. (2019). The associated factors of domestic violence against
   infertile women. Journal of Research Development in Nursing and Midwifery, 16 (2), 61-70.
    http://nmj.goums.ac.ir/article-1-1170-en.html

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              9 · References 415

AlQahtani, S. M., Almutairi, D. S., BinAqeel, E. A., Almutairi, R. A., Al-Qahtani, R. D., & Menezes, R. G. (2022). Honor
   killings in the Eastern Mediterranean Region: A narrative review. Healthcare (Basel, Switzerland), 11(1), 74.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare11010074

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2012). Initmate partner violence. Committee Opinion No.
    518. Reaffirmed 2022. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-opinion/articles/2012/02/
    intimate-partner-violence

Aqel, F. (2020). The psychology of a rapist. https://www.dw.com/en/the-psychology-of-a-rapist/a-54814540

Bermele, C., Andresen, P. A., & Urbanski, S. (2018). Educating nurses to screen and intervene for intimate partner
   violence during pregnancy. Nursing for Women's Health, 22(1), 79-86. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.nwh.2017.12.006

Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2022). Just the stats: Female murder victims and victim-offender relationships, 2021.
    https://bjs.ojp.gov/female-murder-victims-and-victim-offender-relationship-2021

Burrage, R. L., Gagnon, M., & Graham-Bermann, S. A. (2021). Trauma history and social support among American
   Indian/Alaska Native and non-native survivors of intimate partner violence. Journal of Interpersonal Violence,
   36(5-6), NP3326-NP3345. https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260518772103

Byrne, M., Parsh, S., & Parsh, B. (2019). Human trafficking: Impact, identification, and intervention. Nursing
   Management, 50(8), 18-24. https://www.doi.org/10.1097/01.NUMA.0000575304.15432.07

Camak, D. J. (2022, February 25). Recognizing and addressing the needs of sex trafficking victims. The Online
   Journal of Issues in Nursing, 27(2), 53. https://www.doi.org/10.3912/OJIN.Vol27No02PPT53

Cannon, L., Munro-Kramer, M. L., Scheiman, L., Bailey, J. M., Parrish, D., & Ernst, S. D. (2023). Patient satisfaction
    with sexual assault nurse examiner services and post-assault resource utilization at a university health center
   and emergency department. Journal of American College Health, 71(2), 562-570. https://doi.org/10.1080/
    07448481.2021.1898407

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021a, October 1). Violence prevention: Intimate partner violence.
    https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/intimatepartnerviolence/index.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021b, November). Violence prevention: Risk and protective factors for
   perpetration. https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/intimatepartnerviolence/riskprotectivefactors.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022a, January 18). Violence prevention: Timeline of violence as a
   public health problem. https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/about/timeline.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022b, February 4). Violence prevention: Sex trafficking.
    https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/sexualviolence/trafficking.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022c, June 8). Community violence prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/
    violenceprevention/communityviolence/index.html

Cleveland Clinic. (2023, July). Consult QD: How nurses can spot the hidden signs of domestic violence and offer
   lifesaving help. https://consultqd.clevelandclinic.org/how-nurses-can-spot-the-hidden-signs-of-domestic-
    violence-and-offer-lifesaving-help/

Department of Human Services. (2020, April). Blue campaign: Human trafficking 101information sheet.
    https://www.dhs.gov/blue-campaign/materials/human-trafficking-101

Eikemo, R., Barimani, M., Elvin-Nowak, Y., Eriksson, J., Vikström, A., Nyman, V., Backman-Enelius, M., & Jonas, W.
    (2023). Intimate partner violence during pregnancy-Prevalence and associations with women's health: A cross-
   sectional study. Sexual & Reproductive Healthcare, 36, 100843-100843. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.srhc.2023.100843

End Violence Against Women International. (n.d.). Start by believing. https://startbybelieving.org/home/

Goodmark, L. (2011). Defining domestic violence. In A troubled marriage (pp. 29-53). NYU Press. https://doi.org/
416 9 · References

    10.18574/nyu/9780814732229.003.0003

Goswami, S., & Handa, R. K. (2020). The peril of acid attacks in India and susceptibility of women. Journal of
   Victimology, 3(1), 72-92. https://doi.org/10.1177/2516606920927247

Government of Canada. (2021, December 8). Preliminary examination of so-called "honor killings" in Canada.
    https://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/rp-pr/cj-jp/fv-vf/hk-ch/p3.html

Hodge, D. R., & Lietz, C. A. (2018). A social work perspective on human trafficking research: Informing practice and
   policy. Journal of Human Trafficking, 4(4), 283-297.

Hutchinson, M., Cosh, S. M., & East, L. (2023). Reproductive sexual health effects of intimate partner violence: A
   longitudinal and intergenerational analysis. Sexual & Reproductive Healthcare, 35, 100816.
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S187757562300006X?via%3Dihub

International Labour Organization. (2022). Global estimates of modern slavery: Forced labour and forced marriage.
    International Labour Organization. https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/@ed_norm/@ipec/documents/
    publication/wcms_854795.pdf

Jagasia, E., Lee, J. J., & Wilson, P. R. (2023). Promoting community institutional partnerships to improve the health
   of intimate partner violence survivors experiencing homelessness. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 79(4),
    1303-1313. https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.15357

Jock, B. W., Dana-Sacco, G., Arscott, J., Bagwell-Gray, M. E., Loerzel, E., Brockie, T., Packard, G., O'Keefe, V. M.,
    McKinley, C. E., & Campbell, J. (2022). "We've already endured the trauma, who is going to either end that cycle
    or continue to feed it?": The influence of family and legal systems on Native American women's intimate partner
   violence experiences. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 37(21-22), NP20602-NP20629. https://doi.org/
    10.1177/08862605211063200

Kelly, B. R. (2017, January 17). Exposure to violence hinders short-term memory, cognitive control. Princeton
    University Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs. https://www.princeton.edu/news/2017/
    07/25/exposure-violence-hinders-short-term-memory-cognitive-control

Kippert, A. (2022, June 6). Profile of an abuser: Is it possible to spot an abuser before you get involved?
    https://www.domesticshelters.org/articles/identifying-abuse/profile-of-an-abuser

Ledray, L., & Simmelink, K. (2020). Efficacy of SANE evidence collection: A Minnesota study. Journal of Emergency
   Nursing, 46(3), 283-285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jen.2020.01.008

Levin, B., & Nolan, J. (2019). Hate crimes and bias incidents. Annual Review of Law and Social Science, 15, 103-124

Lindner, J. (2023, December 20). Forced marriage statistics: Market report & data. https://gitnux.org/forced-
    marriage-statistics/

Mattheiss, S. R., Levinson, H., Rosenberg-Lee, M., & Graves, W. W. (2022). Exposure to violence is associated with
    decreased neural connectivity in emotion regulation and cognitive control, but not working memory, networks
   after accounting for socioeconomic status: A preliminary study. Behavioral and Brain Functions, 18(15), 3359.
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s12993-022-00201-8

McGeough, S., & Van Schooneveld, A. (2023, January 30). Where does human trafficking occur? The Exodus Road.
    https://theexodusroad.com/where-does-human-trafficking-occur/

National Coalition Against Domestic Violence (2020). Domestic violence. https://assets.speakcdn.com/assets/2497/
    domestic_violence-2020080709350855.pdf?1596811079991

National Human Trafficking Hotline. (2023). Recognizing the signs. https://humantraffickinghotline.org/en/human-
    trafficking/recognizing-signs

National Human Trafficking Hotline. (2024). Human trafficking: What human trafficking is, and isn't.
    https://humantraffickinghotline.org/en/human-trafficking

National Human Trafficking Hotline. (n.d.). National statistics. https://humantraffickinghotline.org/en/statistics

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              9 · References 417

National Network to End Domestic Violence. (2017). About financial abuse. https://nnedv.org/content/about-
    financial-abuse/

National Network to End Domestic Violence. (2021, September 8). Emotional and psychological abuse.
    https://www.womenslaw.org/about-abuse/forms-abuse/emotional-and-psychological-abuse

National Partnership for Women and Families. (2021). Intimate partner violence endangers pregnant people and
   their infants. https://nationalpartnership.org/report/intimate-partner-violence/

Nöthling, J., Abrahams, N., Jewkes, R., Mhlongo, S., Lombard, C., Hemmings, S. M. J., & Seedat, S. (2022). Risk and
   protective factors affecting the symptom trajectory of posttraumatic stress disorder post-rape. Journal of
   Affective Disorders, 309, 151-164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2022.04.032

Owens, B., Hall, E. L., Anderson, T. L. (2021). The relationship between purity culture and rape myth acceptance.
   Journal of Psychology and Theology, 49(4), 405-418. https://doi.org/10.1177/0091647120974992

Padilla, M. (2023, July 5). The 19th explains: Why child marriage is still legal in 80% of U.S. states. The 19th
   Newsletter. https://19thnews.org/2023/07/explaining-child-marriage-laws-united-states/

Paxton, K., Attorney General of Texas. (n.d.). Sexual assault nurse examiner (SANE) program: Frequently asked
   questions. https://www2.texasattorneygeneral.gov/faq/cvs-sexual-assault-nurse-examiner-sane-program-
    frequently-asked-questions

Peitzmeier, S., Malik, M., Kattari, S. K., Marrow, E., Stephenson, R., Agenor, M., & Reisner, S. L. (2020). Intimate
    partner violence in transgender populations: Systematic review and meta-analysis of prevalence and correlates.
   American Journal of Public Health, 110, e1-e14. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2020.305774

Piscitelli, A., & Pienaar, K. (2019). Human trafficking and forced labour: A global perspective. Palgrave Macmillan.

Powers, R. A., Cochran, J. K., Maskaly, J., & Sellers, C. S. (2020). Social learning theory, gender, and intimate partner
   violent victimization: A structural equations approach. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 35(17-18),
    3554-3580. https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260517710486

Ragpa, L. H., Urdangaray, A., Beneitez, O., & Saez, C. (2019). Sexually transmitted infections in the context of a
   sexual assault. Enfermedades Infecciosas y Microbiologia Clinica, 37(3), 187-194. https://www.elsevier.es/en-
    revista-enfermedades-infecciosas-microbiologia-clinica-english-428-pdf-S2529993X18302880

Rape trauma syndrome. (2020). Eastern Oregon University. https://www.eou.edu/student-affairs/sex-matters/rape-
    trauma-syndrome/

Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network. (n.d.). What to expect from the criminal justice system.
    https://www.rainn.org/articles/what-expect-criminal-justice-system

Saleme, P., Seydel, T., Pang, B., Deshpande, S., & Parkinson, J. (2023). An integrative literature review of
   interventions to protect people with disabilities from domestic and family violence. International Journal of
   Environmental Research and Public Health, 20(3), 2145. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph20032145

Savage, M., Scarduzio, J., & Milne, K. (2022). News stories of intimate partner violence: An experimental
   examination of media framing and perpetrator sex in LGBTQ versus heterosexual relationships. Journal of
   Interpersonal Violence, 37(23-24), NP22226-NP22249. https://doi.org/10.1177/08862605211071143

Save the Children. (n.d.). Child marriage: The devastating end of childhood. https://www.savethechildren.org/us/
    charity-stories/child-marriage-a-violation-of-child-rights

Scheer, J. R. & Baams, L. (2021). Help-seeking patterns among LGBTQ young adults exposed to intimate partner
   violence victimization. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 36(17-18), 8050-8069. https://doi.org/10.1177/
    0886260519848785

Selwyn, C. N. (2020). Quality care for women's health: When home is not safe for mothers. The Journal for Nurse
   Practitioners, 16, 547-548. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nurpra.2020.04.013

Sherman, A., Peitzmeier, S., Cimino, A. N., Balthazar, M., Klepper, M., Chand, A. T., Lawrence, C., Allure, K., Slink, G.,
418 9 · References

    & Campbell, J. C. (2023). Risks of severe assault and intimate partner homicide among transgender and gender
   diverse intimate partner violence survivors: Preliminary findings from community listening sessions. Violence
   Against Women, 10778012231172700. https://doi.org/10.1177/10778012231172700

Someplace Safe. (n.d.). Types of sexual assault. https://www.someplacesafe.info/helping-someone/crime-victim-
    advocacy/sexual-violence-and-exploitation/types-of-sexual-assault.html

Stellar, C., Garcia-Moreno, C., & Temmerman, M. (2016). A systematic review and narrative report of the relationship
   between infertility, subinfertility, and intimate partner violence. International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics,
   133(1), 3-8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijgo.2015.08.012

Tilton, E. (2022, March 28). Rape myths, catastrophe, and credibility. Episteme, 1-17. https://doi.org/10.1017/
    epi.2022.5

Tjaden, P., & Thoennes, N. (1998). Prevalence, incidence, and consequences of violence against women: Findings
   from the National Violence Against Women Survey. U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice,
    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. https://www.ojp.gov/pdffiles/172837.pdf

Tracy, N. (2021, December 17). Types of rape: The different forms of rape. https://www.healthyplace.com/abuse/
    rape/types-of-rape-the-different-forms-of-rape

Trotta, D. (2022, March 15). U.S. report identifies misogynist "incels" as violence threat. https://www.reuters.com/
    world/us/us-report-identifies-misogynist-incels-violence-threat-2022-03-15

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' Office on Women's Health. (2021, February). Sexual assault on
   college campuses. https://www.womenshealth.gov/relationships-and-safety/sexual-assault-and-rape/college-
    sexual-assault

U.S. Department of Justice (2022, October). Bureau of Justice Statistics: Human trafficking data collection activities,
   2022. https://bjs.ojp.gov/library/publications/human-trafficking-data-collection-activities-2022

U.S. Department of Justice Archives. (2012). An updated definition of rape. https://www.justice.gov/archives/opa/
    blog/updated-definition-rape

U.S. Department of Justice. (2024, April 11). Hate crimes case examples. https://www.justice.gov/hatecrimes/hate-
    crimes-case-examples

U.S. Department of State. (2022). 2022 Trafficking in persons report: United States. https://www.state.gov/reports/
    2022-trafficking-in-persons-report/united-states/

U.S. Department of State. (2024, February 23). Forced marriage. Travel.State.Gov. https://travel.state.gov/content/
    travel/en/international-travel/emergencies/forced-marriage.html

U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. (2021, May 4). VHA Social Work: Intimate partner assistance program: What is
   IPV? https://www.socialwork.va.gov/IPV/VETERANS_PARTNERS/WhatIPV/Effects-Family.asp

UCLA School of Law, Williams Institute. (2022, December 21). LGBT people nine times more likely than non-LGBT
   people to be victims of violent hate crimes. https://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/press/lgbt-hate-crimes-press-
    release/

UNICEF. (2023). Child marriage. https://www.unicef.org/protection/child-marriage

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. (2020). Global report on trafficking in persons 2020. Vienna: United
    Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

United Nations Women. (n.d.). Violence against women. https://interactive.unwomen.org/multimedia/infographic/
    violenceagainstwomen/en/index.html

Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000. 22 USC 7101 (2000). https://www.govinfo.gov/content/
    pkg/PLAW-106publ386/pdf/PLAW-106publ386.pdf

Wallace, M., Gillispie-Bell, V., Cruz, K., Davis, K., & Vilda, D. (2021). Homicide during Pregnancy and the Postpartum
   Period in the United States, 2018-2019. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 138(5), 762-769. https://doi.org/10.1097/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              9 · References 419

    AOG.0000000000004567

Waller, B. Y., Harris, J., & Quinn, C. R. (2022). Caught in the crossroad: An intersectional examination of African
   American Women intimate partner violence survivors' help seeking. Trauma, Violence, & Abuse, 23(4),
    1235-1248. https://doi.org/10.1177/1524838021991303

Waller, B., Goddard-Eckrich, D., Kagotho, N., Hankerson, S. H., Hawks, A., & Wainberg, M. L. (2023). Sarah Waller's
    Help-Seeking Model: Understanding African American women intimate partner violence survivors' help-seeking
   process. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 38(11-12), 7170-7192. https://doi.org/10.1177/
    08862605221141869

Washington State Department of Social and Health Services. (n.d.). Types and signs of abuse.
    https://www.dshs.wa.gov/altsa/home-and-community-services/types-and-signs-abuse

Williams-Breault B. D. (2018). Eradicating female genital mutilation/cutting: Human rights-based approaches of
   legislation, education, and community empowerment. Health and Human Rights, 20(2), 223-233.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6293358/

Women and elder abuse. (n.d.). https://www.nursinghomeabuseguide.org/elder-abuse/women

World Health Organization. (2012). Understanding and addressing violence against women: Human trafficking.
    https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-RHR-12.42

World Health Organization. (2021, March 9). Violence against women. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
    detail/violence-against-women

World Health Organization. (2024). Female genital mutilation. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
    female-genital-mutilation

Zucchelli, M. M., & Giuseppe, U. (2019). Cognitive-emotional and inhibitory deficits as a window to moral decision-
   making difficulties related to exposure to violence. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, e1. https://www.frontiersin.org/
    articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01427/full
420 9 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 10

Pregnancy

FIGURE 10.1 Changes during Pregnancy Pregnancy can be a time of joy, wonder, and mystery. As the fetus grows within the pregnant
person's uterus, many physiologic and emotional adaptations occur. (credit: "Ya no queda nada" by Raúl Hernández González/Flickr, CC BY
2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
10.1 Physiologic Changes Due to Pregnancy
10.2 Psychosocial Aspects of Pregnancy
10.3 Common Discomforts of Pregnancy
10.4 Fetal Growth and Development
10.5 Choosing a Health Care Provider
10.6 Choosing a Birthing Place

INTRODUCTION Pregnancy is considered a normal physiologic event that transforms the pregnant person and the
individuals close to them. Pregnancy lasts approximately 280 days, or 40 weeks. The physiologic changes during
pregnancy are not confined to the uterus. Cardiac, respiratory, gastrointestinal, renal, musculoskeletal, neurologic,
and endocrine changes also occur from conception to birth and beyond. The physiologic changes support growth in
the uterus, growth and functions of the placenta, and growth and development of the fetus. Psychosocial
adaptations of pregnancy are related to changes in hormone production and in societal role expectations of the
pregnant person and parenting.
This chapter covers the physiologic changes and psychosocial adaptations the pregnant person undergoes
throughout pregnancy, common discomforts of pregnancy, fetal growth and development, and recommendations for
choosing a health care provider. Nursing care and interventions assist the pregnant person to recognize and
understand their body's changes and adaptations, common discomforts of pregnancy, and growth and development
milestones of their fetus. Nursing interventions also focus on education in relief measures for the common
422  10 · Pregnancy

     discomforts of pregnancy, emphasizing self-care of the person. In addition, nursing care during pregnancy includes
     monitoring for any indications that the pregnancy, the pregnant person, or the fetus may be at risk for complications.

     10.1 Physiologic Changes Due to Pregnancy

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain physiologic changes due to pregnancy
         · Explain the functions of the placenta hormones
         · Differentiate between the presumptive, probable, and positive signs of pregnancy

     Pregnancy affects every system in the pregnant person's body. The changes begin at conception, support the
     pregnancy and the developing fetus, and prepare for labor. The reproductive and cardiovascular systems account for
     many of the physiologic changes of pregnancy. The placenta hormones, especially estrogen and progesterone, are
     responsible for initiating and supporting many physiologic changes of pregnancy.

     Physiologic Changes

     Nursing care during pregnancy requires the nurse to continually assess the pregnant person and to analyze the
     assessment data for expected versus unexpected cues. It is important for the nurse to understand the causes and
     manifestations of the anatomic and physiologic changes that occur during pregnancy in order to educate the
     pregnant person about them. The education provided by the nurse helps the pregnant person adapt to the expected
     changes and recognize any unexpected changes that may place the pregnancy at risk. Table 10.1 summarizes the
     expected changes and associated symptoms experienced during pregnancy.

     System            Changes during Pregnancy

     Reproductive      Cessation of menses
                       Increase in size of uterus
                       Increased contractility of uterus
                       Changes in breasts to prepare for lactation
                       Cervical engorgement and softening
                       Vaginal engorgement and elongation

     Cardiovascular    Decreased peripheral vascular resistance
                       Increase in blood volume
                       Increase in cardiac output and pulse
                       Decrease in blood pressure
                       Physiologic anemia of pregnancy
                       Hypercoagulability
                       Displacement of heart to the left

     Respiratory       Diaphragm rises 4 cm
                       Change from abdominal to thoracic breathing
                       Increase in respiratory alkalosis
                       Tidal volume increases

     Gastrointestinal  Motility is slowed
                       Change in taste
                       Swollen gums
                       Nausea and vomiting
                       Heartburn and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
                       Constipation

     TABLE 10.1 Summary of Expected Physiologic Changes in Pregnancy

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  10.1 · Physiologic Changes Due to Pregnancy             423

System           Changes during Pregnancy

Renal and        Dilation of renal pelvis and ureters
Urinary          Increased glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
                 Increased blood flow to kidneys
                 Decrease in bladder tone
                 Faster excretion of drugs

Integumentary    Hyperpigmentation: linea nigra and melasma
                 Striae gravidarum
                 Increase in acne
                 Increase in sweating and flushing
                 Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP)

Musculoskeletal  Lordosis
                 Ligament relaxation
                 Change in center of gravity

Immune           General reduction in immune function (to prevent pregnant person from physiologically
                 rejecting the fetus)

Endocrine        Production of pregnancy hormones
                 Maintain and support the pregnancy
                 Maintain pregnant person's and fetal metabolism
                 Glucose regulation

TABLE 10.1 Summary of Expected Physiologic Changes in Pregnancy

Reproductive System
Many significant changes occur in the reproductive system during pregnancy. The uterus expands to accommodate
the growing fetus, amniotic fluid, and placenta. Changes in the vagina and cervix allow for passage of the fetus to the
extrauterine environment. The ovaries assist in maintaining the pregnancy until the placenta takes over. The breasts
are prepared for lactation.

Uterus
The uterus is a unique organ because it can enlarge (via hyperplasia and hypertrophy) without increasing the
number of its cells. The initial uterine enlargement is stimulated by estrogen. The myometrial cells in the walls of the
uterus stretch and thin as the fetus grows, the placenta enlarges, and the amniotic fluid increases. The uterine blood
vessels enlarge as well, increasing the blood volume supporting the pregnancy, with the majority of the blood flow
to the placenta. The nonpregnant uterus weighs about 60 g, enlarging to 1,000 to 1,200 g at 40 weeks of pregnancy.
The fundus of the enlarging uterus is at the symphysis pubis by 12 weeks of gestation and reaches its highest point
at the xiphoid process around 36 weeks of gestation. At the end of the pregnancy, the enlarged uterus has displaced
the intestines, changed the shape of the rib cage, shifted the lungs, and changed the pregnant person's center of
gravity (Figure 10.2). The enlargement also leads to hypercontractility of the uterus, resulting in spontaneous,
irregular, and painless uterine contractions known as Braxton Hicks contractions that occur throughout the
pregnancy. Braxton Hicks contractions normally have no effect on the cervix until the final weeks of the pregnancy
when the cervix begins to soften in preparation for labor.
424  10 · Pregnancy

     FIGURE 10.2 Displacement of Intestines during Pregnancy (a) These illustrations depict uterine enlargement at 12 weeks of gestation,
     (b) 24 weeks of gestation, and (c) 36 weeks of gestation. As the uterus enlarges throughout the pregnancy, it grows out of the pelvis and
     into the abdomen. The enlargement pushes the intestines higher in the abdomen, changing the shape of the diaphragm. (attribution:
     Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0)

     Cervix
     The cervix (Figure 10.3) is the lower 3 to 4 cm of the uterus and connects the uterus to the vagina. The cervix
     contains the opening, or os, of the uterus. During pregnancy, estrogen causes the cervix to enlarge and soften, and
     progesterone causes the endocervical glands to increase in number and enlarge. The glands produce more mucus,
     forming the mucus plug in the cervix. The mucus plug helps to keep bacteria out of the uterus, decreasing the
     chance of infection. In the first part of pregnancy, the connective tissue within the cervix strengthens to prevent a
     preterm birth. In the final 3 or 4 weeks, the connective tissue changes, becoming more elastic as labor approaches.
     Pregnancy hormones are responsible for changes in the connective tissue of the cervix (Pantelis et al., 2018).

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.1 · Physiologic Changes Due to Pregnancy                                                                                                   425

FIGURE 10.3 Cervix The cervix is the neck of the uterus and connects the uterus to the vagina. The cervical os is the opening of the uterus.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0)

Vagina
The vagina has both elastic and muscular characteristics. Estrogen causes an increase in vascularity, hypertrophy of
the cells, and an increase in vaginal discharge during pregnancy. The increase in vaginal discharge and the decrease
in the pH of the vagina protect the pregnancy from bacterial infections but raise the risk of candidiasis in the vagina.
Relaxation and elongation of the vagina and perineum increase in preparation for birth.

Ovaries
Once the ovum is fertilized and starts dividing, the pre-embryonic cells stimulate the production of human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG), causing the corpus luteum to produce progesterone (see Figure 3.8). The progesterone
secreted by the corpus luteum within the ovary helps to support the pregnancy. This hormone stimulates the growth
of the endometrium needed for successful implantation until hormone production from the placenta takes over. The
increase in estrogen and progesterone during pregnancy prevents ovulation by blocking secretion of follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). The ovaries and fallopian tubes remain near the fundus of
the uterus and become abdominal organs after the 14th week of gestation.

Breasts
Changes in the breast are in preparation for breast-feeding the newborn. Estrogen and progesterone cause the
breasts to enlarge, and the growth causes the breasts to be tender. The increase in vascularity of the breasts causes
the veins to become more visible. The nipples and areola become more prominent, larger, and darker in color, and
the sebaceous Montgomery glands secrete a lubricant to decrease cracking during breast-feeding. Alveolar cells
begin producing colostrum between 12 and 16 weeks of gestation. Estrogen and progesterone suppress milk
secretion during pregnancy.

Cardiovascular System
Many changes within the cardiovascular system support the pregnancy and fetal development. The changes begin
with an increase in blood volume and cardiac output and simultaneous decrease in systemic vascular resistance
starting early in the pregnancy. Physiologic anemia, hypercoagulation, and a slight enlargement of the heart are
cardiovascular changes later in the pregnancy. All the cardiovascular changes prepare the pregnant person for
events during pregnancy, labor, birth, and postpartum and are included in patient education.

Blood Volume
During pregnancy, the total blood volume increases 1,500 mL by 30 to 32 weeks of gestation. This is a 40 to 50
percent increase above the total blood volume of the nonpregnant person. Both the plasma volume and the number
of red blood cells (RBCs) increase to support the uterine, placental, fetal, and pregnant person's needs as the
pregnancy progresses. The increase in plasma volume is proportionally higher than the increase in RBCs, causing
hemodilution leading to a physiologic anemia of pregnancy. Table 10.2 lists the expected hematologic lab values
during pregnancy.
426  10 · Pregnancy

     Hematologic Lab Test Nonpregnant First Trimester Second Trimester Third Trimester

     Hemoglobin (g/dL)               12-16      11.6-13.9    9.7-14.5                                         9.5-14.5

     Hematocrit (%)                  36-48      31.0-41.0    30.0-39.0    28.0-40.0

     RBC (×106/mm3)                  4.2-5.4    3.42-4.55    2.81-4.49    2.71-4.43

     WBC (×106/mm3)                  4.5-11     5.7-13.6     5.6-14.8                                         5.9-16.9

     TABLE 10.2 Hematologic Lab Value Changes during Pregnancy RBC, red blood cell; WBC, white blood cell
     (Cunningham, 2018)

     Heart
     The change in blood volume increases the pregnant person's heart rate by 15 to 20 beats per minute. Cardiac
     output is also affected by the change in blood volume and increases 30 to 50 percent by 28 to 30 weeks of
     gestation. The increase in heart rate and cardiac output raises the stroke volume 25 to 30 percent during pregnancy.
     The increase in total blood volume also leads to the presence of a systolic murmur (Table 10.3).

                     Preconception Baseline First Trimester Second Trimester Third Trimester

                     Cardiac output                                     

                     Pulse                                              

                     Blood pressure                                     

                     Blood volume                                       

                     TABLE 10.3 Effect of the Cardiovascular Physiologic Changes during Pregnancy on Cardiac
                     Output, Pulse, Blood Pressure, and Blood Volume (Taranikanti, 2018)

     Anatomically, the growing uterus causes the heart to shift upward and to the left (Figure 10.4). This shift requires
     slight modifications of the placement of the stethoscope when auscultating the heart.

     FIGURE 10.4 Displacement of the Diaphragm and Heart during Pregnancy As the uterus enlarges during pregnancy, the diaphragm
     rises, and the heart is displaced to the left. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                            10.1 · Physiologic Changes Due to Pregnancy                                427

Peripheral Vascular Resistance
The hormones progesterone and relaxin are responsible for the decrease in peripheral vascular resistance during
pregnancy, which helps the pregnant person adapt to the increase in blood volume (Morton, 2021). The change in
peripheral vascular resistance lowers blood pressure during pregnancy and, along with the increase in blood
volume, also results in an increase in the pregnant person's heart rate. The lowest blood pressures occur around 28
weeks of gestation, with a rise back to prepregnant values by the 36th week of pregnancy. The expected heart rate
for a pregnant person is 60 to 120 beats per minute. The weight of the pregnant uterus in the final weeks of
pregnancy increases the risk for varicosities and dependent edema in the lower extremities.

Coagulation
An increase in the ability of the blood to coagulate, or hypercoagulability, occurs during pregnancy to prepare the
pregnant person for the normal blood loss during the process of birth and possible postpartum hemorrhage. Table
10.4 lists coagulation lab profiles. Plasma fibrin increases 40 percent, and fibrinogen increases 50 percent. The
platelet count falls slightly because of hemodilution during pregnancy. The increase in blood coagulability, along
with blood pooling from the weight of the uterus on the lower extremities, places the pregnant person at risk for
venous thrombus formation.

Lab Test            Nonpregnant First Trimester Second Trimester Third Trimester

Platelet count (×109/L) 150-450  174-391    155-409    146-429

PT (sec)            11-13.5      9.7-13.5   9.5-13.4   9.6-12.9

aPTT (sec)          25--35       24.3-38.9  24.2-38.1  24.7-35.0

Fibrinogen (mg/dL)  200-400      244-510    291-538    373-619

TABLE 10.4 Coagulation Lab Value Changes during Pregnancy aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; PT,
prothrombin time.
(Cunningham, 2018)

Respiratory System
The respiratory system changes both physiologically and anatomically during pregnancy. The physiologic changes
are part of the modifications in metabolic needs of the pregnant person and developing fetus. The pregnant person's
metabolic rate rises up to 15 percent, increasing oxygen consumption by 20 percent. An increase in tidal volume (35
to 50 percent) and slight respiratory alkalosis facilitate the transport of carbon dioxide produced by the fetus. The
rise in progesterone, estrogen, and prostaglandin production leads to nasal, sinus, and lung tissue congestion,
resulting in a feeling of dyspnea and increasing the risk of nosebleeds in the pregnant person.

The anatomic changes are adjustments of the diaphragm to the growing uterus and the increase in diameter of the
rib cage as the muscles and cartilage relax. The diaphragm rises about 4 cm, and the rib cage diameter enlarges
about 6 cm. These anatomic modifications cause the pregnant person to change from abdominal breathing to
thoracic breathing and are thought to be one cause of dyspnea during pregnancy. Explaining the physiologic and
anatomic changes of the respiratory system during pregnancy is part of nursing care.

Gastrointestinal System
Many of the changes in the gastrointestinal system during pregnancy are due to the rise in progesterone levels
slowing the motility of the entire gastrointestinal tract. Nausea, vomiting, and heartburn caused by the slowing of
gastrointestinal motility are common symptoms during pregnancy. Hemorrhoids also may occur because of a
combination of the relaxation of blood vessels in the rectum and the weight of the growing uterus. Cholelithiasis
results from the slow emptying of the gallbladder caused by the increase in estrogen production during pregnancy.
Extreme pruritis can be related to liver or gallbladder disease and requires further assessment.

Mouth
Both progesterone and estrogen production change a pregnant person's ability to taste and smell and have been
linked to the cravings many pregnant persons experience. During pregnancy, an increase in the acidity of the saliva
428  10 · Pregnancy

     may cause a change in taste as well. Excessive salivation, or ptyalism, is linked to pregnant persons with nausea
     who are reluctant to swallow their saliva. Ptyalism can cause a constant bad taste in the mouth.

     The rise in estrogen causes an increase in the vascularity of the gums. This predisposes the pregnant person to
     bleeding from the gums, gingivitis, and periodontal disease. The increase in the acidity of saliva is also linked to
     periodontal disease. Dental hygiene is an important topic of patient education throughout pregnancy.

     Esophagus and Stomach
     Because of the decrease in peristalsis, the esophagus and esophageal sphincter are more relaxed, and gastric
     emptying is slowed. The result is an increased incidence of heartburn and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
     during pregnancy. In the third trimester, the stomach is pushed up by the enlarging uterus, leading to a feeling of
     fullness and nausea in addition to dyspepsia and GERD. Sitting up for 30 to 60 minutes after eating helps to
     decrease the incidence of heartburn and acid reflux. Nutrition and over-the-counter relief measures for heartburn
     and acid reflux are included in patient education.

     Intestines
     The slowing of the entire digestive system by the decrease in peristalsis during pregnancy allows more nutrients to
     be absorbed by the pregnant person as the process of digestion is completed. The increase in absorption is
     important to meet the nutritional needs of the pregnant person and the developing fetus. The consequence of
     reduced peristalsis increases the risk for constipation during pregnancy. Nursing care and education include
     balancing nutritional needs, activity, and gastrointestinal symptoms throughout the pregnancy.

     Gallbladder
     The slowing of the digestive system also causes delay in emptying of the gallbladder. The accumulation of bile and
     the increase in serum cholesterol predispose the pregnant person to cholelithiasis and cholecystitis, with the
     highest incidence in pregnant persons 35 years of age or older. The nurse educates and encourages the pregnant
     person with gallbladder problems to maintain a low-fat diet to delay or avoid surgery whenever possible.

     Liver
     During pregnancy, the liver enlarges slightly to accommodate the increased demand for energy to support the
     pregnancy and the developing fetus. The liver is also essential in the detoxification of fetal metabolites entering the
     pregnant person's bloodstream after crossing through the placenta. Physiologic changes in the liver include
     increased cholesterol synthesis and increased production of clotting factors. Cholesterol is needed for fetal growth
     and development and the production of estrogen and progesterone (Uvoh et al., 2021). The increase in clotting
     factors is needed to control bleeding after labor and birth and during the postpartum period. Physiologic changes in
     the liver during pregnancy also increase the incidence of spider angioma and palmar erythema. The increase in
     physiologic functions of the liver changes the nurse's assessment of the liver in the pregnant person to include
     questions focusing on the symptoms of liver inflammation and deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and reviewing liver
     function tests when ordered by the health care provider. Changes in the physiologic function of the liver also require
     patient education focusing on recognition of the signs and symptoms of inflammation of the liver (nausea, fatigue,
     right upper quadrant discomfort, and jaundice).

             LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

     Age-Specific Gastrointestinal Concerns

     Pregnant persons 35 years of age and older have an increased incidence of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy.
     The number of weeks nausea and vomiting persist in this population is greater than for those under 35 years old.
     The risk for excessive nausea and vomiting increases the incidence of treatment for dehydration with intravenous
     (IV) fluids, antiemetics, and the need for more than over-the-counter or home remedies.

     Pregnant persons 35 years of age and older are also at increased risk for gallbladder disease during pregnancy. The
     need for surgery during pregnancy to remove the gallbladder is based on the severity of symptoms experienced by
     the pregnant person, the amount of blockage when cholelithiasis is present, and whether cholecystitis is present.
     The ability to perform a laparoscopic-assisted cholecystectomy is a consideration in whether to perform surgery
     during pregnancy or to wait until the postpartum period (Celaj & Kourkoumpetis, 2021).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                            10.1 · Physiologic Changes Due to Pregnancy                                  429

Renal and Urinary System
Changes in the urinary system are in response to the anatomic and physiologic changes of pregnancy. There is a 50
percent increase in blood flow in the kidneys, dilating the renal pelvis and ureters. The glomerular filtration rate
(GFR) rises along with an increase in urine volume during pregnancy. More solutes are filtered during pregnancy
because the kidneys are now filtering waste products from both the pregnant person and the fetus. The increase in
filtration of solutes overwhelms tubular reabsorption, and low levels of glucose and protein are excreted in the
urine. The change in the GFR speeds up the excretion of drugs, and dosage adjustments must be made. For
infections, a 7 to 10-day supply of antibiotics is usually prescribed during pregnancy instead of the 5-day supply in a
person who is not pregnant. For anticonvulsants, serum levels need to be closely monitored and dosages modified,
when needed, throughout the pregnancy to prevent a recurrence of seizure activity. Table 10.5 summarizes renal
function lab changes.

Lab Test                  Nonpregnant First Trimester Second Trimester Third Trimester

BUN (mg/dL)               7-20     7-12     3-13     3-11

Serum creatinine (mg/dL)  0.6-1.1  0.4-0.7  0.4-0.8  0.4-0.9

GFR (mL/min)              90-120   131-166  135-170  117-182

Serum protein (g/dL)      6-8      6.2-7.6  5.7-6.9  5.6-6.7

TABLE 10.5 Renal Function Lab Value Changes during Pregnancy BUN, blood urea nitrogen; GFR, glomerular filtration
rate.
(Cunningham, 2018)

Everyday activities involve a lot of sitting and standing. The weight of the uterus on the relaxed vascular system of
the lower extremities causes pooling and edema, especially during the second half of the pregnancy. When the
pregnant person lies on their side, the venous return is more efficient, and the pooling and edema are relieved, but
the result is an increase in urine output, especially at night.

Bladder tone decreases, and capacity increases because of the rise in progesterone in pregnancy. Combined with
the enlargement of the renal pelvis and ureter, the decrease in bladder tone allows for stasis of urine. The result is
an increased risk for urinary tract infections during pregnancy. The increased incidence of hydronephrosis, urinary
frequency, and urgency from the pressure of the uterus on the bladder often hides the symptoms of urinary
infections during pregnancy.

The growing uterus tends to stay more toward one side of the pregnant person's abdomen, putting pressure on that
ureter and causing urine to build up in the kidney. Nurses can instruct the pregnant person to bend at the hips and
support themselves on a table or sink (Figure 10.5). This pulls the growing uterus away from the maternal back,
relieving pressure on the ureter and allowing the urine to flow into the bladder. This change in position also
straightens the spine, relieving lower back ache.

All the anatomic and physiologic adaptations of the urinary system are discussed when the nurse provides patient
education throughout the pregnancy. The education focuses on why the adaptations occur and how the pregnant
person can prevent complications. A discussion on the possible need for medication adjustments is included as
well.
430  10 · Pregnancy

     FIGURE 10.5 Bending for Relief Bending at the waist with the feet at least a foot apart draws the uterus off the ureters, allowing urine to
     flow to the bladder. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0)

     Integumentary System
     During pregnancy, changes to the hair, nails, skin, sweat glands, and sebaceous glands are due to multiple
     physiologic increases in hormone production, cortisol levels, and metabolism. Once the pregnant person has given
     birth, the changes to the integumentary system fade or disappear. The process of fading or disappearing can be
     immediate or can take 2 to 3 months.
     Hyperpigmentation
     Estrogen, progesterone, and melanocyte-stimulating hormone are responsible for hyperpigmentation changes
     during pregnancy. In addition to the areola, there is a noticeable increase in skin pigmentation in two other places.
     The first is the linea nigra, a vertical line of increased pigmentation, which starts at the pubic hair line, passes
     through the umbilicus, and goes up to the xiphoid process (Figure 10.6). The second is melasma, the mask of
     pregnancy, or hyperpigmentation on the face from the cheekbones to the forehead. Both the linea nigra and
     melasma get darker in the sun, so the nurse advises the pregnant person to wear a hat and to cover the abdomen
     when spending time in the sun. Hyperpigmentation also occurs on the nipples, perineum, and axilla.

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.1 · Physiologic Changes Due to Pregnancy                                                                                          431

FIGURE 10.6 Hyperpigmentation during Pregnancy (a) The linea nigra is a vertical line of hyperpigmentation on the midline of the
abdomen that is present during pregnancy. (b) Melasma is hyperpigmentation on the face that is present during pregnancy. (credit a:
"March 13th" by Daniel Lobo/Flickr, CC BY 2.0; credit b: "what-is-melasma" and "causes-of-melasma" by Kylie Aquino/Flickr, Public
Domain)

Striae Gravidarum
Stretch marks, or striae gravidarum, are reddish lines where the skin has stretched to accommodate the growth in
the breasts, abdomen, and buttocks during pregnancy. Estrogen, relaxin, and adrenocorticoids affect the strength of
the collagen within the skin, contributing to the formation of the striae (Figure 10.7). Applying lotions and creams to
the skin during pregnancy has not been shown to decrease the occurrence of striae gravidarum, but these products
can help to decrease itching.

FIGURE 10.7 Stretch Marks Striae gravidarum, or stretch marks, occur where the skin is stretched because of growth in the breasts,
abdomen, and buttocks during pregnancy. (credit: Saildancer/pixabay, CC 0)

Acne and Sweating
The placenta plays a role in the increased production of androgens during pregnancy. Androgens influence the
production of estrogen by the placenta (Parsons & Bouma, 2021). The increase in androgens during pregnancy
contributes to the increase in acne on the face and upper body of the pregnant person. Androgens are also
associated with oily skin and increased secretion from the sebaceous glands. Sweating and hot flushing occur more
easily during pregnancy because of the increase in metabolism of the pregnant person.
432  10 · Pregnancy

     Pruritic Urticarial Papules and Plaques of Pregnancy (PUPPP)
     The benign skin condition of pregnancy called pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP) is a
     rash made of a combination of hives, bumps, microvesicles, and plaques (Figure 10.8). PUPPP occurs most often in
     the first pregnancy. The rash starts on or near striae on the abdomen and can spread to the arms, legs, back, and
     buttocks. Lotions containing corticosteroids can help relieve the itching (American College of Obstetricians and
     Gynecologists [ACOG], 2022). The rash disappears shortly after giving birth.

     FIGURE 10.8 Pruritic Urticarial Papules and Plaques of Pregnancy PUPPP is a benign rash that occurs during pregnancy and consists of
     hives and plaques that itch constantly. (credit: "PUPPP" by Heykerriann/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

     Musculoskeletal System
     Anatomic and mechanical changes occur in the musculoskeletal system during pregnancy. To facilitate vaginal birth,
     the ligaments of the pelvic joints stretch, increasing the inside diameters of the pelvis. However, relaxation of the
     ligaments is not confined to the pelvis because of systemic distribution of the progesterone and relaxin hormones.
     Patient education regarding changes in the musculoskeletal system includes relief measures for discomforts in the
     lower back, hips, and other joints, as well as ways to prevent injury.

     Lordosis
     Because of the weight of the pregnant uterus, the pregnant person's center of gravity shifts, increasing the risk for
     falls. The posture of the pregnant person is also affected as the curvature of the spine changes and lordosis occurs
     to help correct the shift in the pregnant person's center of gravity. Lordosis (Figure 10.9) and the weight of the
     pregnant uterus lead to lower back pain, especially in the later weeks of pregnancy.

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.1 · Physiologic Changes Due to Pregnancy                                                                                               433

FIGURE 10.9 Lordosis Lordosis is a necessary anatomic adaptation of the spine in the pregnant person. (credit: modification of work from
Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0)

Role of Relaxin
During pregnancy, production of the hormone relaxin increases. Relaxin softens the ligaments in all joints in the
body, and a change in posture and gait occurs. This is why pregnant persons should be instructed not to wear shoes
with heels higher than 1 inch. Pregnant persons may also require minimal modifications to routine exercise
regimens (ACOG, 2020a). If too much relaxin is produced, the symphysis pubis can separate, causing extreme pain
and inability to walk. It takes several months after delivery for the symphysis ligaments to strengthen again.

Diastasis Recti
During pregnancy, the enlarging uterus stretches the abdominal muscles. For some pregnant persons, the stretching
is significant enough to cause the connective tissue holding the muscles on each side of the abdomen to stretch and
widen, forming a separation of the muscles, or diastasis recti (Figure 20.7). This leads to an increased risk for lower
back pain during pregnancy. It takes several months of exercise after delivery to reduce the diastasis recti.

Immune System
Immunologic adaptations during pregnancy help to prevent the pregnant person's body from rejecting the fetus.
These changes also protect the fetus from infection. The result is that the pregnant person is more susceptible to
some infections and the symptoms of some autoimmune disorders may worsen.

Endocrine System
Endocrine system adaptations are critical to maintain the health of the pregnant person, sustain the pregnancy, and
promote the growth and development of the fetus. The functions of the pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid, and adrenal
glands change as the pregnant person's metabolism increases and the fetus grows and develops. The pituitary
gland is responsible for the secretion of prolactin and oxytocin. Prolactin levels increase to promote breast
development. Oxytocin levels increase slowly throughout the pregnancy in preparation for labor. The adrenal gland
is responsible for the secretion of cortisol and aldosterone. The amount of cortisol produced by the adrenal gland
434  10 · Pregnancy

     does not increase, but the excretion of cortisol is delayed so that the serum level increases. Cortisol is necessary to
     maintain glucose levels. Aldosterone levels increase to help with fluid and electrolyte balance and blood pressure
     regulation.

     The production of insulin in the pancreas alters in response to changes in carbohydrate metabolism to support the
     pregnancy and fetus. In the first half of the pregnancy, the pancreas is able to keep up with the insulin needs of the
     pregnant person. In the second half of the pregnancy, however, the human placenta lactogen hormone starts
     exerting an insulin resistance to meet the increased glucose needs of the fetus. The pregnant person must produce
     more insulin to maintain a normal glucose. If the pancreas is unable to produce an adequate supply of insulin, a
     sustained increase in blood glucose, or diabetogenic effect, occurs. This is why the nurse informs all pregnant
     persons who do not have pregestational diabetes that they will be tested for gestational diabetes during the second
     trimester.

     Placenta Hormones
     The hormones produced by the placenta are responsible for the establishment, progression, and maintenance of a
     pregnancy. The effects of the placenta hormones promote fetal growth and development. The placenta hormones
     that play a major role during pregnancy are human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), progesterone, estrogen, human
     placental lactogen (hPL), and relaxin. The role of the placenta hormones in the physiologic adaptations of the
     pregnant person and fetal growth and development is summarized in Table 10.6. Patient education provided by the
     nurse explains the importance of the placenta hormones in supporting the pregnancy and fetal growth and
     development.

     Hormone                             Function during Pregnancy

     Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)  Maintains the corpus luteum
                                         Thickens the uterine lining
                                         Stimulates the placenta to produce estrogen and progesterone

     Human placental lactogen (hPL)      Regulates the metabolism of the pregnant person
                                         Increases glucose availability to the fetus
                                         Helps to prepare the breasts for lactation

     Estrogen                            Contributes to hyperpigmentation
                                         Stimulates vascular relaxation
                                         Helps to prepare the breasts for lactation
                                         Increases vaginal discharge
                                         Increases vascularity of the gums
                                         Increases congestion in the nose and sinuses

     Progesterone                        Prepares the uterus for implantation
                                         Supports the fertilized egg prior to implantation
                                         Contributes to hyperpigmentation
                                         Stimulates vascular relaxation
                                         Helps to prepare the breasts for lactation
                                         Slows motility in the gastrointestinal system
                                         Increases cervical mucus
                                         Decreases bladder tone

     Relaxin                             Softens the ligaments in all joints in the body
                                         Helps to decrease peripheral vascular resistance in the pregnant person
                                         Helps with cervical ripening and dilation

     TABLE 10.6 Functions of the Placenta Hormones

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.1 · Physiologic Changes Due to Pregnancy                                                                             435

Beta Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG)
Human chorionic gonadotropin is produced as soon as the embryo's trophoblast starts forming, leading to the
development of the placenta. Serum levels of hCG peak at 10 weeks of pregnancy and continue to fall throughout
the remainder of the pregnancy. The purpose of hCG is to support the pregnancy at the beginning by thickening the
uterine lining and stimulating the placenta to produce estrogen and progesterone.

Human Placental Lactogen (hPL)
Human placental lactogen gradually increases throughout the pregnancy and peaks around 34 weeks of gestation.
The purpose of hPL is to help regulate the metabolism of the pregnant person and increase the glucose available to
the fetus. Human placental lactogen also helps prepare the breasts for lactation.

Estrogen
Estrogen helps to maintain the pregnancy by supporting the uterine lining and stimulating the growth of the uterus.
Estrogen is also needed to help regulate many of the functions of the placenta. Estrogen helps to stimulate the
development of the organs of the embryo.

Progesterone
Progesterone helps to prepare the uterus for implantation and to support the fertilized egg prior to implantation.
Progesterone plays a major role in supporting the pregnancy after implantation as well. Many of the physiologic
adaptations of the pregnant person occur because of progesterone.

Nutritional Needs
Adequate nutrition and calories are needed to promote the physiologic changes of the pregnant person and to
support the pregnancy and the growth and development of the fetus. Increased intake of protein, folic acid, iron,
and calcium helps the pregnant person meet the nutritional needs of pregnancy. (See the chapter on Prenatal Care
for further discussion of nutritional needs during pregnancy.) The pregnant person requires 300 more calories per
day and a minimum of eight glasses of water to promote the physiologic changes. Table 11.6 provides more detailed
information on the nutritional needs of the pregnant person. Table 11.7 summarizes the expected trend in weight
gain as the pregnancy progresses.

Food Groups
One-half cup of vegetables, 2 ounces of grains, or 1 ounce of protein--adding any of these to the daily basic needs of
a nonpregnant person (based on age and height) will meet the daily nutritional needs of the pregnant person. The
pregnant person should follow the guidelines set by the U.S. Department of Agriculture to meet the nutritional
needs during pregnancy. The guidelines can be found at the website MyPlate.gov. If eligible for the Special
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC), a pregnant person will receive nutrition
counseling based on the guidelines.

Vitamins and Minerals
The recommended amounts of many vitamins and minerals also increase during pregnancy. In the first 8 weeks of
the pregnancy, the rapidly developing embryo is totally dependent on the nutritional status of the pregnant person
at conception and the continuing food intake throughout the pregnancy. Table 11.6 provides more detailed
information on the vitamin and mineral requirements of the pregnant person.

        LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

Age-Specific Nutritional Concerns

The diets of many teenagers in the United States have been found deficient in several micronutrients. This has been
attributed to the high intake of fast food, convenience (often microwavable) foods, and high-calorie snack foods in
the adolescent diet. The micronutrients include calcium, magnesium, iron, and vitamins D and E.

When a pregnant adolescent takes prenatal vitamins, they get sufficient iron and vitamin supplements. However, the
adolescent's calcium and magnesium intake is still inadequate. The continued deficiency of calcium may influence
fetal bone growth. Magnesium deficiency has been associated with an increased risk of miscarriage, preterm birth,
and fetal growth restriction.
436  10 · Pregnancy

     The diets of pregnant persons 35 years of age and older who live in lower income households were also found to be
     deficient in the same micronutrients. The deficiencies were associated with an increased risk of miscarriage,
     preterm birth, and fetal growth restriction as well. Diet monitoring with reinforcement of adequate nutrition in both
     populations is an important nursing action throughout pregnancy.

     Special Diets
     A vegetarian consumes limited animal protein sources of nutrition, such as dairy products, eggs, and honey. A
     pescatarian prefers to consume only fish and seafood as animal sources of proteins. Vegans do not consume animal
     food sources or any food source produced by an animal, relying on plant-based foods to meet their nutritional
     needs. A well-balanced vegetarian, pescatarian, or vegan diet can supply the pregnant person with all the nutrients
     and calories needed during pregnancy. The nurse should assess the pregnant person's current dietary intake to
     ensure that protein, calcium, iron, and vitamin B12 requirements are currently met. Patient education includes the
     following:

         · Soy, beans, lentils, and nuts are good alternative sources of protein.
         · Foods rich in vitamin C increase iron absorption.
         · Calcium-rich green leafy vegetables and tofu should be consumed.
         · A vitamin B12 supplement is essential.

     In the United States, dairy products are a major source of calcium in the diet. When a person is lactose intolerant,
     the consumption of dairy products causes bloating, abdominal cramps, gas, and diarrhea. Plant-based sources of
     calcium include two cups of kale, mustard greens, or turnip greens; three-fourths of a cup of tofu; or one and one-
     half cups of white beans. These foods have the highest bioavailability of calcium in plant-based sources commonly
     consumed in the United States. Broccoli, kidney beans, and almonds also contain a significant amount of calcium.
     The nurse first assesses the knowledge of the pregnant person who is lactose intolerant regarding plant-based
     sources of calcium and educates them as needed.

     The increase in knowledge regarding autoimmune intestinal diseases and gluten allergies has led to wider
     availability of gluten-free processed foods. However, some gluten-free foods have a higher fat and sodium content
     than gluten-containing options. Those who follow a gluten-free diet for medical reasons will be deficient in folic
     acid, vitamin B, iron, calcium, fiber, and grain servings. Vitamin and mineral supplementation becomes more
     important when balancing the needs of the pregnant person with intestinal symptoms and the needs of the
     developing fetus.

     Influence of Culture on Diet
     Certain foods are native to specific geographic areas, and others have been imported when people began trading
     and immigrating (Rasmussen et al., 2022). Children grow up eating the foods consumed by their parents and
     grandparents. The result is the development of food preferences, whether the preferences are nutritionally sound or
     increase the risk for obesity, hypertension, and diabetes. When a pregnant person completes a 72-hour nutrition
     diary, their food preferences and other dietary habits are often revealed. The nutrition diary is one way for the nurse
     to provide individualized nutritional counseling to people of a culture other than their own.

     Awareness of the nutritional values of the foods and dishes of various cultures is needed to provide comprehensive
     nutritional counseling. Table 10.7 places common foods of populations based on geographic areas into the five
     basic food groups. Many of the foods are found in the traditional dishes for that geographic area.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        10.1 · Physiologic Changes Due to Pregnancy  437

Geographic      Grains      Vegetables   Fruits         Protein       Dairy
Population                                              Sources

Native          Corn        Squash       Cranberries    Native fish   None
American        (maize)     Potatoes     Blueberries    Shellfish
                Quinoa      Tomatoes     Strawberries   Deer
                Rice                     Raspberries    Buffalo
                (Zizania)                Grapes         Acorns
                                         Pawpaws        Walnuts
                                                        Sunflowers
                                                        Beans

Mexican         Corn        Elote        Avocado        Beans         Cheese
                (maiz)      Esquites     Papaya         (frijoles)    Cow's milk
                Rice        Flautas      Mango          Eggs
                (arroz)     Tomatoes     Orange         (huevos)
                Quinoa      Tomatillos   Lime           Deer
                            Squash       Prickly pear   (ciervo)
                            Peppers                     Chicken
                            Sweet                       (pollo)
                            potatoes                    Beef (carne)
                                                        Fish (pez)
                                                        Goat
                                                        (cabrito)
                                                        Shrimp
                                                        (camarones)
                                                        Pork
                                                        (carnitas)

South           Corn        Peppers      Papaya         Fish          Soya
American        (maiz)      Potatoes     Pineapple      Beef          Cow's milk
                Rice        Pumpkin      Avocado        Chicken       Goat's milk
                (arroz)     Squash       Plantains      Eggs          Cheese
                Quinoa      Sweet        Lucuma         Pork          Yogurt
                Barley      potatoes     Passion fruit  Black beans
                (cebada)    Tomatoes     Pear (araza)   Red beans
                Wheat                    Acai berry     Cashews
                (trigo)

Southeast Asia  Rice        Lotus seeds  Rambutan       Pork          Majority of the population is
                (multiple   Banana       Papaya         Fish          lactose intolerant
                varieties)  flowers      Melon          Seafood
                            Bamboo       Chayote        Peanuts
                            shoots       Pinee
                            Taro         Mangosteen
                            Cabbage      Dragon fruit
                            Lettuce      Durian
                            Tarragon

TABLE 10.7 Common Foods Consumed by Geographic Populations Placed within the Five Food Groups
438  10 · Pregnancy

     Geographic      Grains           Vegetables     Fruits        Protein  Dairy
     Population                                                    Sources

     Indian          Barley           Potato (aloo)  Bananas       Fish     Water Buffalo milk
                     Wheat            Tomato         Lemon         Mutton   Cheese: paneer
                     Rice             (tamatar)      Lime          Buffalo  chhena
                     Millet           Okra (bhindi)  Mango         Beef
                                      Cauliflower    Muskmelon     Goat
                                      (phool gobhi)  Papaya        Poultry
                                      Taro (arbi)    Gooseberries  Pork
                                      Yams           Jackfruit
                                      Eggplant
                                      (brinjal)

     Middle Eastern  Rice             Cabbage        Cherries      Chicken  Yogurt
                     Wheat            Spinach        Figs          Mutton   Camel's milk/cheese
                     Barley           Chard          Grapes        Lamb     Goat's milk/cheese
                                      Onions         Olives
                                      Carrots        Peaches
                                      Turnips        Plums
                                      Beets          Dates
                                      Squash         Pomegranate
                                                     Watermelon

     TABLE 10.7 Common Foods Consumed by Geographic Populations Placed within the Five Food Groups

     Influence of Religious Practices on Nutrition
     Religious practices may involve fasting on holy days, forbid the ingestion of specific foods and drinks, and specify
     rituals in food preparation. When a person is pregnant or breast-feeding, the fasting requirements are waived, but
     many pregnant persons elect to fast (Seiermann et al., 2021). The pregnant person needs to understand the
     importance of balanced nutritional practices every day to meet the needs of the developing and growing fetus. Food
     and drink restrictions are taken into consideration when the nurse provides dietary suggestions. Discussing food
     preparation rituals encourages a dialog about safe handling of food.

     Pica
     One significant concern for pregnant persons is a strong craving for and consumption of a nonfood substance, called
     pica. The top three ingested substances are dirt or clay, freezer ice or ice cubes, and laundry starch or corn starch.
     When a pregnant person consumes a nonfood substance, it replaces nutritional foods. Iron deficiency anemia can
     occur when a pregnant person consumes these nonfood substances. Pica occurs worldwide, but in the United
     States, the most common populations diagnosed with pica are pregnant persons and persons with intellectual
     disabilities (Hartmann et al., 2022). The physiologic cause is unknown.

     Signs of Pregnancy

     The physiologic and anatomic changes during pregnancy are the foundation of the presumptive, probable, and
     positive signs of pregnancy. The presumptive signs of pregnancy include the subjective cues of early pregnancy. The
     probable signs of pregnancy are composed of objective cues discoverable by the health care provider. The positive
     signs of pregnancy are cues provided by the fetus. The signs of pregnancy are summarized in Table 10.8.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                        10.1 · Physiologic Changes Due to Pregnancy                                    439

Type of Sign Signs

Presumptive  Amenorrhea
             Nausea and vomiting
             Fatigue
             Urinary frequency
             Breast enlargement and tenderness
             Quickening

Probable     Chadwick sign
             Goodell sign
             Hegar sign
             Enlargement of the uterus
             Skin hyperpigmentation
             Palpation of the fetus
             Positive pregnancy test

Positive     Auscultation of the fetal heart rate
             Palpable fetal movement
             Visualization of the embryo or fetus via ultrasound

TABLE 10.8 Signs of Pregnancy

Presumptive Signs of Pregnancy
The presumptive signs of pregnancy are symptoms noticed by the patient and include fatigue, urinary frequency,
nausea and vomiting, amenorrhea, breast enlargement and tenderness, and quickening. Only quickening is unique
to pregnancy. Amenorrhea can occur because of thyroid dysfunction, stress, morbid obesity, anorexia and
malnutrition, and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). In pregnancy, amenorrhea is caused by progesterone. Nausea
and vomiting are symptoms of the flu, gastroenteritis, and intestinal blockage. Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
is the most likely cause of the nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Fatigue can be due to anemia, lack of sleep, and
cancer. Progesterone and lower blood glucose levels are associated with fatigue during pregnancy. Urinary
frequency is a symptom of a bladder infection, pyelonephritis, and interstitial cystitis. The pressure of the growing
uterus is the cause of urinary frequency in a person who is pregnant. Breast enlargement and tenderness are
associated with increased prolactin levels or a breast mass. During pregnancy, the breasts enlarge as part of
preparation for lactation. The perception of fetal movement by the pregnant person, or quickening, could be
intestinal gas or associated with diarrhea. The presumptive signs are the least reliable symptoms confirming a
pregnancy because the signs can also occur with other medical conditions.

Probable Signs of Pregnancy
Most of the probable signs of pregnancy are objective cues occurring during pregnancy. These signs are noticed by
the provider and include Chadwick sign, Goodell sign, Hegar sign, enlargement of the uterus, skin
hyperpigmentation, and palpation of the fetus. Chadwick sign is the bluish discoloration of the vagina and cervix
due to the vasocongestion needed to support the growing uterus during pregnancy. Persons with endometriosis and
adenomyosis will also exhibit Chadwick sign. Goodell sign is the softening of the cervix and vagina and the increase
in vaginal mucus discharge during pregnancy. Hegar sign is the softening of the lower uterine segment during
pregnancy. Connective tissue disorders can cause the cervix and lower uterine segment to soften.

Enlargement of the uterus is expected during pregnancy. Uterine leiomyomas will also cause the uterus to enlarge.
Skin hyperpigmentation occurs on the face, abdomen, axilla, areola, and nipples during pregnancy and is caused by
the increase in estrogen, progesterone, and melanocyte-stimulating hormone.

It should be noted that conditions other than pregnancy can cause symptoms similar to those of pregnancy. Obesity
and gynecologic conditions can cause hyperpigmentation. Uterine fibroids could be mistaken for palpation of a
fetus. A positive or negative pregnancy test may be inaccurate or caused by a medical condition (such as ovarian
cancer or pituitary disease).
440  10 · Pregnancy

     Positive Signs of Pregnancy
     The positive signs of pregnancy directly confirm a person is pregnant and include auscultation of the fetal heart
     rate, palpable fetal movement by the examiner, and visualization of the embryo or fetus via ultrasound. Fetal heart
     tones (FHT) can be heard by Doppler as early as 10 weeks of gestation. Fetal movement can be felt when palpating
     the uterus. An ultrasound can confirm cardiac activity and the size and location of the embryo or fetus.

             LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

     Human Trafficking

     Human trafficking is just one area of abuse and neglect, and its incidence in the United States is growing. The
     market for newborns encourages trafficking of persons who could become or already are pregnant. Because nurses
     spend more time with patients, awareness of the signs of human trafficking is imperative to identify a victim. The
     signs include (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2022):

         · Sudden or extreme change in behavior
         · Signs of physical abuse noted
         · Poor or inconsistent keeping of prenatal appointments
         · Submissive actions when responding to questions
         · Always in the company of someone in control
         · Homeless appearance
         · Bound by precise rules
         · Lack of support of family and friends

     There are no mandatory reporting laws for human trafficking unless the person is a child. Human trafficking of
     children falls under abuse and neglect, and health care providers are mandated by laws in every state to report
     suspected abuse and neglect of children.

     Mail order brides can be a source of human trafficking that is often not recognized (Branagan, 2019). The potential
     bride is sold into domestic slavery or prostitution, rather than the expected marriage. There are thousands of
     marriage agencies linked to human trafficking.

     Anti-Trafficking International sponsors a summer intern program to train persons interested in educating others and
     preventing human trafficking (Anti-Trafficking International, 2023). The focus is on education and prevention within
     the community. The tools provided to those attending the intern program are aimed to increase awareness and
     interception of human trafficking.

     To report suspected human trafficking, call the National Human Trafficking Hotline: 888-373-7888.

     10.2 Psychosocial Aspects of Pregnancy

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain psychosocial adaptations of the pregnant person and tasks during pregnancy
         · Explain partner adaptations during pregnancy
         · Explain sibling adaptations during pregnancy
         · Explain extended family adaptations during pregnancy

     Psychosocial adaptation to pregnancy involves many variables related to societal, family, personal, and cultural role
     expectations of the pregnant person and parenting. The adaptations start when the pregnancy is confirmed and are
     modified again when the pregnant person announces the pregnancy to family and society. Nursing care is centered
     on respect for the pregnant person's needs, choices, preferences, beliefs, and values.

     Psychosocial Adaptation to Pregnancy

     Pregnancy initiates changes in a person's social and family standing as the pregnant person faces new role and
     lifestyle expectations. The role of the birthing parent is expected to provide intense satisfaction and emotional
     fulfillment along with multiple societal and cultural expectations. The pregnant person's acceptance of the role of

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.2 · Psychosocial Aspects of Pregnancy                                                                                 441

the birthing parent is dependent on their feelings and attitudes toward these presumptions.

Reactions to Pregnancy
When a person is aware they are pregnant, several reactions can occur. Ambivalence is expected in the beginning of
the pregnancy as the pregnant person goes from excitement about the new baby to concerns about finances and
what effect(s) the baby is going to have on their lifestyle. A previous loss may also induce fear.

When a person first finds out they are pregnant and as they prepare for birth, the pregnant person may also be
introverted. The actions of the introverted pregnant person focus on their own needs as they adapt to the
physiologic changes of pregnancy and the growth and development of the fetus. The pregnant person's introverted
actions support a healthy pregnancy but often leave out the support system. For example, pregnancy increases
fatigue, and the person may prefer to nap rather than socialize with others in the household. Acceptance of the
pregnancy is usually apparent by the time the pregnant person feels the fetus move, around 16 to 20 weeks of
gestation. Once fetal movement occurs, the pregnancy is validated, and the fetus is real.

Changes in the pregnant person's body image occur throughout the pregnancy as the fetus grows and the pregnancy
is maintained. The interpretation of the changes by the pregnant person fluctuate from feeling beautiful to feeling
uncomfortable and awkward. Mood swings are also common during pregnancy. Occasionally the mood swings may
be difficult for the pregnant person, the partner, and the family to understand. It is important for the nurse to
communicate the normality of the variety of reactions to pregnancy when providing prenatal education and to
inform the health care provider if the mood swings are extreme.

Developmental Tasks of Pregnancy
The research of Reva Rubin (1984) determined several psychosocial developmental tasks the pregnant person goes
through to adapt to the pregnancy and the fetus, and to accept their new role as parent. The first developmental
task of pregnancy is for the pregnant person to ensure safe passage of themselves and the fetus through the
pregnancy, for example, by eating a balanced diet. The second task is acceptance of the pregnancy, the fetus as a
member of the family, and the fetus as an individual. This can be demonstrated when announcing the pregnancy to
family and friends. The third task is for the pregnant person to accept they are going to be a parent to the person
growing in their uterus. Setting up the nursery demonstrates the third task. The fourth and final developmental task
of pregnancy is for the pregnant person to accept that becoming a parent will involve putting the child first and
meeting the expectations of a good parent. Going to an infant care class demonstrates the fourth task.

Factors Influencing the Pregnant Person's Adaptation
Factors influencing the pregnant person's psychosocial adaptation to their pregnancy are many and include their
age, whether the pregnancy was intended, and body image. Who the other biological parent is, the relationship the
pregnant person has with the other biological parent, and family support also affect psychologic adaptation to the
pregnancy. The household environment and financial stability influence the psychologic adaptation to the pregnancy
as well.

Age
Age is the first factor affecting a person's adaptation to pregnancy. Adolescents are still trying to find their own
sense of self. An adolescent who becomes pregnant is faced with extra developmental tasks as they face becoming
a parent. Younger adolescents tend to hide their pregnancy, do not actively seek prenatal care, and often are unable
to plan for the changes and developmental tasks of pregnancy and parenting. Many adolescents who become
pregnant still live in their childhood household and face dual roles as dependents of their parents and as parents
themselves. The other biological parent of the adolescent's baby often provides minimal support or is absent,
negatively affecting the pregnant adolescent's adaptation to both the pregnancy and their upcoming role as parent.

The person who delays parenting until their career, relationships, and lifestyle are established is often in their late
30s or over 40 when they become pregnant. Infertility is also a cause of parenting after 35. The pregnancy is often
planned in this age group, and the person is highly motivated to seek information on pregnancy and parenting. The
most difficult developmental task of pregnancy for persons who are over 35 years of age and pregnant is adapting to
their upcoming role of parent. The difficulty in adapting to their new role is associated with work and parenting
stress and time conflicts (Nomaguchi & Milkie, 2020).
442  10 · Pregnancy

     Pregnancy Plan
     In the United States, the percentage of unplanned pregnancies is around 45 percent, with the highest incidence in
     pregnant persons who are low income or less than 100 percent of the poverty level (Guttmacher Institute, 2019). An
     unplanned or unintended pregnancy not accepted by the pregnant person is linked with psychologic stress during
     the pregnancy, postpartum depression, and lack of bonding with the newborn. Not bonding with the newborn
     negatively affects the psychosocial development of the child (Joas & Mohler, 2021).

     Even a planned pregnancy may cause stress on the pregnant person and their partner. (Bjelica et al., 2018). The
     stress may be psychosocial or physiologic. Psychosocial stress can be related to the pregnant person's career,
     finances, and integrating the newborn into the family structure. Physiologic stress is related to the pregnant person's
     age, pre-existing medical conditions, or pregnancy spacing.

     Perception of Body Image
     A pregnant person's acceptance of the changes in their physical appearance is linked to psychosocial adaptation to
     the pregnancy (Przybyla-Basista et al., 2020). A negative perception of a person's body image during pregnancy is
     linked with depression during the pregnancy. As with nonacceptance of an unintended pregnancy, depression during
     the pregnancy is associated with a higher risk of poor psychosocial development in the child.

     Partner Support
     Strong support by the pregnant person's partner during pregnancy is associated with higher psychosocial adaptation
     to the pregnancy. Research indicates the stronger the support system surrounding the pregnant person, the more
     successful the pregnant person is at achieving all the developmental tasks of pregnancy and adapting to parenting
     (Atif et al., 2023). With the changes in the structure of families today, the person supporting the pregnant person is
     not always the other biological parent of the fetus.

     Economics
     The income of the household and the physical environment in which the pregnant person lives also influence the
     psychosocial adaptation to pregnancy (Eick et al., 2020). Low income and poor living conditions increase stress
     during pregnancy and decrease the psychosocial adaptation of the pregnant person. It is difficult for the pregnant
     person to focus on prenatal care or take time off from work for appointments when they are worried about their next
     meal or if the electricity is going to be turned off.

     Incarceration
     Incarceration of the pregnant person or their support partner has a negative impact on the psychosocial adaptation
     of the pregnant person (Sapkota et al., 2022). Financial stress and lack of support occur when the partner of the
     pregnant person is incarcerated. When the person who is incarcerated is pregnant, psychosocial adaptation to the
     pregnancy is hindered by a loss of control and power. The inability to obtain consistent prenatal care and adequate
     nutrition, along with the lack of a support system, hinders the pregnant person's ability to achieve the
     developmental tasks of pregnancy while incarcerated. Prisons are working to provide better care for pregnant and
     postpartum persons (as required by the Eighth Amendment of the Constitution). Prison nursery programs are
     becoming more common (Dodson et al., 2019).

     Intimate Partner Violence
     Pregnancy is a trigger for intimate partner violence (IPV) to begin or worsen in some relationships. The number of
     perinatal deaths (by homicide or suicide) of pregnant persons who are victims of IPV is higher than the rate of
     perinatal death of pregnant persons who experience preeclampsia and gestational diabetes combined (Modest et
     al., 2022). Nursing care in the prenatal period now includes screening for IPV more than once during the pregnancy
     and each time a pregnant person is triaged or admitted to a hospital. Developing a trusting relationship with the
     pregnant person aids in asking these personal questions.

     Military Service
     Active military personnel who are pregnant can be deployed in noncombat roles. Deployment separates the
     pregnant person from their family, changing the support system and increasing stress. When the pregnant person's
     partner is deployed, the support system changes as well. If the pregnant person lives on base, community support
     may substitute for the geographic absence of the partner and other family support and may increase acceptance of
     the pregnancy. This substitution has a positive effect on the psychosocial adaptation to the pregnancy.

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.2 · Psychosocial Aspects of Pregnancy                                                                                 443

Nursing Assessment of Psychosocial Adaptations to Pregnancy
The expected emotional lability of pregnancy often hides poor psychosocial adaptation to pregnancy. The perinatal
period is associated with a higher risk of a new diagnosis of psychiatric illness, especially anxiety and depression
(ACOG, 2018). The nurse needs to be vigilant in assessing the pregnant person at each prenatal visit for signs of
stress. Several screening tools are available for the nurse to complete at various weeks in the pregnancy. The
Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) and Prenatal Psychosocial Profile (PPP) are two screening tools. The content of the
tools focuses on self-esteem, history of psychiatric counseling, feelings about the pregnancy, family violence, and
partner and family support during the pregnancy (Solivan et al., 2015).

Nursing Assessment of Cultural Influences on Pregnancy
The culture of the pregnant person influences their acceptance of and adaptation to the pregnancy. Cultural beliefs
and practices related to pregnancy encompass role expectations of the pregnant person and their support
person(s); dietary preferences and restrictions; health promotion practices; religious preferences; and pregnancy,
labor, and birth practices. When gathering cultural data on the pregnant person, the nurse should respect the
pregnant person's beliefs, values, and behaviors. Other actions by the nurse demonstrating cultural awareness
include listening to the pregnant person, providing nonjudgmental care within an environment of trust, discovering
religious and spiritual influences on pregnancy and birth expectations, and understanding the pregnant person's
family dynamics.

Partner Adaptation to Pregnancy

The partner of a pregnant person also goes through a series of developmental tasks (Atif et al., 2023). When the
pregnancy is first announced, the partner may be enthusiastic. Congratulations are received and acknowledged, and
there is an atmosphere of celebration. As the weeks of the pregnancy go by, the partner may become less interested
in the pregnancy and may not appear to place the pregnant person first. The pregnant person interprets the
partner's lack of interest as a form of rejection. As the due date approaches, the partner becomes focused on the
pregnancy again and begins to plan for the upcoming birth.

Factors influencing the partner's adaptation to the pregnancy include the perceived closeness of the relationship
with the pregnant person. If the partner feels secure in the relationship, the partner adapts to the pregnancy and
their upcoming role as parent. The final result is that the partner and the pregnant person are more sensitive to their
newborn (Atif et al., 2023).

Partners may also exhibit couvade syndrome and take on the symptoms associated with pregnancy. There is no
physiologic explanation for the symptoms (Mrayan et al., 2019). Common symptoms exhibited include nausea,
fatigue, weight gain, and indigestion.

There may be times when the biological parent does not accept the pregnancy. Lack of acceptance is associated
with decreased or no support provided to the pregnant person (Atif et al., 2023). The nurse needs to investigate if
other support persons are present for the pregnant person and provide referrals for counseling when indicated.

Sibling Adaptation to Pregnancy

Sibling adaptation to the pregnancy and upcoming birth is dependent on the age of the child and the child's
perception of the impact the new member of the family will have on them (Daciolu, 2018). If the sibling feels as if
they are being replaced, the pregnant person and other members of the household need to be aware. When
appropriate, the nurse should assess the pregnant person's inclusion of the sibling in the preparation for the
newborn. Sibling participation in a prenatal class or tour is one way to promote sibling adaptation. The nurse can
provide guidance on prevention of sibling regression or aggression by emphasizing the importance of a loving and
nurturing environment within the home. An example would be to discourage parents from taking toys from the older
child to give to the new baby.

Extended Family Adaptation to Pregnancy

The extended family of the pregnant person can consist of people who live in the same household, people related by
blood (such as grandparents, siblings, and cousins), friends, and support persons of the pregnant person. Each
extended family member will be affected by the addition of the newborn and needs to prepare for changes. The
nurse can assist the extended family members' adaptation by assessing their knowledge of newborn care and their
444  10 · Pregnancy

     expectations of their role in assisting the pregnant person in caring for the newborn. Preparation is important in
     acceptance of the newborn, and nurses can encourage and educate the extended family in supporting the growth
     and development of the family as they adapt to this new person.

     10.3 Common Discomforts of Pregnancy

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Educate the pregnant person on the causes of and relief measures for the common discomforts of
             pregnancy

         · Discuss priority actions of the pregnant person promoting self-care during pregnancy

     A pregnant person experiences physical discomforts throughout the pregnancy. The common discomforts of
     pregnancy are symptoms that are due to the physiologic and anatomic changes of pregnancy and include
     gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, integumentary, and musculoskeletal manifestations. Each pregnant person
     experiences the common discomforts at various frequencies. Patient education throughout the pregnancy includes
     a discussion on the discomforts, their physiologic or anatomic cause, when the discomfort is most likely to occur,
     and relief measures.

     Self-care during pregnancy includes health promotion practices that help to prevent complications. Self-care
     practices also provide relief from the common discomforts of pregnancy. Regular exercise, good hygiene,
     comfortable clothing, adequate sleep and rest, employment accommodations, and recommended immunizations
     are self-care practices included in the patient education provided by nurses throughout the pregnancy.

     Physiologic Causes and Relief Measures

     The common discomforts occurring during pregnancy are not confined to one body system or a specific week of
     gestation. Relief measures for these discomforts are most often nonpharmacologic self-care actions easily
     performed by the pregnant person. When these actions are not effective, pharmacologic relief measures may be
     prescribed.

     Nausea and Vomiting
     Nausea and vomiting, commonly called morning sickness, are expected discomforts most frequently experienced
     starting around weeks 4 to 6 of gestation and fading away by 16 weeks of gestation. Nausea and vomiting are linked
     to the changes in motility within the digestive system and the higher serum levels of estrogen, progesterone, and
     hCG in the first part of the pregnancy.

     Patient education to relieve nausea and vomiting includes eating small, frequent snacks every 1 to 2 hours while
     awake and not drinking fluids immediately before, during, or after eating. Ginger tea, ginger ale, and lemonade have
     proved effective in relieving nausea. Consuming dry toast, saltine crackers, or cold pasta and avoiding greasy or
     spicy foods have also been found to decrease the severity of nausea and vomiting in some pregnant persons.
     Sometimes the pregnant person has to find their own pattern of eating and specific foods to eat to find relief from
     the nausea and vomiting. Additional nonpharmacologic measures include increasing vitamin B6, using acupressure
     wrist bands, or taking prenatal vitamins at night.

     Pharmacologic measures are prescribed to treat severe vomiting to prevent dehydration and weight loss. The most
     commonly prescribed antiemetics during pregnancy are pyridoxine and doxylamine (Diclegis, Bonjesta),
     ondansetron (Zofran), and promethazine (Phenergan). When to take an antiemetic is included in the patient
     education provided by the nurse.

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     Medications for Nausea and Vomiting during Pregnancy

     Several medications are routinely prescribed to treat nausea and vomiting during pregnancy when
     nonpharmacologic measures are not effective. Each of the medications blocks chemicals in the brain to decrease
     the nausea and vomiting experienced during pregnancy. Ondansetron and promethazine are also prescribed to treat

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.3 · Common Discomforts of Pregnancy                                                                                445

hyperemesis gravidarum.

Pyridoxine and doxylamine (Diclegis)

    · Classification: combination of vitamin B6 and an antihistamine; antiemetic
    · Route/Dosage: two tablets by mouth at bedtime on an empty stomach
    · Indications: nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
    · Mechanism of Action: Decrease in vitamin B6 has been linked with nausea, and the antihistamine dulls the

        motion sensor in the inner ear, decreasing nausea and vomiting
    · Contraindications: patients currently taking a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI); allergy to any of the

        ingredients
    · Side Effects: dry mouth and throat, headache, dizziness, drowsiness, muscle weakness
    · Adverse Effects: vision problems, tachycardia, confusion
    · Nursing Actions: monitor patient's weight, blood pressure (BP), and pulse and for other signs and symptoms

        of dehydration
    · Patient/Family Education: take the medication at night if only prescribed once a day; take the medication on

        time when prescribed more than one dose per day and schedule the doses 1 hour before or 2 hours after a
        meal

Ondansetron (Zofran)

    · Classification: antiemetic; selective 5-HT3 antagonist
    · Route/Dosage: 4-8 mg by mouth, intramuscular (IM), and IV every 4-8 hours
    · Indications: nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
    · Contraindications: known allergy to any ingredient in the tablet, prolonged QT interval, serotonin syndrome
    · Mechanism of Action: blocks the action of serotonin to prevent nausea
    · Side Effects: drowsiness, fatigue, diarrhea, constipation
    · Adverse Effects: blurred vision, fainting, agitation, hallucinations
    · Nursing Actions: monitor patient's weight, BP, and pulse and for other signs and symptoms of dehydration
    · Patient/Family Education: take the medication on time as prescribed and schedule the doses 1 hour before

        or 2 hours after a meal.

Promethazine (Phenergan, Avomine, Sominex)

    · Classification: antiemetic; phenothiazine; antihistamine
    · Route/Dosage: 12.5-25 mg by mouth, per rectum, IM, and IV every 6 hours as needed
    · Indications: nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
    · Mechanism of Action: blocks antihistamine
    · Contraindications: known allergy to promethazine, bone marrow suppression
    · Side Effects: drowsiness, dizziness, itching
    · Adverse Effects: anaphylaxis, seizures, nightmares, hallucinations
    · Nursing Actions: monitor patient's weight, BP, and pulse and for other signs and symptoms of dehydration
    · Patient/Family Education: take the medication on time when prescribed more than one dose per day and

        schedule the doses 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal; rectal suppositories can be inserted as prescribed
        regardless of when meals are consumed

Heartburn and GERD
Heartburn, also known as dyspepsia, is due to the increase in progesterone. This hormone supports the pregnancy
and also causes relaxation of the cardiac sphincter and slows the emptying of the stomach. Heartburn is
experienced most often in the second half of pregnancy and increases in severity in the final weeks because of the
enlarged uterus. Heartburn can evolve into gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).

Heartburn can be relieved by remaining upright after eating and not eating for up to 2 hours before lying down to
sleep. Heartburn can be lessened by not wearing tight clothes around the waist and by eating slowly, eating smaller
portions, and eating foods lower in fat and spices. Some pregnant persons find that drinking a glass of milk
decreases the burning sensation of heartburn, and some find that drinking an entire glass of water aggravates
heartburn.
446  10 · Pregnancy

     Pharmacologic measures to treat heartburn are antacid tablets containing calcium or those containing a
     combination of magnesium and aluminum. Antacids should be taken with meals or immediately after a meal for best
     effectiveness. Antacids should not be taken with iron supplements because the absorption of iron is decreased. For
     more severe heartburn and GERD, a histamine 2 blocker, such as famotidine (Pepcid), or a proton pump inhibitor,
     such as omeprazole (Prilosec), can be taken at the recommendation of the health care provider. These medications
     can all be purchased over the counter.

     Constipation
     Constipation during pregnancy is caused by the decrease in gastric motility due to the increase in progesterone. The
     slowing of the intestines allows more nutrients and water to be absorbed to support the pregnancy and the growth
     and development of the fetus. The increase in water absorption results in firmer stools that are more difficult to
     evacuate. The calcium and iron in prenatal vitamins add to the development of hard stools as well.

     Prevention of constipation is important during pregnancy. Increasing water intake to eight glasses each day and
     increasing dietary fiber by including cereals with bran, whole grain breads, and fresh fruits and vegetables are
     preventive measures for constipation. Other dietary changes to prevent constipation include decreasing the intake
     of refined sugars and cheese. Exercising regularly also decreases constipation. During pregnancy, exercise can be as
     simple as walking a mile or swimming for 30 minutes four or five times a week. Yoga routines offer another way to
     exercise during pregnancy.

     Pharmacologic measures to treat constipation start with adding psyllium (Metamucil) to a glass of juice or water and
     drinking it. Stool softeners (Dulcolax, MiraLAX) add water back into the stool to ease evacuation. Stimulant laxatives,
     those that increase gastric motility, are not recommended during pregnancy. All these medications are available
     over the counter and are taken after a discussion with the health care provider.

     Hemorrhoids
     Hemorrhoids occurring during pregnancy are caused by a combination of the increase in progesterone and the
     weight of the growing uterus. Progesterone relaxes the veins in the rectum, and the weight of the uterus causes
     more vasodilation. Hemorrhoids are more common during pregnancy if the pregnant person is constipated or has a
     low fiber intake. Prevention of hemorrhoids is key. Increasing consumption of foods high in fiber and increasing
     water intake help to prevent hemorrhoids during pregnancy. Increase in movement by walking more and sitting less
     also plays a role in the prevention of hemorrhoids.

     Pharmacologic treatment of hemorrhoids includes application of witch hazel, an astringent. Products with a
     combination of phenylephrine, glycerin, and petroleum (Preparation H), or a combination of hydrocortisone and
     bismuth ointment (Anusol), are also recommended. These products decrease the swelling of the rectal tissue and
     are also available over the counter and taken based on the recommendation of the health care provider.

     Fatigue
     Fatigue is caused by the increased metabolic demands the pregnancy places on the pregnant person's body and the
     production of progesterone and relaxin. Fatigue tends to occur with more frequency during the early weeks and the
     final weeks of the pregnancy. The early weeks are the period of most rapid growth of the fetus and uterus. In the
     final weeks, fatigue is the result of difficulty sleeping and the physiologic adaptations of the body to pregnancy.

     Dizziness and Syncope
     Occasional dizziness is expected during pregnancy and is linked to vasodilation of the blood vessels resulting from
     the decrease in peripheral vascular resistance caused by the increase in progesterone and relaxin hormones. This
     process can cause a drop in blood pressure or orthostatic hypotension. Dizziness can be prevented by staying
     hydrated, rising from bed slowly, and not making any sudden moves. Dizziness can also occur with low blood
     glucose, so instructing a patient to eat at regular times and to have a snack if needed will prevent a drop in the blood
     glucose level. A third cause of dizziness is anemia. Taking prenatal vitamins and consuming foods high in iron are
     important points for the nurse to include in the education of the pregnant person.

     Syncope can also occur owing to vasodilation, low blood glucose levels, and anemia. Staying hydrated, eating at
     regular intervals, and having adequate intake of iron-rich foods often prevent both dizziness and syncope. Syncope
     can also be linked to impaired cardiac function. Once the pregnant person has been evaluated for adequate
     hydration, adequate food intake, and anemia, the nurse needs to assess the patient for a possible cardiac problem,

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.3 · Common Discomforts of Pregnancy                                                                                                   447

such as transient tachycardia of pregnancy or preexisting cardiac disease.

Vena Cava Syndrome
The enlarging uterus places pressure on the vena cava starting around 28 weeks of gestation. This pressure can
cause vena cava syndrome, which involves the pregnant person feeling dizzy, weak, and sometimes nauseated
when lying flat on their back. The pressure decreases blood flow back to the heart (Figure 10.10). It is important for
the nurse to instruct the pregnant person to lie down in a lateral position rather than flat on their back once they
reach 28 weeks of gestation.

FIGURE 10.10 Vena Cava Syndrome Pregnant persons should avoid lying flat on their back to prevent vena cava syndrome, or
compression of the vena cava. When the vena cava is compressed by the enlarging uterus, blood flow back to the heart is slowed, causing
the pregnant person to feel dizzy, weak, and sometimes nauseated. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0)

Insomnia
Insomnia during pregnancy is due to the surge in estrogen and progesterone in early pregnancy and the common
discomforts of leg cramps, back pain, and nocturia. Later in pregnancy, fetal activity may cause insomnia as the due
date approaches. Developing and maintaining a daily schedule is important to sleeping well. Not drinking any fluids
2 hours before bedtime and having a consistent bedtime also help a pregnant person to sleep better. Relaxation
techniques performed while lying in bed help the pregnant person to fall asleep more easily. (See further discussion
on this topic in Chapter 17 Pain Management During Labor and Birth.) Chamomile tea is often used to relax and fall
asleep. Pharmacologic measures include melatonin, an over-the-counter sleep aid.

Breast Tenderness
Breast tenderness is due to the increase in estrogen during pregnancy, stimulating the milk ducts and glands to
increase in both number and size. Many pregnant persons need to wear a good-fitting bra when awake and asleep to
decrease breast tenderness. As the pregnancy progresses, it will be necessary to purchase new bras as the breasts
enlarge.

Shortness of Breath
Shortness of breath and dyspnea are caused by a rise in progesterone, estrogen, and prostaglandin. The increase in
these hormones leads to lung tissue congestion. The diaphragm rises as much as 4 cm, and the rib cage diameter
expands as much as 6 cm as the enlarged uterus pushes the intestines into the rib cage. Maintaining good posture
and sleeping with several pillows can assist in making breathing easier.

Lower Back Discomfort
Lower back discomfort occurs because of anatomic and physiologic changes during pregnancy. Progesterone and
relaxin cause the ligaments to become more elastic, and the weight of the growing uterus causes an increase in the
curvature of the spine. Education to relieve lower back discomfort includes instructions on how to perform the pelvic
rock, advice to wear low-heeled shoes, and information on the use of a maternity belt (Figure 10.11).
448  10 · Pregnancy

     FIGURE 10.11 Support during Pregnancy A pregnancy belt lifts the uterus, provides support to the lower uterus and back, and decreases
     lower back discomfort, urinary frequency, and vulvar edema. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0)

     Urinary Frequency
     The pressure of the enlarging uterus on the bladder causes urinary frequency throughout pregnancy. Although
     restricting caffeine intake during pregnancy to 200 mg per day is recommended (ACOG, 2020b), further limiting or
     omitting caffeine can decrease urinary frequency. To prevent nocturia, pregnant persons can decrease their fluid
     intake 2 hours before bedtime. It is important for the nurse to make sure the urinary frequency is not due to the
     presence of a urinary tract infection.

     Itching
     Itching during pregnancy has been attributed to the increased blood supply to the skin and stretching of the skin
     due to the growing uterus. Patient education includes taking cool baths, using unscented lotions or oils on the skin,
     and avoiding scratching to prevent skin breakdown. Itching can also be a sign of cholestasis or liver disease and
     needs to be investigated.

     Headache
     Headaches during pregnancy are attributed to dehydration, low blood glucose, and difficulty sleeping. Estrogen
     production may also play a role in the occurrence of headaches. Patient education by the nurse includes instructions
     to the pregnant person to keep hydrated, eat regular meals and snacks, and maintain a regular routine and bedtime.
     The sudden onset of a severe headache can be a medical emergency, and the nurse needs to advise the pregnant
     person to be evaluated immediately (Mayo Clinic, 2022).

     Edema
     Dependent edema is common in late pregnancy. Edema is caused by the decreased peripheral vascular resistance
     produced by estrogen and progesterone and the pressure of the enlarged uterus on the lower extremities. The
     teaching includes instructing the pregnant person to wear loose clothing, use a maternity belt, avoid prolonged
     standing or sitting, elevate their legs when sitting, and minimize salt intake. Compression socks or stockings can
     also be recommended. Edema can also be a sign of preeclampsia, especially if the edema is generalized.

     Varicosities
     Varicosities occur during pregnancy because of the decreased peripheral vascular resistance in the lower
     extremities and the pressure of the enlarged uterus on the perineum. Education includes instructing the pregnant
     person to avoid prolonged standing or sitting and to elevate their legs when sitting. The use of support hose or a
     maternity belt can also help decrease the severity of varicose veins.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         10.3 · Common Discomforts of Pregnancy         449

Leg Cramps
Leg cramps can be due to too much or too little calcium, potassium, or magnesium in the diet. Leg cramps can be
relieved by dorsiflexing the foot and massaging the affected muscle. Regular exercise and a nutritionally sound diet
can prevent leg cramps.

Round Ligament Pain
The round ligaments attach the uterus to the pelvis. As the uterus grows out of the pelvis and into the abdomen,
stretching of the round ligaments occurs. The stretching causes the pregnant person to feel pain in the right or left
lower quadrant. Round ligament pain is most often experienced by the pregnant person between 14 and 27 weeks
of gestation. Round ligament pain can be relieved by warm compresses and baths, lying on the side with knees
drawn up toward the abdomen, and using a maternity belt. It is important for the nurse to determine that the cause
of the pain is due to the stretching of the round ligament and not appendicitis or another medical condition.

Braxton Hicks Contractions
As discussed earlier in this chapter, Braxton Hicks contractions are spontaneous, painless uterine contractions that
occur throughout the pregnancy. Braxton Hicks contractions normally have no effect on the cervix until the final
weeks of the pregnancy when the progesterone levels drop and the oxytocin level increases. Dehydration can
increase the frequency and intensity of Braxton Hicks contractions, especially in the final weeks of the pregnancy.
Maintaining an adequate fluid intake can decrease the discomfort and frequency of Braxton Hicks contractions. A
maternity belt can help support the uterus and lift the fetus in the lower uterine segment, decreasing the discomfort
and frequency of the Braxton Hicks contractions. Table 10.9 summarizes the common discomforts of pregnancy,
their causes, and relief measures.

Common        Cause                                                      Relief Measures
Discomfort

Nausea and    Digestive changes in motility and higher levels of         Eat small, frequent snacks every 1-2
vomiting      estrogen, progesterone, and hCG in the first part          hours; do not drink fluids immediately
              of the pregnancy                                           before, during, or after eating; drink ginger
                                                                         tea and lemonade; eat dry toast, saltine
                                                                         crackers, and cold pasta

Heartburn     Increase in progesterone causes relaxation of the          Drink a glass of milk before lying down to
and GERD      cardiac sphincter; slower emptying of the stomach          sleep; do not wear tight clothes around the
                                                                         waist; eat smaller portions slowly; eat
                                                                         foods lower in fat and spices; remain
                                                                         upright after eating; do not eat for up to 2
                                                                         hours before bedtime

Constipation  Increase in progesterone causes a decrease in              Increase water intake to eight glasses
              gastric motility                                           each day; increase fiber intake; decrease
                                                                         the intake of refined sugars and cheese;
                                                                         exercise regularly: walking 30 minutes or
                                                                         yoga 5 days a week

Hemorrhoids   Progesterone relaxes the veins in the rectum, and          Increase consumption of foods high in
              the weight of the uterus causes more vasodilation          fiber; increase water intake; increase
                                                                         movement by walking more and sitting
                                                                         less

TABLE 10.9 Common Discomforts of Pregnancy, Causes, and Relief Measures
450  10 · Pregnancy

     Common          Cause                                                    Relief Measures
     Discomfort

     Fatigue         Increased metabolic demands the pregnancy                Rest and exercise
                     places on the pregnant person's body; production
                     of progesterone and relaxin; increased energy
                     needed during the most rapid growth of the fetus
                     and uterus in the beginning weeks; result of
                     difficulty sleeping during the final weeks of
                     pregnancy

     Dizziness       Vasodilation of the blood vessels due to the             Stay hydrated; rise from bed slowly; do not
     and syncope     decrease in peripheral vascular resistance caused        make any sudden moves; eat at regular
                     by the increase in progesterone and relaxin; low         times, snack if needed; take prenatal
                     blood glucose; anemia; impaired cardiac function         vitamins and consume foods high in iron

     Vena cava       The pregnant person starts feeling dizzy, weak,          Lie down in a lateral position rather than
     syndrome        and sometimes nauseated when lying flat on their         flat on the back after 28 weeks of
                     back because of the pressure the enlarging uterus        gestation
                     places on the vena cava starting around 28 weeks
                     of gestation

     Insomnia        Due to the surge in estrogen and progesterone in         Develop and maintain a daily schedule; do
                     early pregnancy and the common discomforts of            not drink any fluids 2 hours before
                     leg cramps, back pain, and nocturia, and fetal           bedtime; have a consistent bedtime;
                     activity later in the pregnancy                          perform relaxation techniques at bedtime;
                                                                              drink chamomile tea; avoid TV and phone
                                                                              use at least 30 minutes before lying down
                                                                              at night

     Breast          Increase in estrogen during pregnancy,                   Wear a good-fitting bra when awake and
     tenderness      stimulating the milk ducts and glands to increase        asleep; purchase new bras as the breasts
                     in both number and size                                  enlarge

     Shortness of    Rise in progesterone, estrogen, and prostaglandin        Maintain good posture; sleep with several
     breath          production leads to lung tissue congestion;              pillows
                     diaphragm rises up to 4 cm and the rib cage
                     diameter enlarges up to 6 cm

     Lower back      Progesterone and relaxin make the ligaments              Maintain good posture; perform the pelvic
     discomfort      become more elastic; weight of the growing               rock exercise; wear low-heeled shoes;
                     uterus causes an increase in the curvature of the        wear a maternity belt
                     spine

     Urinary         Pressure of the enlarging uterus on the bladder          Decrease fluid intake 2 hours before
     frequency                                                                bedtime; limit caffeine

     Itching         Increased blood supply to the skin; stretching of        Take cool baths; use unscented lotions or
                     the skin due to the growing uterus                       oils

     TABLE 10.9 Common Discomforts of Pregnancy, Causes, and Relief Measures

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         10.3 · Common Discomforts of Pregnancy         451

Common        Cause                                                      Relief Measures
Discomfort

Headache      Dehydration; low blood glucose; insomnia                   Keep hydrated; eat regular meals and
                                                                         snacks; establish a regular routine and
                                                                         bedtime

Edema         Decreased peripheral vascular resistance;                  Wear loose clothing; use a maternity belt;
              pressure of enlarged uterus on lower extremities           avoid prolonged standing or sitting; elevate
                                                                         legs when sitting

Varicosities  Decreased peripheral vascular resistance;                  Use compression hose; wear a maternity
              pressure of enlarged uterus on lower extremities           belt; avoid prolonged standing or sitting;
                                                                         elevate legs when sitting

Leg cramps    Too much or too little calcium, potassium, or              Dorsiflex the foot; massage the affected
              magnesium intake                                           muscle; exercise regularly; eat a
                                                                         nutritionally sound diet

Round         Stretching of the round ligament as the uterus             Use warm compresses and baths; lie on
ligament      grows, causing pain in the right or left lower             the side with knees drawn up toward the
pain          quadrant, most often experienced by the pregnant           abdomen; use a maternity belt
              person between 14 and 27 weeks of gestation

Braxton       Spontaneous painless uterine contractions that             Maintain an adequate fluid intake; use a
Hicks         occur throughout pregnancy and normally have no            maternity belt
contractions  effect on the cervix until the final weeks of the
              pregnancy

TABLE 10.9 Common Discomforts of Pregnancy, Causes, and Relief Measures

Self-Care Practices and Teaching

Nurses should encourage patients to embrace self-care practices, daily activities that replenish oneself physically,
mentally, emotionally, socially, and spiritually. Health promotion during pregnancy is important to achieve a positive
outcome for both the pregnant person and the newborn. Nurses can educate the pregnant person regarding self-
care practices to support their physiologic adaptations and the growth and development of the fetus. The pregnant
person's implementation of self-care practices throughout pregnancy is associated with a decrease in the incidence
of complications of pregnancy (Farhodimoghadam et al., 2020). Nurses provide education and answer questions at
each prenatal visit, which reinforces the pregnant person's awareness and implementation of self-care health
promotion practices.

Hygiene
Hygiene self-care includes bathing practices, handwashing, and dental care. Bathing removes the buildup of oils,
bacteria, and dirt on the body, decreasing the risk of disease. It is important for the nurse to include perineal
cleansing when discussing bathing practices because of the increase in cervical and vaginal secretions during
pregnancy. Frequent handwashing and cleaning under the fingernails by the pregnant person prevent illness caused
by the microorganisms on multiple surfaces touched every day.

Pregnant persons should also be cautioned not to use hot tubs, saunas, or tanning beds during pregnancy. The heat
generated by these products raises the pregnant person's temperature and the fetal heart rate. The vasodilation of
the blood vessels in the skin (as a response to the increase in temperature) pulls blood away from the uterus and
can cause orthostatic hypotension upon standing after using these devices.

Pregnancy changes the amount of saliva and increases the vascularity of the gums. These two events place the
pregnant person at risk for gingivitis, dental caries, and loss of teeth. Oral hygiene with a soft-bristled toothbrush
452  10 · Pregnancy

     after each meal helps to prevent the buildup of bacteria and bleeding gums. Visits with a dental hygienist for routine
     teeth cleaning are encouraged during pregnancy. If x-rays need to be taken, the pregnant person should wear a
     protective apron to shield the abdomen.

     Oral hygiene also decreases the risk for periodontitis, which is associated with preterm birth and low birth weight
     (Uwambaye et al., 2021). The symptoms of periodontitis include bleeding gums, loose teeth, and abscess formation.
     The nurse can assess the mouth, gums, and teeth and refer the pregnant person to dental services before
     periodontitis occurs.

     Clothing
     Self-care related to clothing includes wearing clothes that are not constrictive to the growing uterus. This includes
     girdles and other shapewear. Education also includes the avoidance of knee-high stockings or socks that are tight at
     the top. These stockings or socks can impede circulation, increasing the risk of DVT in the pregnant person.
     Education also includes wearing shoes with low heels to decrease the incidence of lower back ache and risk for falls.

     Exercise
     Exercise decreases joint discomforts, increases endorphins to decrease fatigue, helps to prevent excessive weight
     gain, and improves cardiac health. All these positive attributes of exercise improve the health of the pregnant person
     and have a positive effect on the growth and development of the fetus. Exercise also improves posture and muscle
     tone and helps promote sleep and rest. When providing education on exercise during pregnancy, the nurse should
     base the discussion on the pregnant person's current exercise routine. The current recommendation is a minimum
     of 30 to 60 minutes of exercise, three or four times per week (ACOG, 2020a).

     Sleep and Rest
     Balancing sleep and rest with work, household expectations, and exercise promotes self-care. During sleep, the
     body repairs itself and grows. During pregnancy, sleep also promotes fetal growth and development. Education for
     self-care involving rest and sleep includes the establishment of a consistent bedtime routine and bedtime.
     Consistency places the body on a schedule, making it easier to fall asleep. Limiting fluid intake for 2 hours prior to
     going to bed decreases nocturia and prevents interrupted sleep.

     Sexual Activity and Intimacy
     Sexual activity during pregnancy can remain normal for couples during an uncomplicated pregnancy (Alizadeh et al.,
     2021). The physiologic changes and psychosocial adaptations that occur during pregnancy may consciously and
     unconsciously alter the pregnant person's interest in sexual activity and intimacy. Sexual activity is not restricted
     during pregnancy except in cases of vaginal bleeding, placenta previa, rupture of membranes, and preterm
     contractions. Intimacy involves actions and communication between the pregnant person and their support person.
     This can also be a hug, watching a movie together, giving gifts, or just talking.

     Employment
     Employment may require the pregnant person to commute or to work from home. Some pregnant persons provide
     full-time care for members of the immediate or extended family. The family members may be siblings of the fetus,
     related children or children living in the neighborhood, or adults. Pregnancy places a few limitations on job
     requirements. These limitations include

         · no heavy lifting, specifically no more than 25 pounds after 28 weeks of gestation,
         · avoiding exposure to teratogens, such as chemical fumes and tobacco products, and
         · taking scheduled breaks.

     Table 10.10 summarizes the self-care practices and prenatal education topics presented in this section of the
     chapter.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   10.4 · Fetal Growth and Development  453

Self-Care     Recommendations                                            Cautions
Area

Hygiene       Bathing, handwashing, perineal care, and dental care       Avoid hot tubs, saunas, and
                                                                         tanning beds

Clothing      Wear loose clothing, low-heeled shoes, and bras that       Avoid tight-fitting knee-high
              accommodate the changes due to pregnancy                   stockings and socks and girdles

Exercise      Do regular, nonimpact exercise such as walking, swimming,  Discuss an exercise routine with
              and yoga                                                   the health care provider; avoid
                                                                         dehydration and overheating

Sleep and     Stay on a regular schedule and establish a bedtime routine;
rest          use relaxation techniques when needed; limit fluid intake --
              in the last 2 hours before bedtime

Sexual        Sexual activity is not restricted during pregnancy unless  Complications limiting sexual
activity and  complications occur; intimacy is supported when the        activity include vaginal bleeding,
intimacy      support person or persons communicate with and             placenta previa, preterm
              demonstrate emotional support for the pregnant person      contractions, and rupture of
                                                                         membranes

Employment    Maintain a work-home balance during pregnancy; take        Limitations include weight-lifting
              regular breaks throughout the workday                      restrictions, teratogen exposure

TABLE 10.10 Self-Care Practices and Prenatal Education Topics

10.4 Fetal Growth and Development

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Explain the relevance of genetics in conception and fetal development
    · Differentiate between the stages of fetal development
    · Explain the physiology of the placenta
    · Explain fetal circulation
    · Discuss important milestones of fetal growth and development
    · Explain the effects of important influences on fetal growth and development

When providing prenatal care, the nurse should understand the basic laws of genetic inheritance in order to provide
preconceptual counseling and basic genetic information. Knowledge of the processes of conception and embryonic
and fetal development is important for the nurse to understand why and when the fetus is vulnerable. The nurse
also needs to comprehend how lifestyle behaviors and environmental exposures affect the pregnancy and the
growth and development of the embryo and fetus. Understanding the laws of inheritance, fetal growth and
development, and the multiple influences on fetal growth and development is part of the foundation of prenatal
care.

Genetics

The study of heredity and the patterns of inherited traits is called genetics. The basics of genetics include
understanding the role of chromosomes and genes. Chromosomes are found in the nucleus of every cell in the
human body and contain all the person's genes. Genes are short strands of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) found
within the chromosome; they carry the traits of inheritance and direct many functions to maintain the health of the
human body. The science of genomics maps and studies the functions of genomes, the gene sequencing forming the
DNA chain within any cell in the body. Each gene instructs a specific set of proteins to perform a specific function
454  10 · Pregnancy

     within a person's body. Any change in the structure or location of a gene within a DNA molecule results in an
     abnormality within a specific function of the body, such as lactose intolerance. Advances in genetics and genomics
     contribute to the growing knowledge of prevention, detection, and diagnosis of disease and provide health care
     providers the means to develop personalized treatment plans. For a list of disorders caused by genetic mutations,
     see Table 10.11.

     Disorder Description

     Sickle cell     Changes the structure of the red blood cell, diminishing the ability of the RBC to transport oxygen;
     disease         most commonly found genetic disorder in people of African descent (recessive)

     Cystic          Produces thick mucus that blocks the bronchi and fibrous tumors causing pancreatic insufficiency;
     fibrosis        most commonly found genetic disorder in people of European descent (recessive)

     Tay-Sachs       Degenerative nervous system disease resulting in the death of the infant by 2 years of age; most
     disease         commonly found genetic disorder in people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent (recessive)

     Huntington      Progressive neuromuscular disorder affecting motor, memory, and behavior (dominant)
     chorea

     Hemophilia      Lack of factor VIII in the clotting cascade; without replacement factor VIII, bleeding cannot be
                     controlled (X-linked)

     TABLE 10.11 Genetic Disorders

     Perinatally, genetics and genomics present facts and risks to the expectant parents and their families regarding
     inherited disorders or anomalies. Some families are faced with decisions before they conceive, such as when both
     prospective parents know they carry the recessive sickle cell trait. Other families make decisions after conception
     when informed the fetus has a chromosome or genetic disorder, such as Down syndrome or cystic fibrosis.

     Inheritance
     Nursing care in the perinatal period requires the nurse to understand and explain basic patterns of inheritance to
     persons considering pregnancy or who are already pregnant. The patterns of inherited traits are the result of
     dominant or recessive genes. A dominant gene (brown eye color) will mask the trait of a recessive gene (blue eye
     color) in a person. Autosomal dominant disorders occur when the mutated gene produces the disorder when
     present in the heterozygous state. Autosomal recessive disorders occur when the mutated gene produces the
     disorder only when present in the homozygous state. It takes a pair of recessive genes (one from each parent) for
     the recessive trait to appear in the offspring.

     Inherited conditions are also linked to the X and Y chromosomes. The conditions occur based on whether the gene
     is located only on the X or Y chromosome and if the gene is dominant or recessive. X-linked dominant disorders
     happen when the mutated gene is located only on the X chromosome and the disorder presents in the heterozygous
     state. X-linked recessive disorders happen when the mutated gene is located only on the X chromosome and the
     disorder presents only in the homozygous state. The mutated gene is located only on the Y chromosome in Y-linked
     disorders. The Y chromosome is paired with the X chromosome during fertilization to produce XY offspring. All XY
     offspring will have the disorder or trait. Figure 10.12 illustrates these different patterns of inheritance.

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.4 · Fetal Growth and Development                                                                                                           455

FIGURE 10.12 Patterns of Inheritance (a) When only one biological parent carries a dominant mutant gene, each child has a 50 percent
chance of being affected and a 50 percent chance of not being affected. (b) When both biological parents carry a recessive mutant gene,
each child has a 25 percent chance of being affected, a 50 percent chance of being a carrier, and a 25 percent chance of not being affected.
(c) When the XY parent has the X-linked dominant disorder and the XX biological parent is not affected, 100 percent of the XX offspring will
be carriers, and 100 percent of the XY offspring will be unaffected. (d) When the XY biological parent is not affected and the XX biological
parent carries the recessive X-linked disorder or trait, the XX offspring will have a 50 percent chance of being a carrier and a 50 percent
chance of being unaffected. The XY offspring will have a 50 percent chance of being affected and a 50 percent chance of not being affected.
(modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0)
456  10 · Pregnancy

     Chromosome Abnormalities
     Some genetic disorders are the result of inherited abnormal chromosomes. However, most chromosomal disorders
     are not inherited. Instead, the abnormality occurs during the formation of the egg or the sperm, immediately after
     fertilization, or during embryonic development. Abnormalities in the chromosomes of the egg or sperm show up in
     every cell of the person's body. When abnormalities in the chromosomes occur immediately after fertilization during
     mitosis, the abnormality shows as mosaicism, in which the abnormality in the chromosome is not present in every
     cell. In the United States, 1 out of 150 live-born newborns has chromosomal abnormalities (March of Dimes, 2022),
     and 50 percent of spontaneous abortions (miscarriages) have chromosome abnormalities (Cleveland Clinic, 2023).
     Health care providers use a karyotype, an image showing the results of a chromosome analysis, to identify
     anomalies.

     A person may have more or fewer than the normal 46 chromosomes. Trisomy 21, Down syndrome, is the most
     commonly known trisomy abnormality, in which a third copy of the entire 21st chromosome is added. Trisomy 18
     and Trisomy 13 also feature an additional entire chromosome. Turner syndrome occurs when an entire X
     chromosome is missing (Figure 10.13). In Klinefelter syndrome, an extra X chromosome, XXY, is present.

     FIGURE 10.13 Karyotype of Turner Syndrome Aneuploidy is depicted in a karyotype of the chromosome analysis showing Turner
     syndrome. (credit: Wessex Reg. Genetics Centre/Wellcome Collection, CC BY 4.0)

     Chromosome structure can be changed in multiple ways. Deletions occur when part of the chromosome is missing.
     Duplications occur when the entire chromosome or part of a chromosome is duplicated. Inversions are when a part
     of the chromosome breaks off and reattaches upside down. Rings are when a part of the chromosome breaks away
     and reattaches to form a ring. Translocations occur when a part of a chromosome is missing and the missing part
     has attached itself to a different chromosome altogether. These structural abnormalities can affect several genes
     with unpredictable effects on the affected person's body structure and physiology.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     What do you know about birth defects? Take this quiz from the University of Rochester Medical Center
     (https://openstax.org/r/77birthdefects) to test your knowledge.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                               10.4 · Fetal Growth and Development                                        457

Genetic Counseling
Genetic counseling is the provision of information about inherited conditions, disorders, or abnormalities affecting
an individual or a family. The information is provided by a trained professional. Perinatally, counseling is provided to
biological parents prior to conception, after a prenatal screening for or diagnosis of a chromosome or genetic
disorder, and after the birth of a newborn with a chromosome or genetic or another congenital anomaly. The
purpose of genetic counseling is to determine risk for genetic abnormalities, to answer questions about prognosis
and long-term care of these conditions, to discuss legal and ethical issues, and to provide referrals to additional
services. Risk factors that may indicate the need for genetic counseling include the following:

    · Pregnant person aged 35 years or older at the estimated date of delivery (EDD)
    · Other biological parent's age of 50 years or older
    · Known carriers of genetic disorders
    · Pregnant person's history of a minimum of two pregnancy losses
    · Biological parent of a child with congenital anomalies (stillbirth or live birth)
    · Biological parent of a child with developmental delays or sensory disorders
    · Family history of either biological parent that includes a relative with genetic or congenital anomalies,

        developmental delays, or sensory disorders
    · Consanguinity or incest
    · Exposure to teratogens during pregnancy (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2022)

The ideal time for obstetric care providers to offer genetic counseling is before conception. Preconception screening
for both medical and genetic disorders opens up a dialog between the prospective biological parents. Genetic
counseling, based on a comprehensive family genetic history, provides accurate information on the risks and
incidence of genetic disorders as a couple in order for the pregnant person to make the most informed decision. A
list of genetic disorders and congenital anomalies to include when obtaining the genetic history is included in Table
10.12.

Genetic Disorders        Congenital Anomalies

Thalassemia              Congenital heart disease
Tay-Sachs disease        Cleft lip and/or cleft palate
Sickle cell anemia       Limb defects
Cystic fibrosis          Deafness
Hemophilia               Blindness
Muscular dystrophy       Neural tube defects
Spinal muscular atrophy  Developmental delay
Neurofibromatosis        Unexplained pregnancy loss
Huntington disease
Epilepsy
Phenylketonuria (PKU)
Chromosome abnormality

TABLE 10.12 List of Genetic Disorders and Congenital Anomalies to
Include When Obtaining a Genetic History (American Medical
Association, n.d.)

Several factors influence a person's choice to undergo genetic counseling and testing. These factors include
socioeconomic, cultural, and religious considerations. Legal, ethical, and moral considerations surrounding
decisions based on genetic risks make the decision making a complex process. Nurses who provide information to
parents and families about genetics must have the following competencies: interviewing skills, ensuring
confidentiality and informed consent, and provision of ethical, legal, psychosocial, and culturally appropriate care.
Knowledge competencies include inheritance patterns, genetic probability, financial aspects of counseling and
laboratory testing, and the risks and benefits of genetic testing. It is also important for the nurse to know their
limitations and refer patients and families to other individuals, groups, or agencies when necessary.
458  10 · Pregnancy

             REAL RN STORIES

     Nurse: L.K.
     Clinical Setting: Labor and delivery unit
     Geographic Location: South Carolina

     I remember when a patient came into the labor and delivery unit with a known fetal congenital anomaly that was
     incompatible with life outside the uterus. The anomaly was anencephaly (a serious birth defect in which a baby is
     born without parts of the brain and skull). I was assigned to the patient, who was in early labor. During the
     admission process, I asked the patient what her plans were for pain relief. The patient stated an epidural and
     spontaneously said she did not want her mind clouded with drugs so she would be alert during Angel's (the name
     the couple had given to their baby) birth and transition. The patient's husband volunteered that they both had had
     genetic counseling, but the most important influence on their decision to continue the pregnancy was their minister.
     The minister also went to genetic counseling to become more informed about the anomaly and the prognosis for the
     fetus. While in early labor, the patient and her husband openly discussed how they arrived at the decision of
     continuing to provide life to the fetus and newborn for however long the newborn survived, inside or outside the
     uterus.

     I did not ask this couple to explain their decision-making process. The information was freely given to me. I was not
     present for the birth of Angel, but I was able to realize how the information this couple received during the genetic
     counseling played a role in both continuing the pregnancy and the birth plan.

     Fetal Development

     Nurses practicing in perinatal care need to understand and be able to explain the processes of conception and
     embryonic and fetal development. Conception, or fertilization, is when the sperm and ovum unite to form the zygote
     and typically occurs within the fallopian tube. After the zygote has divided into 16 cells, the zygote becomes the
     morula. Peristalsis and cilia within the fallopian tube help to move the morula into the uterus. The time from
     conception to when the morula enters the uterus is about 72 hours. Over the next several days, the cells of the
     morula divide into specialized cells, blastocyst and trophoblast, that will create the fetal structures. The blastocyst
     is the group of cells forming the embryo and the amnion. The trophoblast is the group of cells forming the placenta
     and the chorion. The trophoblast and blastocyst implant in the endometrium within 7 to 10 days after conception.
     When the trophoblast has successfully attached to the endometrium, implantation occurs. The days from
     conception to implantation are the pre-embryonic stage of development (Figure 10.14).

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.4 · Fetal Growth and Development                                                                                                  459

FIGURE 10.14 Pre-embryonic Stage of Development The fertilized ovum develops into the morula as the ovum divides during its journey
through the fallopian tube. Once inside the uterus, the morula becomes the blastocyst and implants into the endometrium. During
implantation, the trophoblast becomes the placenta. This process takes 10 to 14 days from conception. (modification of work from
Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0)

Embryonic Stage of Development
The embryonic stage of fetal development begins with the completion of implantation and ends at the start of week
9 of gestation. The weeks of gestation during pregnancy are calculated from the first day of the pregnant person's
last menstrual period rather than from the date of conception. In the final days of the pre-embryonic stage, the
blastocyst develops into three germ layers called the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. The formation and
development of the organs of the body, called organogenesis, starts at the beginning of the embryonic stage. The
three germ layers develop into the organs, tissues, and structures of the body.

Although the nervous system starts forming first, the embryo's cardiovascular system begins functioning first. The
hemoglobin formed by the embryo has a higher affinity for oxygen than adult hemoglobin because the embryo is
dependent on the parent for oxygen. The embryo also requires more oxygen to support its rapid growth. The
nervous system works within the first 8 weeks of gestation but is not fully developed at birth. This is evident by a
newborn's lack of neuromuscular coordination, developed senses, or speech. The brain is not fully developed until 5
years of age. In most cases, the gonads differentiate into male or female by 8 weeks. The testes stay in the inguinal
canal, fully descending between 34 and 36 weeks of gestation.

Exposure to teratogens during organogenesis leads to an increase in the risk of malformations in all systems of the
460  10 · Pregnancy

     embryo's body (Figure 10.15). During organogenesis, the trachea and esophagus are one tube. The separation into
     esophagus and trachea is not complete until 5 weeks of gestation. If the pregnant person is exposed to a teratogen
     at this critical point, then a congenital anomaly called a tracheal-esophageal (TE) fistula could result. In this
     anomaly, the esophagus is attached to the trachea rather than to the stomach. Table 10.13 summarizes the weekly
     changes in embryo development.

     FIGURE 10.15 Fetal Development This chart shows the development of the organs, structures, and tissues of the embryo and fetus and
     the week of gestation each organ or structure is most vulnerable to teratogens. *This fetal chart shows 38 weeks of pregnancy. Since it is
     difficult to know exactly when conception occurs, health care providers calculate a woman's due date 40 weeks from the start of her last
     menstrual cycle. (credit: "Fetal development chart" by CDC, Public Domain)

                     Week of Gestation Structure and System Development

                     Week 3           Neural tube: brain and spinal cord
                                      Heart and gastrointestinal tract
                                      Limb buds form

                     Week 4           Brain structures begin to form
                                      Stomach, pancreas, and liver start to form
                                      Limb buds enlarge

                     Week 5           Cranial nerves start to form
                                      Heartbeat is detectable
                                      Neuromuscular connections are establishing
                                      Eyes and ears are beginning to form

                     TABLE 10.13 Embryonic Development

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                             10.4 · Fetal Growth and Development                                       461

Week of Gestation Structure and System Development

Week 6  CNS forms, and brain waves are detectable
        Fetal circulation is established
        RBCs are starting to be formed in the liver
        Lungs begin forming
        Skeletal structure is laid out

Week 7  Arm and leg movements, toes visible
        Mouth and lips formed
        Diaphragm formed
        Nipples, hair follicles, and genitals form

Week 8  Heart is developed
        Facial features continue to develop
        Intestinal rotation occurs
        Bone cells replace cartilage

TABLE 10.13 Embryonic Development

Fetal Stage of Development
The fetal stage of development begins at 9 weeks of gestation and ends with birth (Figure 10.16). Organs, tissues,
and structures of the fetus continue to develop and begin to function. The fetus has its own circulation, and the
umbilical cord connects the fetus to the placenta. The skin on the fetal abdomen closes at around 10 weeks of
gestation. Exposure to teratogens at this part of organogenesis can result in abdominal congenital anomalies known
as gastroschisis (failure of the upper abdomen to close, allowing the stomach to protrude) or omphalocele (failure of
the abdomen to close at the umbilicus, allowing the intestines to protrude).
462  10 · Pregnancy

     FIGURE 10.16 Early Fetal Development At 9 weeks, the fetus can move its arms and legs, the heart is formed, the brain is developing, and
     the intestines are outside the abdomen. (credit: "9-Week Human Embryo from Ectopic Pregnancy (7th week p.o.)" by Ed Uthman/
     Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

     Skeletal system development reaches an important step when ossification starts at 12 weeks' gestation. The
     kidneys are capable of producing urine at 12 weeks. Urine production influences the amount of amniotic fluid that is
     present. Urine production is also required for fetal lung development. When urine is not excreted into the amniotic
     fluid, as in the case of Potter syndrome, the lungs remain hypoplastic, incapable of inflating. At 16 weeks, the fetus
     starts forming stool called meconium. Unless infection is present, the fetal gut remains sterile until after birth.
     Digestive enzymes are not secreted sufficiently until 36 weeks of gestation. This is why preterm newborns do not
     tolerate formula or even breast milk well. The lungs are among the last organs to complete anatomic development.
     Until 24 weeks of gestation, the alveoli are not formed or present in sufficient numbers. Without the surface area in
     the alveoli for gas exchange in the lungs, the fetus has not reached viability, or the ability to survive outside the
     uterus. For the alveoli to expand and retract for respiration, the lungs need to produce surfactant, a mixture of fats
     and proteins produced in the lungs that coats the alveoli. When the newborn exhales, surfactant keeps the alveoli
     from sticking together, interfering with expansion of the alveoli during the next inhalation. The fetus starts producing
     surfactant at 24 weeks. Table 10.14 lists the milestones in fetal development by weeks of gestation.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          10.4 · Fetal Growth and Development             463

Week of    Structure and System Development
Gestation

Week 12    Ossification begins at 12 weeks and continues through childhood
           Urine is formed
           Limbs move at the joints
           Eyelids are fused
           Palate is completely formed
           Fetal heart rate can be heard by Doppler

Week 16    Pinna of ear is formed
           Respiratory system is formed
           Hand and foot ridges are formed
           Fetus is able to make sucking motions
           Meconium is forming in the intestines

Week 20    Pancreas is producing insulin
           Sleep and activity pattern is present
           Lanugo and vernix cover the body
           Nails are formed
           Brown fat begins to develop

Week 24    Now viable because alveoli in the lungs are forming in preparation for breathing, and surfactant
           is starting to be produced by the alveoli
           Eyelids begin to open
           Capable of hearing

Week 28    Eyelids open and close
           Blood formation now occurs in bone marrow
           Nervous system takes over more functions
           Fetus has a sleep-wake cycle
           Fetus reacts more to the sound of the pregnant person's voice

Week 32    Bones are developed
           Increase in the number of adipose cells
           Breathing movements are rhythmic

Week 37    Enzymes for digestion not secreted efficiently until 36 weeks
           Testes do not descend until 34-36 weeks
           Fetus is considered full term at 37 weeks

TABLE 10.14 Fetal Growth and Development Milestones

        LINK TO LEARNING

You can watch video footage of fetal development inside the womb (https://openstax.org/r/77development) to
observe the stages of development.

Formation and Functions of the Placenta

The placenta is a unique organ because it develops for the sole purpose of providing nutrients and oxygen to the
developing embryo and fetus and removing the fetal waste products and carbon dioxide. The placenta has a limited
lifespan, ending with its delivery after the birth of the newborn. The formation of the placenta starts at implantation.
464  10 · Pregnancy

     Formation of the Placenta
     The placenta is formed from a blend of tissue from the embryo and the pregnant person. The chorionic membrane
     and chorionic villi make up the fetal side of the placenta. The chorionic villi develop into the fetal blood vessels that
     will merge into the umbilical cord vessels. The fetal blood vessels protrude into the decidua basalis, the pregnant
     person's side of the placenta. The decidua basalis is one of the three layers of the endometrium and helps to form
     the cotyledons, or lobes on the pregnant person's side of the placenta (Figure 10.17).

     FIGURE 10.17 Placenta The structures of the placenta allow for the exchange of nutrients and oxygen from the pregnant person and
     carbon dioxide and wastes from the fetus. (modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University,
     OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0)

     The placental membrane separates the fetal side of the placenta from the pregnant person's side. The placental
     membrane allows transfer of oxygen and nutrients to the fetus and carbon dioxide and waste products to the
     pregnant person, without the mixing of fetal and parental blood. The amnionic membrane, formed at the same time
     as the chorion, is part of the placenta and lies over the chorion. The amniotic membrane forms the sac around the
     embryo and fills with amniotic fluid as the fetus grows and develops. The formation of the placenta is usually
     complete by week 12 of gestation.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Take this quiz on the anatomy of the placenta (https://openstax.org/r/77placenta) to test your knowledge.

     Functions of the Placenta, Membranes, and Amniotic Fluid
     The placenta performs physiologic functions for the developing embryo and fetus. Respiration occurs in the
     placenta. Oxygen diffuses across the placenta membrane from the pregnant person to the fetus, and carbon dioxide
     diffuses across the placenta membrane from the fetus to the pregnant person. Nutritional intake is another
     physiologic function of the placenta. Glucose diffuses from the pregnant person to the fetus to provide energy.
     Amino acids cross the placenta membrane from the pregnant person to the fetus via active transport to be
     synthesized by the fetus for growth and development. Fatty acids are transported to the fetus via simple diffusion
     and are essential to building the brain and nerves. Water and electrolytes are transferred from the pregnant person
     to the fetus via passive diffusion. Iron, calcium, and vitamins require active transport across the placenta membrane
     from the pregnant person to the fetus. The placenta also acts as the kidneys for the fetus, transporting metabolic
     waste like urea, uric acid, and bilirubin to the pregnant person to eliminate.

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.4 · Fetal Growth and Development                                                                                         465

Another important function of the placenta is the production of hormones to support the pregnancy and fetal growth
and development. The placenta produces progesterone, estrogen, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), human
placental lactogen (hPL), and relaxin.

    · Progesterone serves two major functions: to facilitate implantation and to decrease uterine contractions.
    · Estrogen stimulates enlargement of the uterus and breasts.
    · Human chorionic gonadotropin supports the production of estrogen and progesterone from the corpus luteum

        until the placenta can produce these hormones.
    · Human placental lactogen promotes fetal growth and parental breast development.
    · Relaxin is produced first by the corpus luteum and then by the placenta. Relaxin increases the elasticity of the

        ligaments in the pregnant person, loosening the joints in the body. Relaxin helps prepare the pelvis to
        accommodate the fetus during the birth process.

The fetal membranes consist of the chorion and amnion. The functions of the fetal membranes are to contain the
amniotic fluid and to help protect the fetus from infections. The functions of the amniotic fluid include protecting the
fetus from injury, allowing freedom of movement for normal development of the fetus, and maintaining a consistent
intrauterine temperature. The fluid is produced by the amniotic membrane in the first 14 weeks of the pregnancy
and by the fetal kidneys during the remainder of the pregnancy.

Fetal Circulation

Fetal circulation allows oxygenated blood from the placenta to travel to the major functioning organs of the fetus,
and it allows deoxygenated blood to go back to the placenta. This flow of blood requires a different circulation
pattern in the fetus than is present in the newborn. The umbilical cord usually inserts into the center of the placenta
and contains two arteries and one vein. Oxygenated blood is transported to the fetus from the placenta via the
umbilical vein. The ductus venosus connects the umbilical vein to the inferior vena cava of the fetus. This places the
oxygenated blood near the right atrium. The foramen ovale shunts the oxygenated blood from the right to left
atrium, allowing some of the blood to bypass the right ventricle. The ductus arteriosus connects with the
pulmonary artery to the descending aorta, bypassing the lungs so that more oxygenated blood is circulated
throughout the body of the fetus. The deoxygenated blood is carried back to the placenta via the umbilical arteries
that branch off the right and left internal iliac arteries (Figure 10.18). Fetal circulation is necessary, since the lungs
are filled with fluid and cannot supply oxygen to or remove carbon dioxide from the fetus until after birth. When the
newborn takes their first breath and starts crying, the pressure within the lungs causes the foramen ovale to close.
Within 24 to 48 hours, the ductus arteriosus closes as well because the blood is now circulating in the pulmonary
system. When the umbilical cord is clamped and blood ceases to flow through the ductus venosus, it collapses,
closing as well.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Watch this video about the key components of fetal circulation (https://openstax.org/r/77circulation) to aid your
understanding.
466  10 · Pregnancy

     FIGURE 10.18 Fetal Circulation The three shunts in the fetal circulation are the ductus venosus, the foramen ovale, and the ductus
     arteriosus. (modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0)

     Influences on Fetal Development

     The nutrition and lifestyle habits of the pregnant person, environmental hazards, teratogens, TORCH and other
     infections, and maternal preexisting conditions can all affect the growth and development of the embryo and fetus.
     Embryonic and fetal development are affected by the pregnant person's nutrition prior to and during pregnancy. A
     deficiency in folic acid has been linked to neural tube defects (spina bifida, myelomeningocele, encephalocele, and
     anencephaly). Too much vitamin A, as from the acne treatment isotretinoin (Accutane), is linked to cleft lip and
     palate. Maternal exposure to environmental hazards can be through the lungs, ingestion, and exposure to an
     organism. A teratogen is anything known to affect the normal growth and development of the embryo or fetus.
     Teratogens include chemicals, drugs, and lifestyle habits.

     TORCH, a group of infectious diseases that can be passed from the pregnant person to the fetus, is a known
     teratogen. The diseases included in the group are

         · toxoplasmosis,
         · other (originally only syphilis),

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             10.5 · Choosing a Health Care Provider     467

    · rubella,
    · cytomegalovirus, and
    · herpes.

The causative viruses, bacteria, or organisms are capable being transported through the placenta membrane and
affecting multiple fetal organ systems, specifically the brain, heart, eyes, ears, and skin. Table 10.15 lists TORCH
infection effects on the fetus. If syphilis goes untreated or is treated in the second or third trimester, the newborn
will have congenital syphilis or be stillborn. Hepatitis most commonly causes liver disease in the newborn.

Infection                Effect on the Fetus

Toxoplasmosis            Spontaneous abortion, low birth weight (LBW), hepatomegaly, neurologic damage
protozoan

Other: Hepatitis B       Chronically infected, HBV carrier, liver disease
virus

Other: Syphilis          Neurologic damage, congenital syphilis, stillbirth
bacteria

Rubella                  Congenital rubella syndrome
virus                    Deafness, eye anomalies, neurologic deficits, cardiac anomalies

Cytomegalovirus          LBW, hearing impairment, microcephaly, neurologic deficits
herpes group virus

Herpes                   Neurologic deficits, hepatic encephalopathy
chronic viral infection

TABLE 10.15 TORCH Infections and the Effect on the Fetus

If a pregnant person is human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) positive and their CD4 count does not fall below 400,
the infant will usually convert to seronegative within 6 months to 2 years of age if the person takes zidovudine (AZT)
during pregnancy and/or during labor and birth. Additional information on teratogens and other influences on the
growth and development of the fetus are discussed in Chapter 12 Pregnancy at Risk.

10.5 Choosing a Health Care Provider

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Differentiate among the types of physicians providing perinatal care
    · Differentiate among the types of midwives providing perinatal care
    · Analyze considerations when choosing a health care provider for the perinatal period

When a person becomes pregnant, choosing a health care provider for their perinatal care is not always an easy
choice. Some people choose a perinatal care provider based on the recommendation of a friend or family member.
Others select a perinatal care provider based on their choice of place to give birth or on their health care insurance
carrier.

Physicians

Physicians are people who completed medical school and passed a state licensure exam to practice medicine.
Physicians often specialize and complete a residency in a specific practice area. The specializations of obstetrics,
family practice, and maternal-fetal medicine provide the training to give medical care during the perinatal period.
Most physicians in the United States who manage labor and birth attend births only within hospitals.
468  10 · Pregnancy

     OB/GYN
     An OB/GYN is a physician specializing in obstetrics and gynecology. These physicians completed a residency
     program in which they learned to provide gynecologic and perinatal care for persons assigned female at birth. OB/
     GYNs take a written exam after completing their residency program and become board eligible. OB/GYN physicians
     become board certified after they complete an oral exam (American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology [ABOG],
     2023).

     Family Practice
     A family practice physician specializes in providing medical care to the entire family, and part of their residency
     program includes providing perinatal care. Unless a family practice physician takes additional surgical training, their
     privileges at a health care facility will not include the ability to perform a cesarean section. Family practice
     physicians are expected to have practice guidelines with a board-certified OB/GYN to be on call if a cesarean section
     becomes necessary or a complex perinatal complication arises when caring for pregnant persons (American
     Academy of Family Physicians, 2023).

     Maternal-Fetal Medicine Specialist
     A maternal-fetal medicine specialist is an OB/GYN physician who has an additional 2 or 3 years of training in the
     management of high-risk pregnancies. Maternal-fetal medicine specialists provide care to pregnant people with a
     medical condition or complication of pregnancy affecting the person or their fetus that requires complex or
     specialized care (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2023). Pregnant persons who receive care from a maternal-
     fetal medicine specialist still see their OB/GYNs because most specialists do not offer delivery services.

     Midwives

     Midwives are people who have had formal or informal training in pregnant people and birth. Depending on their
     training, midwives may or may not be licensed. In the United States, multiple routes exist to becoming licensed to
     practice midwifery.

     Certified Nurse-Midwives
     A certified nurse-midwife (CNM) is a registered nurse who completes an accredited midwifery program (usually 2 or
     3 years) that provides either a master's or doctorate degree with training in gynecologic and family planning
     services, perinatal services, and newborn care. CNMs are required to successfully pass the national certification
     exam and maintain a license to practice. CNMs provide care during labor and birth in hospitals, birth centers, and at
     private homes and have protocols and agreements with a board-certified OB/GYN (American College of Nurse-
     Midwives [ACNM], 2021).

     Certified Midwives
     A certified midwife (CM) is a person who has a 4-year college degree and specific science and health courses and
     then completes an accredited midwifery program (usually 2 or 3 years) that provides either a master's or doctorate
     degree with training in gynecologic and family planning services, perinatal services, and newborn care. CMs are
     required to successfully pass the national certification exam and maintain a license to practice. Some states provide
     licenses to CMs. When licensed, CMs provide prenatal and postpartum care in offices or homes as well as care
     during labor and birth in hospitals, birth centers, and at private homes. They have protocols and agreements with a
     board-certified OB/GYN (ACNM, 2021).

     Certified Professional Midwives and Traditional Birth Attendants
     A certified professional midwife has received formal training in perinatal care only through a training organization
     and apprenticeship. The training provides a certificate, and certification can be obtained in many countries and in
     some states in the United States. Certified professional midwives provide prenatal and postpartum care in offices or
     homes and care during labor and birth in birth centers and at private homes (ACNM, n.d.).

     Traditional birth attendants, sometimes known as lay midwives, are people who may or may not have received
     formal training in providing perinatal care and many times learn through apprenticeship (Mwoma et al., 2021). They
     provide prenatal and postpartum care in offices or homes and provide care during labor and birth at private homes.
     Traditional birth attendants are not licensed. It is important for the pregnant person to ask the birth attendant about
     their training and experience in perinatal care before choosing the birth attendant as their provider.

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.6 · Choosing a Birthing Place                                                                                            469

Choosing a Health Care Provider

When choosing a health care provider, the pregnant person should determine if they have any risk factors. Pregnant
persons who have risk factors such as diabetes or hypertension require multiple ultrasounds and fetal monitoring to
prevent an adverse outcome for themselves or their fetus. The recommended choice for these pregnant persons is
an OB/GYN or a CNM who works in an OB/GYN office. Pregnant persons who have no risk factors may choose an OB/
GYN, family practice physician, CNM, CM, or licensed certified professional midwife. If a risk factor develops during
the pregnancy, the recommendation is for the pregnant person who chose a CM or licensed certified professional
midwife to change providers because a hospital birth may be indicated.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Understanding the types of health care providers (https://openstax.org/r/77typesprovider) available to patients can
help you guide them in their selection.

10.6 Choosing a Birthing Place

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Explain considerations when choosing an in-hospital birth
    · Explain considerations when choosing an out-of-hospital birth
    · Analyze considerations when choosing a birthing place

When a person becomes pregnant, the birthing place is most often based on their choice of prenatal care provider or
their health care insurance carrier. Other pregnant persons choose the birthing place based on personal preference
first and then choose a health care provider who provides care in the choice of birthing place. In the United States
the various birthing place choices can be divided into in-hospital and out-of-hospital birthing places.

In-Hospital Birthing Place Choices

In the United States more than 98 percent of births take place within hospitals (Scrimshaw & Backes, 2020). There
are four levels of regionalized perinatal care provided by hospitals (ACOG, 2019). Each level is based on the
resources, staff, equipment, and processes in place for a perinatal patient's specific needs and risk level (The Joint
Commission, n.d.).

Level I hospitals are capable of providing care for low-risk and moderate-risk pregnancies and newborns at term. A
Level I hospital has the capability to perform cesarean births and initiate complex antepartum and intrapartum care
as well as neonatal support measures until transfer to a higher-level facility. Level II hospitals are capable of
providing Level I care plus care for moderate-risk to high-risk pregnancies and newborns at 32 weeks' gestation or
later. Level III hospitals provide Level II care plus have the capability to care for high-risk pregnancies with complex
preexisting medical and pregnancy-related conditions, obstetric complications, and fetal and newborn conditions.
Level III hospitals are capable of providing care for preterm and critically ill infants regardless of gestation. Level IV
hospitals provide Level III care plus on-site availability for the most comprehensive and intensive perinatal care
required for complex preexisting medical and pregnancy-related conditions, critically ill obstetric patients, and
fetuses and newborns (ACOG, 2019).

Labor and Birth Suites
In-hospital birthing places include units composed of labor and birth rooms or suites. A labor and birth suite is
designed to provide care to the person during the entire labor and birth process, immediate care to the newborn,
and care in the first hours of recovery for the birthing person and transition for the newborn. The labor and birth
suites are designed to provide care to the birthing person and newborn for vaginal births. The suites include a
birthing bed, a fetal monitoring system, an infant warmer, and an ensuite bathroom. The suites are equipped to
provide oxygen and suction to both the birthing person and newborn, as well as equipment and supplies for the
labor, birth, and first hours after the birth for both the newborn and postpartum person. The suites are large enough
to provide sufficient room for support persons, health care providers, and nursing and ancillary staff to move freely
throughout the labor and birth process and the first 1 to 2 hours after birth.
470  10 · Pregnancy

     One to 2 hours after birth, the birthing person and newborn are transferred to mother/baby units as a couplet or the
     birthing person to a postpartum unit and the newborn to a newborn nursery. When the birth is uncomplicated, a
     baby-friendly hospital promotes and supports breast-feeding and does not separate the birthing person from their
     newborn during the entire hospital stay. The birthing person and their newborn are transferred to a mother/baby
     unit, and a nurse is assigned to provide care to the couplet. Some hospitals that are not designated as baby friendly
     transfer the birthing person to the postpartum unit, and the newborn is transferred to the newborn nursery. Once
     the initial newborn assessment is completed by the nurse, the newborn is allowed to be in the room with the
     birthing parent as much as possible. A nurse is assigned to care for the postpartum person, and a different nurse is
     assigned to care for the infant.

     Labor, Delivery, Recovery, and Postpartum Suites
     A suite in an in-hospital birthing place where the patient labors, gives birth, and remains for the entire hospital stay
     is known as a labor, delivery, recovery, postpartum (LDRP) suite. Similar to the labor and birth suites, the LDRP
     suites are designed to provide care to the person during the entire labor and birth process and immediate care to
     the newborn, but also provide postpartum care to the birthing person who had a vaginal birth. The LDRP suites are
     set up like and contain the same equipment as the labor and birth suites. The difference is there is no need to
     transfer the birthing person to a postpartum or mother/baby unit. When the LDRP suites are within a baby-friendly
     hospital, the newborn stays in the suite with the birthing parent until discharge, and one nurse cares for the couplet.
     If there is a newborn nursery, the newborn is with the birthing parent as much as possible.

     In-Hospital Birthing Centers
     An in-hospital birthing center is a unit within a hospital staffed and equipped to provide intrapartum, postpartum,
     and normal newborn services to pregnant persons who are designated as low risk, have an uncomplicated
     pregnancy, and carry a single fetus in a vertex presentation. The unit is separate from the labor and birth unit in the
     hospital and is designed with a home-like physical environment. There are fewer restrictions on the presence and
     number of support persons and family members in the birthing rooms within a birthing center.

     Care provided in an in-hospital birthing center includes:

         · Intermittent fetal and uterine contraction monitoring, allowing more freedom to move about the birthing
             center

         · IV access for intermittent fluids for dehydration or antibiotics if the pregnant person is positive for group B
            Streptococcus (GBS) infection

         · Comfort measures, breathing and relaxation techniques, and emotional support for the discomfort of labor
         · No narcotic analgesia, inhalation anesthesia, and epidural anesthesia
         · Local anesthesia for perineal repair
         · Medications and intravenous solutions for management of postpartum hemorrhage
         · Neonatal and birthing person resuscitation equipment
         · A length of stay that is 24 hours from the time of the birth for the postpartum person and newborn

     Reasons for transferring the patient to the labor and birth or postpartum unit include:

         · Request for epidural
         · Temperature above 100.4° F two times, 4 hours apart
         · Tachycardia or hypertension
         · Labor augmentation
         · Prolonged active phase or second stage
         · Failure to progress or descend
         · Presentation other than vertex or multiple gestation
         · Meconium-stained, bloody, or malodorous amniotic fluid
         · Fetal stress or need for continuous fetal and uterine contraction monitoring
         · Need for cesarean birth
         · Prolapsed cord
         · Excessive vaginal bleeding, abruption, retained placenta, or postpartum hemorrhage
         · Resuscitation

     Reasons for transferring the newborn to the nursery include:

     Access for free at openstax.org
10.6 · Choosing a Birthing Place                                                                                         471

    · Resuscitation
    · Transient tachypnea of the newborn
    · Sepsis
    · Persistent hypothermia or hypoglycemia
    · Signs of prematurity
    · Weight less than 2,500 g
    · Jaundice
    · Failure to breast-feed or bottle-feed
    · Failure to void or have a bowel movement within the first 24 hours after birth

Out-of-Hospital Birthing Place Choices

In the United States less than 2 percent of births take place outside hospitals (Scrimshaw & Backes, 2020). Low-risk
pregnant persons at term with uncomplicated single-fetus pregnancies and without expected labor and birth
complications fit the criteria to deliver outside the hospital. Two out-of-hospital birthing choices are free-standing
birthing centers and home births.

Free-Standing Birthing Centers
Approximately 28 percent of pregnant persons who choose an out-of-hospital birth in the United States deliver in
free-standing birthing centers (Scrimshaw & Backes, 2020). A free-standing birthing center provides intrapartum,
postpartum, and normal newborn care to low-risk persons whose pregnancy is uncomplicated and only one fetus in
a vertex presentation is present (ACOG, 2019). The care provided in a free-standing hospital birthing center and
reasons for transfer are the same as for the in-hospital birthing center. The major difference is the distance from the
closest hospital with perinatal services, so transfer to the hospital is via medical transport (ambulance). Free-
standing birthing centers are often located within 30 minutes of a hospital with perinatal services.

Birthing at Home
Approximately 67 percent of out-of-hospital births in the United States occur in the home (Scrimshaw & Backes,
2020). The majority of home births are planned. Like birthing centers, home births are recommended for low-risk
persons whose pregnancy is uncomplicated and there is only one fetus in a vertex presentation.

Exclusion criteria for home birth include:

    · People who smoke
    · People who use or abuse substances
    · Less than 16 and over 40 years of age
    · Height less than 5 feet
    · Weight less than 100 pounds or greater than 220 pounds at conception
    · History of previous perinatal complication
    · Preexisting medical conditions
    · Previous cesarean birth or uterine surgery
    · Known congenital or genetic anomaly
    · Preterm labor or rupture of membranes

The care provided when birthing at home and reasons for transfer are similar to those for birthing centers. One
major difference is home births may occur more than 30 minutes from a hospital if an obstetric emergency occurs.
Home births also differ from birthing-center births in the attendants. Physicians rarely provide home birth services,
and most home births are attended by midwives with various levels of education. The birth attendants bring all the
birthing equipment with them, and newborn and postpartum supplies are provided by the birthing person.

Choosing a Birthing Place

Choosing a birthing place involves more than talking with a family member or friend and financial and health
insurance factors. It is important to understand the care capabilities provided by the birthing place; feel comfortable
with the actions required when a complication of the labor, birth, postpartum, or newborn develops; and realize that
transfer from the original birthing place location is sometimes required. Previous birth experiences also influence
the choice of birthing place.
472  10 · Pregnancy

     Nurses can assist the pregnant person with making a choice by being knowledgeable about all factors to consider
     and being aware of the level of the in-hospital birthing place and capabilities of the out-of-hospital birthing places
     available in the community. The factors to consider include the capabilities of the level of care provided within the
     birthing place; the absence or presence of antepartum, intrapartum, and postpartum risk factors for the pregnant
     person, as well as newborn risk factors; what is involved when a transfer of birthing place is required; and the
     training and qualifications of the health care providers and staff associated with each birthing place.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Understanding the outcomes and choice of the various birth settings available to pregnant persons in the United
     States (https://openstax.org/r/77birthsettings) can help the nurse guide them when selecting a birthing place.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              10 · Summary 473

Summary

10.1 Physiologic Changes Due to Pregnancy

It is important for the nurse to understand how hormone production during pregnancy and the growth of the fetus
are responsible for the physiologic and anatomic changes that occur throughout the pregnancy, affecting every
system in the pregnant person's body. The major hormones establishing, supporting, and maintaining the pregnancy
are produced by the placenta.

The nurse also needs to differentiate between the presumptive, probable, and positive signs of pregnancy. The
patient education provided by the nurse to the pregnant person includes the functions of the hormones of
pregnancy, the systemic physiologic changes during pregnancy, and the signs of pregnancy.

10.2 Psychosocial Aspects of Pregnancy

Nursing actions to support the pregnant person's, their partner's, or their family members' adaptation to the
pregnancy include encouraging participation in childbirth preparation and assessing the patterns of communication.
Nurses also need to encourage interaction among all those who will be in frequent contact with the pregnant person
and the newborn, and to provide parenting education when requested. Successful adaptation of the pregnant
person, the partner and support persons, and family members is linked with positive environments for raising
children.

10.3 Common Discomforts of Pregnancy

Pregnancy causes multiple changes in the physiology of body systems, and the growing uterus temporarily alters the
anatomy of the pregnant person. These changes can produce symptoms of discomfort throughout the pregnancy.
The education provided by the nurse to the pregnant person includes the cause of the symptoms and relief
measures. Because the symptoms of the common discomforts can also be early signs of pregnancy complications, it
is important for the nurse to recognize when the cues require follow-up.

10.4 Fetal Growth and Development

Knowledge of genetics, fetal growth and development, and factors affecting embryonic and fetal growth and
development helps the nurse to provide prenatal education, identify abnormalities and risk factors, and initiate
interventions. Early interventions are associated with decreased morbidity and mortality of the fetus and pregnant
person. Prenatal nurses are empowered to promote healthy lifestyle choices and assist pregnant persons to have a
healthy outcome.

10.5 Choosing a Health Care Provider

Choosing a perinatal health care provider can be as easy as making a phone call to a family member or friend or
determining which providers are covered by the pregnant person's health insurance. What is important is
understanding the levels of training of the different providers and feeling comfortable that the chosen health care
provider will recognize when a complication of pregnancy starts to develop and will provide the extra monitoring
needed. Nurses can assist the pregnant person with making a choice by being knowledgeable about the health care
providers in the community.

10.6 Choosing a Birthing Place

Choosing a birthing place can be based on personal or cultural preferences of the pregnant person. Preferences
most often focus on choice of provider and location of birthing place. The support person often has input into the
birthing place preference as well. Additional influences on the choice of birthing place include perinatal risk factors,
level of care the birthing place is capable of providing, and geographic factors. Other influences are the pregnant
person's health care insurance and financial factors.

Nurses who provide education regarding birthing place choices are knowledgeable about what factors to consider.
The information is presented openly and nonjudgmentally without bias. The safety of the pregnant person and fetus
is the priority of care and is considered at all times.
474 10 · Key Terms

Key Terms

baby-friendly hospital facility promoting and supporting breast-feeding that does not separate the birthing
    person from their newborn during the entire hospital stay

blastocyst group of pre-embryonic cells forming the embryo and the amnion
Braxton Hicks contractions spontaneous, irregular, and painless uterine contractions that occur throughout the

    pregnancy; Braxton Hicks contractions normally have no effect on the cervix
Chadwick sign bluish discoloration of the vagina and cervix due to the vasocongestion needed to support the

    growing uterus during pregnancy
common discomforts of pregnancy symptoms experienced by pregnant persons due to the physiologic and

    anatomic changes of pregnancy, including gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, integumentary, and musculoskeletal
    manifestations
couvade syndrome the pregnant person's partner taking on the symptoms associated with pregnancy
diastasis recti abdominis separation of the abdominal muscles caused by stretching and widening of the
    connective tissue that holds the muscles on each side of the abdomen
ductus arteriosus shunt that connects with the pulmonary artery to the descending aorta in the fetus
ductus venosus shunt that connects the umbilical vein to the inferior vena cava of the fetus
embryonic stage stage of development that begins with the completion of implantation and ends at the start of
    week 9 of gestation
fetal stage stage of development that begins at 9 weeks of gestation and ends with birth
foramen ovale shunt that moves the oxygenated blood from the right to left atrium in the fetus
free-standing birthing center provides intrapartum, postpartum, and normal newborn care to low-risk persons
    whose pregnancy is uncomplicated and there is only one fetus in a vertex presentation
genetics study of heredity and the patterns of inherited traits
Goodell sign softening of the cervix and vagina and increase in vaginal mucus discharge during pregnancy
Hegar sign softening of the lower uterine segment during pregnancy
hypercoagulability increase in the ability of the blood to coagulate
implantation when the trophoblast has successfully attached to the endometrium
labor and birth suite designed to provide care to the person during the entire labor and birth process, immediate
    care to the newborn, and care in the first hours of recovery for the birthing person and transition for the newborn
labor, delivery, recovery, postpartum (LDRP) suite provides care during the entire labor and birth process, and
    the entire postpartum stay, and provide immediate care to the newborn
linea nigra vertical line of increased pigmentation that starts at the pubic hair line, passes through the umbilicus,
    and goes up to the xiphoid process
melasma hyperpigmentation, or mask of pregnancy, on the face from the cheekbones to the forehead
morula when the zygote has divided into 16 cells
organogenesis formation and development of the organs of the body; starts in the embryonic stage
physiologic anemia of pregnancy anemia caused by the increase in plasma volume being proportionally higher
    than the increase in RBCs during pregnancy
pica strong craving for and consuming a nonfood substance, such as clay
positive signs of pregnancy signs that directly confirm a person is pregnant
presumptive signs of pregnancy symptoms noticed by the patient and are the least reliable symptoms of
    confirming a pregnancy because the signs can also occur with other medical conditions
probable signs of pregnancy objective cues occurring during pregnancy and noticed by the provider and are also
    associated with gynecologic conditions, not just pregnancy
pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP) benign skin condition of pregnancy; the rash is a
    combination of hives, bumps, microvesicles, and plaques
ptyalism excessive salivation
quickening perception of fetal movement by the pregnant person
self-care practices daily activities to replenish oneself physically, mentally, emotionally, socially, and spiritually,
    promoting health
striae gravidarum reddish lines where the skin has stretched to accommodate the growth in the breasts,
   abdomen, and buttocks during pregnancy; also called stretch marks
surfactant mixture of fats and proteins produced in the lungs that coats the alveoli; when the newborn exhales,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         10 · Assessments 475

    the surfactant keeps the alveoli from sticking together, interfering with expansion of the alveoli during the next
    inhalation
teratogen anything known to affect the normal growth and development of the embryo or fetus
TORCH group of infectious diseases that can be passed from the pregnant person to the fetus and is a known
    teratogen; diseases included are toxoplasmosis, other (originally only syphilis), rubella, cytomegalovirus, and
    herpes simplex virus
trophoblast group of pre-embryonic cells forming the placenta and the chorion
vena cava syndrome when the pregnant person starts feeling dizzy, weak, and sometimes nauseated when lying
    flat on their back because of the pressure the enlarging uterus places on the vena cava starting around 28 weeks
    of gestation
viability ability of the fetus to survive outside the uterus

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. The nurse is educating the pregnant person on the effects of the placenta hormones. What information does
        the nurse include in the teaching about relaxin? Select all that apply.

           a. makes the ligaments softer and more flexible
           b. helps decrease peripheral vascular resistance
           c. plays a role in the appearance of the linea nigra
           d. helps the skin stretch
           e. regulates metabolism
            f. increases leukorrhea

    2. The nurse is providing patient education regarding lower back discomfort during pregnancy. Identify the relief
        measure the nurse would discuss with the pregnant person.
           a. pelvic tilt exercise
           b. sit in a hot tub
           c. sleep on a soft mattress
           d. wear a girdle

    3. What are probable signs of pregnancy? Select all that apply.

           a. amenorrhea
           b. fetal movement
           c. Goodell sign
           d. positive pregnancy test
           e. skin hyperpigmentation

    4. The nurse is auscultating the fetal heart rate (FHR) on a patient at 37 weeks' gestation. The nurse notes a line
        of darkened pigmentation on the pregnant person's abdomen starting at the symphysis pubis and ending at
        the sternum. How does the nurse document this finding?
           a. cholasma
           b. linea nigra
           c. spider nevi
           d. striae gravidarum

    5. The nurse receives a phone call from a pregnant person at 36 weeks' gestation stating they have noticed
        some thin pink lines on the lower abdomen and wants to know if this is normal. The nurse recognizes the
        pregnant person is asking about what skin condition?
           a. linea nigra
           b. striae gravidarum
           c. palmar erythema
476 10 · Assessments

           d. pruritis

    6. The nurse is providing care to a pregnant person at 34 weeks' gestation who is experiencing heartburn. The
        pregnant person asks why they are experiencing heartburn so often. What is the appropriate nurse's response
        to the pregnant person's question?
           a. Heartburn is common during pregnancy because of the increase in food cravings.
           b. Heartburn increases during pregnancy because of the increase in salivation.
           c. Heartburn occurs because the cardiac sphincter relaxes, allowing stomach acid to come up into the
                esophagus.
           d. The increase in a pregnant person's metabolism causes an increase in stomach acid and heartburn.

    7. The nurse is caring for a pregnant person at 28 weeks' gestation who has started noticing an increase in
        vaginal discharge that does not have an odor. What is the appropriate response by the nurse to the pregnant
        person's concern?
           a. The discharge is because of the weight of the uterus on your bladder.
           b. The discharge means you have a urinary tract infection.
           c. A slight increase in vaginal discharge is expected at 28 weeks of gestation.
           d. There is nothing to worry about.

    8. The nurse is providing care to a pregnant person at 32 weeks' gestation. The nurse expects to observe what
        change in the pregnant person's spine?
           a. sclerosis
           b. scoliosis
           c. kyphosis
           d. lordosis

    9. The nurse is providing education to a pregnant person at 10 weeks' gestation who is experiencing nausea and
        vomiting. The nurse is aware the nausea and vomiting are due to which hormone produced by the placenta?
           a. relaxin
           b. human chorionic gonadotropin
           c. human placental lactogen
           d. luteinizing hormone

  10. Reva Rubin identified several maternal tasks the pregnant person undertakes during pregnancy. What actions
        by the pregnant person are included in these tasks? Select 4 that apply.

           a. develops attachment to the fetus
           b. schedules a childbirth class
           c. encourages the partner's attachment to the fetus
           d. acknowledges the fetus as a separate person
           e. discusses the deployment with their family
            f. places the needs of the fetus above their own

  11. The nurse is providing education about the newborn to a pregnant person and the soon-to-be grandparents.
        What information is the most important for the nurse to discuss to assist the extended family in adapting to
        their new role?
           a. how to bathe the newborn
           b. extended family role expectations
           c. childbirth preparation
           d. breast-feeding

  12. The nurse is providing education to a pregnant person regarding the nausea and vomiting of pregnancy.
        Identify the relief measures the nurse would discuss. Select all that apply.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      10 · Assessments 477

         a. avoid dairy products
         b. avoid strong odors
         c. drink fluids between meals
         d. drink sweet fluids
         e. eat small, frequent meals
          f. eat dry toast after getting out of bed

13. The nurse is answering a phone call from a pregnant person. The pregnant person informs the nurse she has
      had several sharp pains in the right lower abdomen this week. What is the priority question the nurse should
      ask the pregnant person?
         a. How many weeks pregnant are you?
         b. How much water are you drinking every day?
         c. When was your last bowel movement?
         d. Are you lactose intolerant?

14. The nurse is providing second trimester education on self-care measures to a group of pregnant persons and
      their support persons. What information is most important for the nurse to include at this time? Select 3 that
      apply.

         a. good hygiene
         b. wearing maternity clothing
         c. limiting fluid near bedtime
         d. leg cramps
         e. sexuality
          f. sleep and rest

15. The nurse explains to the patient at 28 weeks' gestation not to lie flat on their back during the remainder of
      the pregnancy. What does this precaution prevent?
         a. acid reflux
         b. headaches
         c. pregnancy-induced hypertension
         d. vena cava syndrome

16. At 16 weeks of gestation a pregnant person states, "The most dangerous time is the first 3 months, so I
      shouldn't have to worry from now on about any dangers to the baby." What is the nurse's most appropriate
      response?
         a. There are teratogens with the potential to harm your baby at any time during the pregnancy.
         b. We really won't be able to say for sure before you have an ultrasound.
         c. You are correct. You are past the critical point.
         d. You don't seem very concerned about your baby's welfare.

17. The nurse is providing prenatal education to a pregnant person who is 10 weeks pregnant. The nurse informs
      the pregnant person the placenta supports continual gestation until term by producing what?
         a. glucose
         b. hormones
         c. oxygen
         d. waste

18. The prenatal nurse is discussing the functions of the placenta with a pregnant person at 6 weeks' gestation.
      What statement by the pregnant person indicates to the nurse the patient understands the information?
         a. The placenta filters hormones to support the pregnancy.
         b. The placenta is responsible for fetal waste disposal.
         c. The placenta prevents all viruses from harming the fetus.
478 10 · Assessments

           d. The placenta regulates glucose levels in the fetus.

  19. The prenatal nurse is discussing fetal circulation with a student nurse. What statement by the student
        indicates to the prenatal nurse the student understands the information?
           a. The ductus arteriosus attaches the umbilical artery to the hepatic artery.
           b. The ductus venosus attaches the pulmonary artery to the aorta.
           c. The foramen ovale is located in the ventricular septum.
           d. There are two arteries and one vein in the umbilical cord.

  20. Why do infants born at 25 weeks' gestation have a poor survival rate?
           a. Cardiac development is incomplete.
           b. Fetal lung alveoli are not present in sufficient numbers.
           c. Gastrointestinal development is incomplete.
           d. Sucking reflex is not present.

  21. Identify the obstetric health care providers who attend births in private homes. Select all that apply.

           a. OB/GYN
           b. family practice physician
           c. maternal-fetal medicine specialist
           d. certified nurse-midwife
           e. professional midwife
            f. traditional birth attendant

  22. Identify the physician who is certified to provide the most comprehensive perinatal care.
           a. family practice
           b. obstetrician
           c. surgeon
           d. maternal-fetal medicine

  23. Where should a pregnant person at 34 weeks with preeclampsia deliver?
           a. Level I hospital
           b. Level II hospital
           c. home
           d. in-hospital birthing center

  24. Identify the health care provided during a home birth. Select all that apply.

           a. labor support
           b. trained birth attendant
           c. neonatal intensive care
           d. breast-feeding assistance
           e. postpartum instructions
            f. social services

  25. Identify the birthing place providing the most comprehensive labor, birth, and immediate postpartum and
        newborn care.
           a. hospital with LDRP and NICU units
           b. in-hospital birthing center
           c. free-standing birthing center
           d. home birth

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. Discuss the maternal physiologic changes associated with the reproductive system and their causes.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         10 · Assessments 479

    2. Discuss the maternal physiologic changes associated with the cardiovascular system and their causes.
    3. Explain the role of progesterone in maintaining the pregnancy.
    4. Differentiate between the presumptive, probable, and positive signs of pregnancy.
    5. What is the long-term result when the actions by the pregnant person's partner demonstrate support of the

        pregnancy?
    6. What should the parents consider when observing the siblings' reaction to the pregnancy?
    7. Explain why the discomforts of pregnancy are common.
    8. Describe three self-care activities to decrease lower back pain. Provide rationale for why you chose these

        activities.
    9. What information would you provide to a pregnant patient about decreasing insomnia?
  10. What is the purpose of surfactant?
  11. Why is the embryo so vulnerable to the effects of teratogens?
  12. Describe the steps of pre-embryonic development from conception to implantation.
  13. Differentiate between a certified professional midwife and a traditional birth attendant.
  14. What should the nurse do if a pregnant person asks for advice about how to choose a perinatal health care

        provider?
  15. Differentiate between the health care provided at inpatient and free-standing birthing centers.
  16. What should the nurse do if a pregnant person asks for advice about having a home delivery?

Reflection Questions

    1. How does the physiologic anemia of pregnancy develop?
    2. Why does the hypercoagulability state of the pregnant person develop?
    3. What is the most important anatomic adaptation the body experiences during pregnancy? Why is this

        anatomic adaptation the most important?
    4. What is a possible consequence when the pregnant person remains ambivalent about the pregnancy?
    5. What is the role of the nurse in caring for a pregnant person when IPV is suspected? Is mandatory reporting

        required in the state you are preparing to practice in? Support your response.
    6. Should the child of a pregnant person who is incarcerated be allowed to live in prison with the birth parent?

        Why or why not? Support your response.
    7. How would you explain the difference between genetic testing and chromosomal karyotyping to a family?
    8. Why is it important to offer genetic screening to all pregnant persons?
    9. How would you respond when a friend informs you (a registered nurse) they heard that a health care provider

        you work with at the hospital has been accused of some illegal act and the friend would like you to refer them
        to another provider?

What Should the Nurse Do?

Lara, a 32-year-old female eagerly anticipating motherhood, arrives at the obstetrics clinic at St. Mary's Hospital for
a routine prenatal checkup in the second trimester. While her medical history reveals a healthy lifestyle with no
underlying medical conditions, Lara expresses an array of pregnancy-related symptoms that have been causing her
some unease. She reports experiencing mild but persistent nausea, especially in the morning, along with a lingering
sense of fatigue that tends to intensify as the day progresses. As she navigates through the profound changes in her
body, Lara finds herself grappling with heightened levels of anxiety. Her anxiety manifests as a preoccupation with
480 10 · Assessments

the physiological transformations she is undergoing, prompting her to seek a better understanding of the intricate
processes at play during pregnancy.

    1. Lara is experiencing mild but persistent nausea and increased fatigue. Explain how the physiological changes
        during pregnancy, particularly hormonal influences, contribute to these symptoms.

    2. Lara is curious about the role of placenta hormones in supporting her pregnancy. Describe the functions of
        hCG, hPL, and estrogen during pregnancy.

    3. Lara is seeking assurance regarding the signs of her pregnancy. Explain the differences between presumptive,
        probable, and positive signs of pregnancy and provide examples relevant to her situation.

Georgia, a 28-year-old pregnant female, arrives at the obstetrics clinic in Mercy General Hospital for her scheduled
prenatal appointment, now well into her third trimester. As she engages with her healthcare provider, Georgia shares
a more detailed account of the emotional journey she has been navigating during this pregnancy. Alongside the
anticipated excitement of impending motherhood, Georgia reveals that she experiences occasional episodes of
heightened anxiety, often triggered by the uncertainty and rapid changes accompanying this transformative period.
These moments of unease are further compounded by noticeable mood swings, a rollercoaster of emotions that she
acknowledges may be influenced by hormonal fluctuations and the broader emotional weight of impending
parenthood. Despite these challenges, Georgia is keen to emphasize that she has a robust support system in place,
including her partner, siblings, and extended family. She describes her partner as actively involved and supportive
yet navigating their own set of adjustments during this journey.

    4. Georgia experiences occasional episodes of heightened anxiety and noticeable mood swings. How might
        these emotional challenges impact her psychosocial adaptation to pregnancy, and what nursing interventions
        can support her during this transformative period?

    5. Georgia mentions that her partner has experienced phases of increased and decreased interest in the
        pregnancy. Explain how the partner's adaptation to pregnancy may influence the overall support system.
        What strategies can the nurse suggest to enhance the partner's engagement throughout the pregnancy?

    6. If Georgia has other children, how might the age of the child influence their adaptation to the pregnancy and
        impending birth? What steps can the nurse recommend to promote positive sibling adaptation and prevent
        potential challenges?

    7. Georgia emphasizes having a robust support system, including extended family. How can the extended family
        members prepare for the changes accompanying the newborn's arrival? What role can the nurse play in
        assisting and educating the extended family to support the pregnant person?

Jennifer, a 34-year-old female in her second trimester of pregnancy, arrives at the obstetrics clinic for her scheduled
prenatal checkup. In a detailed conversation with her healthcare provider, Jennifer elaborates on the common
discomforts she has been encountering during this pregnancy. She describes persistent lower back pain that
intensifies after prolonged periods of standing or sitting. Additionally, Jennifer mentions experiencing occasional leg
cramps, particularly at night, disrupting her sleep and contributing to an overall sense of fatigue during the day. As
she recounts her experiences, Jennifer expresses frustration with the difficulty she encounters while trying to find a
comfortable sleeping position, often disrupted by a combination of back pain and restless legs.

    8. Based on Jennifer's symptoms, which common discomforts of pregnancy is she currently experiencing, and
        what are the possible physiological or anatomical causes for each symptom?

    9. What nonpharmacological relief measures can be suggested to Jennifer for her lower back pain, leg cramps,
        and difficulty sleeping, based on the information provided in the chapter?

  10. How can nurses promote self-care practices related to hygiene during pregnancy, specifically addressing
        Jennifer's concerns, and why is perineal cleansing important?

  11. What self-care practices can Jennifer adopt to prevent constipation, and why is prevention important during
        pregnancy, based on the information provided?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. What are the primary physiological changes in the integumentary system during pregnancy, and how can a
        nurse advise pregnant individuals to manage these changes?

    2. Detail the functions of two placenta hormones discussed in the chapter and their roles in supporting
        pregnancy and fetal growth.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            10 · References 481

    3. Provide examples of one presumptive, one probable, and one positive sign of pregnancy and explain how they
        differ.

    4. Describe two psychosocial developmental tasks identified by Reva Rubin that pregnant individuals go through
        to adapt to pregnancy. Provide examples of how a pregnant person might demonstrate acceptance of their
        role as a birthing parent.

    5. How does the partner's level of interest in the pregnancy change over time, and what factors influence the
        partner's adaptation to pregnancy? Additionally, describe the concept of couvade syndrome.

    6. How does the age of a sibling influence their adaptation to a new pregnancy, and what actions can a nurse
        recommend to promote positive sibling adaptation?

    7. Identify two types of extended family members and describe how the nurse can assist them in preparing for
        the addition of a newborn. Why is preparation important for extended family members?

    8. Explain the causes and relief measures for morning sickness during pregnancy.

    9. What preventive measures can pregnant individuals take to address constipation during pregnancy, and how
        might pharmacologic measures be used?

  10. How can oral hygiene practices contribute to the prevention of periodontitis during pregnancy?

  11. The nurse is providing genetic counseling to a pregnant person at their first prenatal visit because the
        pregnant person is 40 years of age. The pregnant person is undecided about genetic testing. How would you
        respond to this pregnant person if they asked what you would do in their situation?

References

Alizadeh, S., Riazi, H., Majd, H. A., & Ozgoli, G. (2021). The effect of sexual health education on sexual activity,
   sexual quality of life, and sexual violence in pregnancy: A prospective randomized controlled trial. BMC
   Pregnancy and Childbirth, 21(334), 1-12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-021-03803-8

American Academy of Family Physicians. (2023). AAFP-ACOG Joint Statement on Cooperative Practice and Hospital
   Privileges. https://www.aafp.org/about/policies/all/aafp-acog-joint-statement.html

American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology. (2023). Specialty certification general details. https://www.abog.org/
    specialty-certification/requirements

American College of Nurse-Midwives. (2021, December). Definition of midwifery and scope of practice of certified
   nurse-midwives and certified midwives. https://www.midwife.org/acnm/files/acnmlibrarydata/uploadfilename/
    000000000266/Definition%20Midwifery%20Scope%20of%20Practice_2021.pdf

American College of Nurse-Midwives. (n.d.). Certified professional midwife. https://www.midwife.org/Certified-
    Professional-Midwife

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020a). Physical activity and exercise during pregnancy and
   the postpartum period. (ACOG Committee Opinion 804). https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/
    committee-opinion/articles/2020/04/physical-activity-and-exercise-during-pregnancy-and-the-postpartum-
    period

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020b). Moderate caffeine consumption during pregnancy.
    (ACOG Committee Opinion 462). https://www.acog.org/-/media/project/acog/acogorg/clinical/files/committee-
    opinion/articles/2010/08/moderate-caffeine-consumption-during-pregnancy.pdf

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022, July). Skin conditions during pregnancy.
    https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/skin-conditions-during-pregnancy

American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology. (2018). Screening for perinatal depression. (ACOG Committee
    Opinion 757). https://journals.lww.com/greenjournal/abstract/2018/11000/
    acog_committee_opinion_no__757__screening_for.42.aspx

American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology. (2019, August). Levels of maternal care. (Obstetric Care Consensus
482 10 · References

    9). https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/obstetric-care-consensus/articles/2019/08/levels-of-
    maternal-care

American Medical Association. (n.d.). Prenatal Screening Questionnaire. https://www.ama-assn.org/media/8706/
    download

Anti-Trafficking International. (2023). Take action. https://preventht.org/act/

Atif, M., Farooq, M., Shafiq, M., Ayub, G., & Ilyas, M. (2023). The impact of partner's behaviour on pregnancy related
   outcomes and safe child-birth in Pakistan. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth, 23(1), 516. https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s12884-023-05814-z

Bjelica, A., Cetkovic, N., Trninic-Pjevic, A., & Mladenovic-Segedi, L. (2018). The phenomenon of pregnancy: A
   psychological view. Ginekologia Polska, 89(2), 102-106. https://doi.org/10.5603/GP.a2018.0017

Branagan, M. (2019, November 9). Mail-order brides--A form of human trafficking? https://preventht.org/editorial/
    mail-order-brides-a-form-of-human-trafficking/

Celaj, S., & Kourkoumpetis, T. (2021). Gallstones in pregnancy. JAMA, 325(23), 2410. https://doi.org/10.1001/
    jama.2021.4502

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022, June 24). Genetic counseling. https://www.cdc.gov/genomics/
    gtesting/genetic_counseling.htm

Cleveland Clinic. (2023). Aneuploidy. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/24060-aneuploidy

Cunningham, F. G. (2018, updated August 2023). Normal Reference Ranges for Laboratory Values in Pregnancy.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/normal-reference-ranges-for-laboratory-values-in-pregnancy/
    print#subscribeMessage

Daciolu, B. F. (2018). The effects of the new baby on the older sibling. Ankara Medical Journal, 18(3), 286-299.
    https://doi.org/10.17098/amj.461653

Dodson, K. D., Cabage, L. N., & McMillan, S. M. (2019). Mothering behind bars: Evaluating the effectiveness of prison
   nursery programs on recidivism reduction. The Prison Journal, 99(5), 572-592. https://doi.org/10.1177/
    0032885519875037

Eick, S. M., Goin, D. E., Izano, M. A., Cushing, L., DeMicco, E., Padula, A. M., Woodruff, T. J., & Morello-Frosch, R.
    (2020, June 12). Relationships between psychosocial stressors among pregnant women in San Francisco: A path
   analysis. Plos One. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0234579

Farhodimoghadam, M., Heydarpour, S., Salari, N., & Jaberghaderi, N. (2020). The effect of cognitive-behavioral
   counseling on lifestyle in pregnant women: A randomized controlled clinical trial. Journal of Medicine and Life,
   13(2), 187-194. https://doi.org/10.25122/jml-2019-0163

Guttmacher Institute. (2019). Unintended pregnancy in the United States (Fact Sheet). https://www.guttmacher.org/
    sites/default/files/factsheet/fb-unintended-pregnancy-us.pdf

Hartmann, A. S., Zenger, M., Glaesmer, H., Strauß, B., Brähler, E., de Zwaan, M., & Hilbert, A. (2022). Prevalence of
    pica and rumination behaviours in adults and associations with eating disorder and general psychopathology:
   findings form a population-based study. Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences, 31, e40. https://doi.org/
    10.1017%2FS2045796022000208

Joas, J., & Möhler, E. (2021). Maternal bonding in early infancy predicts children's social competences in preschool
   age. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 12, 687535. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2021.687535

Loyola University of Chicago. (n.d.). Table of Genetic Disorders. https://www.meddean.luc.edu/lumen/meded/
    usmle/table_of_genetic_disorders.pdf

March of Dimes. (2022). Genetic and chromosome conditions. https://www.marchofdimes.org/find-support/topics/
    planning-baby/genetic-and-chromosomal-conditions

Mayo Clinic. (2022, September 15). High blood bressure (hypertension). https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            10 · References 483

    conditions/high-blood-pressure/symptoms-causes/syc-20373410

Modest, A. M., Prater, L. C., & Joseph, N. T. (2022). Pregnancy-associated homicide and suicide: An analysis of the
   National Violent Death Reporting System, 2008-2019. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 140(4), 565-573.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000004932

Morton, A. (2021). Physiological changes and cardiovascular investigations in pregnancy. Heart, Lung and
   Circulation, 30(1), e6-e15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hlc.2020.10.001

Mrayan, L., Abujilban, S., Abuidhail, J., Bani Yassein, M., & Al-Modallal, H. (2019). Couvade syndrome among
   Jordanian expectant fathers. American Journal of Men's Health, 13(1), 1557988318810243. https://doi.org/
    10.1177/1557988318810243

Mwoma, T., Kituku, J., Gitome, J., Kahumbi, N., Ndewga, P., Maina, M., & Bagelman, J. (2021). Role of traditional
    birth attendants in providing pre and postnatal care to mothers in refugee camps: A case of Ifo Camp Dadaab
   Kenya. International Journal of Pregnancy & Child Birth, 7(3), 58-62. https://doi.org/10.15406/
    ipcb.2021.07.00229

National Domestic Violence Hotline. (n.d.). What to expect when you contact us. https://www.thehotline.org/what-
    to-expect-when-you-contact-us/

Nomaguchi, K., & Milkie, M. A. (2020). Parenthood and well-being: A decade in review. Journal of Marriage and the
   Family, 82(1), 198-223. https://doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12646

Pantelis, A., Sotiriadis , A., Chatzistamatiou, K., Pratilas, G., & Dinas, K. (2018). Serum relaxin and cervical length for
   prediction of spontaneous preterm birth in second-trimester symptomatic women. Ultrasound in Obstetrics and
   Gynecology, 52, 763-768. https://doi.org/10.1002/uog.18972

Parsons, A. M., & Bouma, G. J. (2021). A potential role and contribution of androgens in placental development and
   pregnancy. Life, 11(7), 644. https://doi.org/10.3390/life11070644

Przybyla-Basista, H., Kwieciska, E., & Ilska, M. (2020). Body acceptance by pregnant women and their attitudes
   toward pregnancy and maternity as predictors of prenatal depression. International Journal of Environmental
   Research and Public Health, 17(24), 9436. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17249436

Rasmussen, W. D., Nair, K., Crawford, G. W., Fussell, G. E., Ordish, G., Mellanby, K., & Gray, A. W. (2022, July 29).
   Origins of agriculture. Encyclopedia Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/topic/agriculture

Rubin, R. (1984). Maternal identity and the maternal experience. Springer.

Sapkota, D., Dennison, S., Allen, J., Gamble, J., Williams, C., Malope-Rwodzi, N., Baar, L., Ransley, J., & McGee, T. R.
    (2022). Navigating pregnancy and early motherhood in prison: A thematic analysis of mothers' experiences.
   Health & Justice, 10(32). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40352-022-00196-4

Scrimshaw, S. C., & Backes, E. P. (2020). Birth settings in America: Outcomes, quality, access, and choice. (A
    Consensus Study Report of the National Academies of Health, Science, and Engineering). National Academies
    Press. https://nap.nationalacademies.org/read/25636/chapter/1

Seiermann, A. U., Al-Mufti, H., Waid, J. L., Wendt, A. S., Sobhan, S., & Gabrysch, S. (2021). Women's fasting habits
   and dietary diversity during Ramadan in rural Bangladesh. Maternal & Child Nutrition, 17(3), e13135.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/mcn.13135

Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine. (2023). What is the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine?
    https://www.smfm.org/what-is-the-society

Solivan, A. E., Xiong, X., Harville, E. W., & Buekens, P. (2015). Measurement of perceived stress among pregnant
   women: A comparison of two different instruments. Maternal and Child Health Journal, 19(9), 1910-1915.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s10995-015-1710-5

Taranikanti, M. (2018). Physiological changes in cardiovascular system during normal pregnancy: A review. Indian
   Journal of Cardiovascular Disease in Women, 3(2/3), 62-67. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0038-1676666
484 10 · References

The Joint Commission. (n.d.). Maternal levels of care verification. https://www.jointcommission.org/what-we-offer/
    verification/maternal-levels-of-care-verification/

U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2022, March 21). Indicators of human trafficking. https://www.dhs.gov/
    blue-campaign/indicators-human-trafficking

Uvoh, S. M., Asara, A. A., Gabriel, K. E., Ebiyemzi, A. B., & Leelee, D. B. (2021). Total serum cholesterol and selected
   electrolytes during pregnancy among women residents in Yenagoa metropolis, Bayelsa state Nigeria. The Journal
   of Medical Research, 7(6), 191-194. https://www.medicinearticle.com/JMR_20216_07.pdf

Uwambaye, P., Munyanshongore, C., Rulisa, S., Shiau, H., Nuhu, A., & Kerr, M. S. (2021, March). Assessing the
   association between periodontitis and premature birth: A case-control study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth,
   21(204). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-021-03700-0

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 11

Prenatal Care

FIGURE 11.1 Prenatal Visit The purpose of prenatal nursing care is to gather assessment data at each prenatal visit, to analyze the data to
ensure there are no factors placing the pregnancy at risk for complications, and when complications are diagnosed, to monitor the
pregnancy more closely for a positive patient and fetal outcome. (credit: "It Takes a Village Friend" by Airman 2st Class Rhonda Smith/U.S.
Air Force, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
11.1 First Prenatal Visit
11.2 Care in the First Trimester of Pregnancy
11.3 Care in the Second Trimester of Pregnancy
11.4 Care in the Third Trimester of Pregnancy
11.5 Family Assessment and Nursing Interventions
INTRODUCTION Routine prenatal care begins at the first prenatal visit and continues throughout the 280 days (40
weeks) of pregnancy. It involves nursing interventions based on the nurse's assessment of the family. The purpose
of prenatal care is to gather assessment data at each prenatal visit, to analyze the data to ensure there are no
factors placing the fetus or pregnant person at risk for complications, and when complications are diagnosed, to
monitor the pregnancy more closely for a positive patient and fetal outcome. Registered nurses are part of the
prenatal health-care team in county public health departments, community health centers and clinics, and provider
private practices, providing education regarding the antepartum, intrapartum, and postpartum periods as well as
newborn and infant care.
486  11 · Prenatal Care

     11.1 First Prenatal Visit

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Obtain a comprehensive patient health history at the first prenatal visit
         · Analyze the subjective and objective patient data obtained in the interval history since the patient's last

             menstrual period
         · Explain various methods of confirming a patient is pregnant
         · Explain the physical examination performed at the first prenatal visit
         · Explain the purpose of the laboratory tests obtained at the first prenatal visit
         · Provide the patient education at the first prenatal visit

     The 280 days of gestation (pregnancy) are divided into three periods, called trimesters. Each trimester is 14 weeks
     of gestation. The first trimester is from 0 to 13 weeks and 6 days of gestation, the second trimester is from 14 to
     27 weeks and 6 days of gestation, and the third trimester is 28 weeks until delivery (American College of
     Obstetricians and Gynecologists [ACOG], 2017, Reaffirmed 2022).

     Early and regular prenatal care is associated with a decreased incidence of complications of pregnancy (Osterman &
     Martin, 2018). The decrease in adverse outcomes for both the patient and newborn is most often attributed to the
     wealth of patient information provided at each prenatal visit. Two examples of this information include eating a
     healthy diet and avoiding intake of or exposure to harmful substances.

     Patients are encouraged to schedule their first prenatal visit sometime between 8 and 12 weeks of gestation. This
     initial prenatal visit starts with obtaining the patient's health history and current data related to the patient's signs
     and symptoms of pregnancy. The pregnancy is confirmed and the patient's due date is determined using the
     patient's recall of the first day of their last menstrual period (LMP) and ultrasound (US) (if performed). A physical
     exam is completed, and initial prenatal laboratory specimens are obtained to be sent out for testing. The visit ends
     with patient teaching about multiple topics for keeping healthy during the pregnancy and scheduling the next
     prenatal visit.

     Health History

     At the first prenatal visit, a comprehensive health history is obtained. Demographic data are first asked of the
     patient. The next part of the health history includes the patient's past medical and surgical history, list of current
     medications, family health and genetic history, lifestyle and health practices, current medications, history of drug
     use, and exposure to sexually transmitted infections (STIs). An obstetric history, nutritional assessment, depression
     screening, and intimate partner violence screen are also completed during the first prenatal visit. The goal of the
     health history is to obtain baseline data on the patient and the patient's partner (or the biological father or sperm
     donor of the fetus) to identify risk factors that could affect the patient, fetus, and newborn.

     Demographic Data
     The age of a pregnant person can be a risk factor for complications, especially if the person is 19 years old or
     younger when conception occurred or will be 35 years old or older at the estimated date of delivery. Those at the
     lower and higher ends of the age continuum are at increased risk for preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, preterm
     delivery, prolonged labor, and delivery by cesarean section.

     Where the patient lives provides cues for social determinants of health, such as potential problems with access to
     care (lack of reliable transportation to and from prenatal visits and diagnostic testing ordered during the pregnancy),
     exposure to environmental toxins, and neighborhood violence. Who the patient lives with impacts who shops for and
     cooks the meals as well as the money available for childbirth education and the needs of the newborn. Members of
     the patient's household also indicate the support system available to the patient throughout the pregnancy and after
     the baby is born.

     Sociocultural considerations, such as the patient's race, ethnicity, religious practices, primary language, education,
     and occupation, often impact pregnancy. Race and ethnicity play a role in dietary intake and risk for certain genetic
     disorders. Religious practices may influence dietary intake and choice of prenatal care provider and place of
     delivery.

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.1 · First Prenatal Visit                                                                                              487

The patient's primary language and highest level of education influence both their literacy and health literacy levels.
The prenatal period is an optimal time for the nurse to screen for health literacy and for the health-care provider to
increase the patient's health literacy. Availability of medical interpreters and verbal and written education in the
patient's primary language is essential to promote awareness of actions to maintain a healthy pregnancy and early
recognition of potential problems during the prenatal period.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Medical and health-care interpreters provide a vital service interpreting and translating medical information
between health-care personnel (nurses, dieticians, health-care providers) and a patient who speaks a different
language. The medical information includes, but is not limited to, completing a health history and physical, obtaining
informed consent, administering medications, and discharge instructions. There are various ways to train to become
a medical or health-care interpreter and multiple choices to obtain certification. The National Board of Certification
for Medical Interpreters (https://openstax.org/r/77interpreters) is one example.

The occupation of both the patient and their partner can affect the pregnancy by exposing the new parents-to-be to
stress and environmental pollutants. Stress can raise the patient's blood pressure, decrease resistance to infection,
interfere with sleep, and affect dietary intake, all of which influence fetal growth and development, thereby
increasing the risk for low birth weight and preterm delivery. Stress can also increase the incidence of intimate
partner violence during pregnancy. Exposure to environmental pollutants raises the risk for congenital
malformations.

Medical and Surgical History
The patient's medical and surgical history reveals past surgical procedures and current and past medical problems
that may occur again or worsen during the pregnancy. Diabetes and hypertension are examples of current medical
problems, and frequent urinary tract infections are an example of an intermittent medical problem increasing the
risk for complications for the entire perinatal period. Surgeries and other procedures that may place the pregnancy
at risk include previous uterine surgery, loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP), and repair of a fractured
pelvis.

Current Medications and Over-the-Counter Supplements
Obtaining a list of over-the-counter (OTC) medications; vitamins, minerals, and herbal supplements; and
prescription drugs used by the patient since the first day of the patient's last menstrual period provides the nurse or
other health-care provider a baseline to screen for teratogens. The embryo and fetus are especially vulnerable to
teratogens in the first 14 weeks of gestation, also known as the first trimester of pregnancy. The patient's current
medication and over-the-counter supplements list also provides the nurse with a foundation for patient education
on medications, vitamins and minerals, and herbal supplements considered safe or contraindicated during
pregnancy.

Patients with preexisting medical conditions are often taking drugs prescribed by other health-care providers. It is
important for the patient to inform their other health-care providers they are planning to become or are currently
pregnant. To ensure medication safety throughout the pregnancy, obstetric care providers often work hand-in-hand
with other health-care providers, such as endocrinologists, when patients have thyroid disease or diabetes.

Lifestyle and Health Practices
It is important to discover if the patient is currently using or has a history of using tobacco products, alcohol,
opioids, marijuana, or illegal substances, especially since the patient's first day of their LMP. All of the listed
substances are linked with adverse patient and fetal outcomes, increasing the risk for maternal and infant morbidity
and mortality. Some over-the-counter and herbal supplements are also linked with adverse patient and fetal
outcomes, and any intake needs to ascertained as well.

Discussing current exercise and activity level with the patient assists in developing an exercise plan during
pregnancy. Exercise is encouraged because staying active during pregnancy is associated with fewer
musculoskeletal complaints during pregnancy, decreased risk of preeclampsia and gestational diabetes mellitus,
and shorter length of labor (Rodriguez-Blanque et al., 2019). If a patient was inactive prior to conception, exercise
488  11 · Prenatal Care

     should be increased gradually.

     Obtaining a 24-hour diet recall from the patient provides the data to evaluate the patient's dietary habits and
     nutritional status. Inadequate or poor nutritional intake is associated with low birth weight, prematurity, and
     preeclampsia. Low fiber and inadequate water intake increase the risk of constipation during pregnancy.

     Additionally, the patient should be asked if they currently use non-Western medical practices such as massage
     therapy, acupressure and acupuncture, Ayurveda, homeopathy, or home remedies. Some non-Western medical
     practices are safe during pregnancy, especially when provided by a trained and, when required, licensed person. The
     prenatal health-care provider should discuss the patient's use of these practices throughout the pregnancy. (Table
     11.1) provides a list of the information documented in the prenatal patient's electronic health record (EHR) at the
     first prenatal visit.

     Category                          Information

     Demographic information           Name
                                       Address
                                       Phone number
                                       Insurance
                                       Date of birth/age
                                       Marital status
                                       Language
                                       Race/ethnicity
                                       Religion
                                       Name of partner
                                       Pregnancy support person
                                       Education of pregnant person/partner
                                       Occupation of pregnant person/partner

     Allergies                         Drugs
                                       Other

     Current medications

     Menstrual history                 Age at menarche
                                       Menstrual cycle interval
                                       Menstrual cycle duration
                                       First day of last menstrual period (LMP)

     Estimated date of delivery (EDD)  By LMP
                                       By US

     TABLE 11.1 Information Included in the Prenatal Health History

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                11.1 · First Prenatal Visit  489

Category             Information
Pregnancy history
                     Gravida ___ T ___ P ___ A ___ L ___
                     Month/year of delivery
                     Weeks of gestation at delivery
                     Length of labor
                     Type of delivery
                     Sex of infant
                     Infant weight at birth
                     Anesthesia
                     Complications during pregnancy

                         · anemia
                         · intrauterine fetal demise (IUFD)
                         · gestational diabetes
                         · hemorrhage
                         · hyperemesis
                         · cervical insufficiency
                         · postpartum (PP) depression
                         · pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH)
                         · preterm labor (PTL) or birth
                         · group B streptococcus (GBS) positive
                         · multiple gestation
                         · infection

                     Repeat information for each pregnancy

Gynecologic history  Past or current contraceptive use
                     Abnormal Papanicolaou (Pap) smear
                     STIs and vaginal infections

                         · gonorrhea
                         · chlamydia
                         · syphilis
                         · herpes
                         · human immunodeficiency virus/acquired

                             immunodeficiency disease (HIV/AIDS)
                         · human papillomavirus (HPV)
                         · trichomoniasis
                         · bacterial vaginosis

                     Fibroids
                     Gynecologic surgery
                     Infertility
                     Uterine and cervical anomalies
                     Abnormal uterine bleeding

Infection history    Toxoplasmosis
                     Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
                     Rubella status
                     Varicella
                     Hepatitis A, B, and C

TABLE 11.1 Information Included in the Prenatal Health History
490  11 · Prenatal Care

     Category                         Information

     Medical history                  Genetic disorder
                                      Cancer
                                      Hypertension (HTN)
                                      Cardiac disease
                                      Rheumatic fever
                                      Asthma
                                      Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
                                      Other pulmonary disease
                                      Gastrointestinal (GI) conditions
                                      Renal and urinary tract conditions
                                      Gynecologic conditions
                                      Varicosities
                                      Endocrine disorders
                                      Anemia
                                      Blood dyscrasia
                                      Substance use (drugs, smoking, alcohol)
                                      Infectious disease
                                      Accidents/injuries
                                      Blood transfusion
                                      Other

     Hospitalizations                 Date
                                      Reason
                                      Repeat for each occasion

     Surgeries                        Name
                                      Date
                                      Repeat for each surgery

     Immunizations                    Tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis (Tdap)
                                      Influenza
                                      COVID
                                      Varicella
                                      Measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR)
                                      Hepatitis A (Hep A)
                                      Hepatitis (Hep B)

     Interval history since LMP       Vaginal bleeding
                                      Abdominal or epigastric pain
                                      Headache
                                      Dizziness or syncope
                                      Visual change
                                      Nausea and vomiting
                                      Urinary complaints
                                      Fever
                                      Infections
                                      Trauma or accident
                                      Other

     TABLE 11.1 Information Included in the Prenatal Health History

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  11.1 · First Prenatal Visit  491

Category                   Information

Exposure to teratogens     STIs
                           TORCH
                           Varicella
                           Hepatitis
                           Work chemicals
                           Radiation
                           Other

Substance use              Nonprescribed drugs
(type and amount per day)  Herbal preparations
                           Prescribed drugs
                           Alcohol
                           Tobacco
                           Marijuana
                           Other drugs

Genetic history, patient   Sickle cell anemia
                           Thalassemia
                           Cystic fibrosis
                           Tay-Sachs disease
                           Hemophilia
                           Muscular dystrophy
                           Huntington chorea
                           Neural tube defects
                           Trisomy or other chromosomal disorder
                           Developmental delay
                           Neurologic deficit
                           Autism spectrum disorder
                           Fragile X
                           Other chromosomal or genetic disorder
                           Recurrent pregnancy loss
                           Metabolic disorder
                           Other

TABLE 11.1 Information Included in the Prenatal Health History
492  11 · Prenatal Care

     Category                                       Information

     Genetic history of other biological parent of  Sickle cell anemia
     baby                                           Thalassemia
                                                    Cystic fibrosis
                                                    Tay-Sachs disease
                                                    Hemophilia
                                                    Muscular dystrophy
                                                    Huntington chorea
                                                    Neural tube defects
                                                    Trisomy or other chromosomal disorder
                                                    Developmental delay
                                                    Neurologic deficit
                                                    Autism spectrum disorder
                                                    Fragile X
                                                    Other chromosomal or genetic disorder
                                                    Recurrent pregnancy loss
                                                    Metabolic disorder
                                                    Other

     Nutrition assessment                           Normal food and drink for breakfast
                                                    Normal food and drink for lunch
                                                    Normal food and drink for supper
                                                    Normal food and drink for snacks
                                                    Eating disorder
                                                    Malnourished
                                                    Special diet
                                                    Vitamin and mineral supplements
                                                    Herbal supplements
                                                    Caffeine intake

     Activity assessment                            Job outside home
                                                    Work at home
                                                    Exercise
                                                    Leisure activities

     TABLE 11.1 Information Included in the Prenatal Health History

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           11.1 · First Prenatal Visit                 493

Category                                      Information

Psychosocial assessment                       Housing
                                              Financial restrictions
                                              Transportation restrictions
                                              Access to phone
                                              Access to utilities
                                              Support person(s)
                                              Adaptation to pregnancy
                                              Safety at home
                                              Presence of abuse
                                              History of depression

Assessment of preexisting conditions placing  Age < 19 and > 35
the pregnancy at risk                         < 8th-grade education
                                              Cardiac disease
                                              COPD
                                              Current endocrine disease
                                              Epilepsy
                                              Two or more abortions
                                              Five or more births at > 20 weeks
                                              Previous preterm births
                                              Previous intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) infant
                                              Previous large for gestational age (LGA) infant
                                              Rh sensitization
                                              Previous ABO incompatibility
                                              Previous antepartum hemorrhage
                                              Previous preeclampsia
                                              Second pregnancy within 12 months of previous delivery
                                              Smoking more than one-half pack per day
                                              Diabetes mellitus
                                              Hypertension
                                              Chronic renal disease
                                              Hemoglobinopathy
                                              Congenital anomaly
                                              Genetic anomaly
                                              Cervical insufficiency
                                              Fetal or neonatal death
                                              Previous neurologically damaged infant
                                              Presence of social determinant of health

TABLE 11.1 Information Included in the Prenatal Health History

Obstetric and Gynecologic History
During the obstetric history-taking process, the patient's estimated date of delivery (EDD) will be determined. The
EDD is the date the pregnant patient is expected to give birth, plus or minus 2 weeks. Information about any
previous pregnancy is obtained to establish the patient's gravidity and parity, both of which will be defined and
discussed later in this section. A gynecologic history is important to discover additional risk factors affecting the
pregnancy.

Estimated Date of Delivery (EDD)
When the pregnant patient is sure of the first day of their last menstrual period, the EDD is determined using
Naegele's Rule. Naegele's Rule is a three-step calculation based on a 28-day menstrual cycle used to determine a
pregnant patient's due date. Using Naegele's Rule, the nurse first subtracts 3 months from the first day of the last
494  11 · Prenatal Care

     menstrual period (LMP). In the second step, the nurse adds 7 days to the LMP. Any needed adjustment to the year is
     the final step of Naegele's rule (Table 11.2). The "plus or minus 2 weeks" of the calculated EDD takes into
     consideration the normal variations in a menstruating person's cycle.

                                      Calculation        Example

                                      Date of LMP        April 6, 2022

                                      Subtract 3 months  January 6, 2022

                                      Add 7 days         January 13, 2022

                                                   Adjust the year [if needed] January 13, 2023

                                                          TABLE 11.2 Calculating the EDD Using Naegele's Rule

     Gravidity and Parity
     Gravidity and parity (G/P) indicate the patient's reproductive history in numerical form. The total number of times
     the patient has been pregnant (including the current pregnancy) regardless of the outcome or number of fetuses is
     gravidity, while parity is the number of pregnancies where the patient has reached 20 weeks of gestation or more,
     regardless of whether the pregnancy ended in a live birth or fetal demise or the number of fetuses (ACOG, 2014).
     Thus, for a patient who is pregnant for the third time and the outcome of the two previous pregnancies was a live
     birth at 37 weeks and a fetal demise at 28 weeks, the nurse would document G3/P2. Abortion is the medical term
     for a pregnancy ending at 20 weeks of gestation or less, whether spontaneous or induced.

     Gravidity and parity can be expanded upon in several ways based on the health-care provider's preference. The
     most common method of detailing gravidity and parity is using the G/TPAL (gravida, term, preterm, abortion, living)
     method (ACOG, 2014).

         · G: Gravida (or gravidity) is the number of pregnancies, including the current pregnancy.
         · T: Term is the number of births at 37 weeks of gestation and later.
         · P: Preterm is the number of births at >20 weeks of gestation and before 37 weeks.
         · A: Abortion is the number of pregnancies ending before 20 weeks of gestation.
         · L: Living is the number of children the pregnant patient has given birth to who lived past 28 days from the date

             of birth.

     To determine a patient's gravidity and parity using G/TPAL, follow this process:

       1. Determine how many times the patient has been pregnant. This is the gravida, or G.
       2. Determine the number of times the patient has given birth at 37 weeks of gestation or later. This is the number

             of term, or T, births.
       3. Determine the number of times the patient has given birth after 20 weeks of gestation but before 37 weeks.

             This is the number of preterm, or P, births.
       4. Determine the number of times the patient has given birth at less than 20 weeks of gestation. This is the

             number of abortions, or A.
       5. Determine the total number of living children the patient has given birth to. This is the number of living, or L.

     For example, consider a pregnant patient whose reproductive history reveals she has given birth twice. The first
     child was born a week early, and the second child was born 4 weeks early. She also miscarried twins during the
     fourth month of pregnancy. Using the G/TPAL method:

       1. G = 4 (she is currently pregnant)
       2. T = 1 (1 week early is 39 weeks)
       3. P = 1 (4 weeks early is 36 weeks)
       4. A = 1 (4 months is 16 weeks, and a multiple gestation pregnancy is considered one birth)
       5. L = 2

     This patient's G/TPAL is G4 P1112.

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.1 · First Prenatal Visit                                                                                              495

Gynecologic History
The gynecologic history provides information that may place the pregnancy at risk and includes whether the
pregnant person has ever been diagnosed with any reproductive cancer, breast disorder, menstrual disorder, and
sexually transmitted infections. Any reproductive surgeries or diagnostic tests are also part of the gynecologic
history. Multiple terminations of pregnancy or dilatation and curettage (D&C) and cervical biopsies and procedures
weaken the cervix and place the pregnant person at risk for cervical insufficiency and preterm delivery. Multiple
terminations of pregnancy can also produce cervical scarring, leading to problems with cervical dilation during labor.
Known uterine anomalies can also increase the risk of preterm delivery. Previous uterine surgeries increase the risk
of abnormal placement of the placenta and uterine rupture during labor, and a cesarean birth may be recommended
based on the location of the placenta and type of uterine scar. Breast surgery can interfere with breast-feeding.

Genetic History
The genetic history includes information on the patient who is pregnant, the biological father or sperm donor of the
fetus, and their respective families. Any known genetic condition of the parents and their families that can be
inherited by the fetus is documented. The most common genetic conditions are the following:

    · cystic fibrosis,
    · trisomy 21,
    · Tay-Sachs disease,
    · hemophilia,
    · sickle cell disease or trait,
    · congenital mental impairment, and
    · congenital anomalies.

Other factors that increase the risk for inherited disorders are also included in the genetic history, such as maternal
and paternal age and consanguinity (shared ancestry, such as when the parents are first cousins).

Initial Screening for Factors Placing the Pregnancy at Risk
The first prenatal visit begins the screening process for factors placing the pregnancy at risk for perinatal
complications. The obstetric and gynecologic history, along with the medical and surgical histories, is reviewed to
determine preexisting risk factors affecting the maternal and fetal outcome. Also discussed throughout this section
are demographic, sociocultural, and genetic factors linked to an increased risk for maternal and fetal complications.
The most common of these preexisting conditions include the following:

    · maternal age <19 at conception or 35 at the EDD
    · obesity
    · nutritional deficiencies
    · substance use
    · hypertension
    · diabetes
    · HIV
    · STIs
    · hepatitis B and C
    · herpes simplex
    · cardiac disease
    · renal disease
    · epilepsy
    · psychiatric disorders
    · cervical procedures or surgeries
    · uterine anomalies
    · uterine surgery
    · obstetric complication in a previous pregnancy

Table 11.3 lists social determinants of health linked with complications of pregnancy. Many of the risk factors are
present at conception, and other risk factors are specific to pregnancy.
496  11 · Prenatal Care

     Social Determinant of Health                         Complication of Pregnancy

     Economic stability: low income                       Spontaneous abortion
                                                          Preterm delivery
                                                          Preeclampsia
                                                          Low birth weight
                                                          Perinatal mortality

     Physical environment: poor housing and neighborhood  Exposure to teratogens
                                                          Low birth weight
                                                          Preterm delivery
                                                          Behavioral health disorders

     Education: less than high school                     Preterm birth

     Nutrition: poor diet                                 Spontaneous abortion
                                                          Preterm delivery
                                                          Preeclampsia
                                                          Perinatal hemorrhage
                                                          Low birth weight
                                                          Perinatal mortality

     Support system: inadequate                           Low birth weight
                                                          Preterm delivery
                                                          Behavioral health disorders

     Access to care                                       Spontaneous abortion
                                                          Preterm delivery
                                                          Preeclampsia
                                                          Perinatal hemorrhage
                                                          Low birth weight
                                                          Perinatal mortality

     TABLE 11.3 Social Determinants of Health Linked to Complications of Pregnancy

     Early and consistent prenatal care helps to both prevent and limit complications of known risk factors. Prenatal care
     provides opportunities to recognize early signs and symptoms to prevent the development of severe and life-
     threatening complications. Each prenatal visit aids in reaching the Healthy People 2030 goal to decrease maternal
     and newborn morbidity and mortality (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [DHHS], 2021).

     Interval History since Last Menstrual Period

     After completion of the health history and risk assessment, the focus of the first prenatal visit turns to the reason
     the patient scheduled the initial prenatal visit: confirmation of the pregnancy. Typically, the patient has missed one
     or two menstrual periods, and a home pregnancy test result was positive. To confirm the pregnancy, the nurse will
     obtain baseline subjective and objective data from the patient.

     Baseline Subjective Data
     The nurse asks the patient a series of questions (known as the interval history). The questions are specific to the
     patient's current gestation and inquire about the presence of nausea, vomiting, dizziness, breast tenderness, vaginal
     discharge and spotting, and lower backache and uterine cramping. Nausea and vomiting, fatigue, and breast
     tenderness are expected symptoms in early pregnancy. Dizziness, vaginal discharge and spotting, and lower
     backache and uterine cramping are not expected and require further investigation.

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.1 · First Prenatal Visit                                                                                                497

Baseline Objective Data
The baseline objective data for the first prenatal visit include the patient's height and weight, blood pressure and
pulse, and urine dipstick results. The height and weight are entered into the EHR and are used to calculate the
patient's body mass index (BMI). When the patient is underweight, overweight, or obese, expectations for weight
gain during pregnancy are different than for the patient who has a normal BMI.

The patient's blood pressure (BP) and pulse are taken to determine normal values. The blood pressure of a pregnant
person is expected to be below 120/80 mm Hg and the pulse 60 to 120 beats per minute. A slightly elevated BP
may be attributed to anxiety or excitement about the pregnancy or may indicate a preexisting hypertensive disorder.
Tachycardia at the first prenatal visit may indicate anxiety or a preexisting cardiac condition. It is important for the
nurse to ask the patient if they know what their BP has been in the past when the BP obtained at the first or any
prenatal visit is elevated.

A urine dipstick test is performed to check for protein, blood, glucose, ketones, bacteria, and nitrites in the urine. At
the first prenatal visit, the presence of protein in the urine can be interpreted as contamination from vaginal
discharge or an indication of preexisting renal disease. The presence of blood in the urine can be caused by vaginal
bleeding or by a urinary tract infection. Glucose in the urine can be a sign of preexisting diabetes. Ketonuria occurs
as a result of excessive vomiting. Bacteria and nitrites indicate the presence of a urinary tract infection. The nurse
should review the pregnant person's health history and answers to the intake questions when there are any
unexpected results in the urine dipstick and inform the health-care provider. The urine dipstick test is also
performed to detect asymptomatic urinary tract infections, which, if not treated, can result in acute pyelonephritis
(Smaill & Vazquez, 2019).

Confirmation of Pregnancy

After the patient's history of present illness is completed, either a urine pregnancy test will be performed to confirm
the probability of pregnancy, or the patient will have a pelvic ultrasound (US) to confirm a viable intrauterine
pregnancy. The method of confirmation is based on the capabilities of the office or clinic where the initial prenatal
visit takes place. Some private practices and many community or county clinics do not have an ultrasonographer
and will refer the patient to a facility with ultrasound capability.

Pregnancy Tests
Pregnancy tests can be performed using the patient's urine or blood. The advantage to using urine is that the test
can be performed at the same place as the initial prenatal visit. Both urine and serum pregnancy tests detect the
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) hormone. The urine pregnancy test detects only the presence or absence of
hCG, while blood serum pregnancy tests can detect the presence or absence of hCG (qualitative) or, when desired,
the amount of hCG (quantitative). Quantitative serum hCG levels are most often ordered when there is no
gestational sac or cardiac activity detected by the pelvic US.

Ultrasound
The pelvic US at the first prenatal visit (when performed) provides important objective data. First, the US confirms
the presence of fetal cardiac activity. Second, the US confirms an intrauterine pregnancy and rules out an ectopic
pregnancy. Third, the US can confirm the EDD by measuring the dimensions of the gestational sac or fetus during the
first trimester of pregnancy. Finally, the pelvic US also provides data on the number of fetuses present in the uterus.

Physical Examination

The physical examination is the next step of the first prenatal visit and includes the head-to-toe and gynecologic
pelvic exams. The data obtained during the physical exam provide the baseline assessment of the patient's current
physical condition. The baseline data are compared with future data obtained throughout the pregnancy for changes
or trends, screening for or indicating the development of complications that place the pregnancy at risk.

Informing the patient about what to expect during the head-to-toe and pelvic exams can decrease any patient
anxiety. Following the attributes of trauma-informed care, recognition, knowledge, concern, and respect are
especially important if this will be the patient's first pelvic exam or if there is any history of sexual abuse (Guest,
2021). The patient will be asked to remove all clothing, including undergarments, and put on a paper or cloth gown
before the physical examination begins. The presence of a support person during the physical exam can increase
498  11 · Prenatal Care

     the patient's comfort level and should be offered to the patient or be a standard of practice.

     Head-to-Toe Exam
     The head-to-toe exam is performed in a methodical manner with the patient first sitting on the exam table. The
     health-care provider starts with observation of the patient's posture and cleanliness and other parts of the general
     survey. Speech and hearing are assessed when asking the patient questions to clarify specific points in the health
     history. The depth of the head-to-toe exam is based on the current health of the patient and includes, but is not
     limited to, the head and neck, back, extremities, anterior thorax and breasts, and abdomen.

     Head and Neck
     Examination of the head and neck begins with assessment of the skin, hair distribution, and facial feature symmetry.
     Clarification of the patient's ability to see, hear, and smell occurs by asking questions, such as whether the patient
     wears glasses or contact lenses. Inspection of the patient's mouth for lesions, gum disease, and dental caries is
     important in determining any possible influences on nutritional intake. Gum disease is associated with an increased
     risk of preterm delivery (Erchick et al., 2020).

     Range of motion of the neck is assessed by having the patient turn their head from side to side, then look up at the
     ceiling and down to the floor. Assessment of the neck includes palpation of the thyroid. Enlargement of the thyroid
     or the presence of any mass or nodule requires more data, such as thyroid function blood tests, and referral to an
     endocrinologist.

     Back
     When examining the patient's back, the skin is assessed for dryness, scars, and lesions, such as acne or nevi. Any
     abnormalities observed on the skin require further investigation. Inspection of the patient's spinal curvature and
     palpation of the vertebrae for tenderness are also performed. Clarification of any history of scoliosis and back injury
     or surgery is important to discover possible contraindications to epidural or spinal anesthesia during the birth
     process that require further investigation. Checking for the presence of costovertebral angle tenderness (CVAT) is
     performed to rule out possible pyelonephritis or other renal conditions.

     Auscultation of the patient's breath sounds through the posterior thorax is performed next. Breath sounds are
     expected to be clear. Adventitious breath sounds, as with any abnormal assessment data, need to be investigated to
     determine the cause.

     Extremities
     The extremities are assessed for symmetry of range of motion, strength, circulation, and any presence of edema. A
     patient with limited use of their arms and hands, such as from brachial plexus injury or amputation, may require
     assistive devices to care for their newborn. Normal range of motion of the legs is important during the second stage
     of labor when bearing down to deliver the baby vaginally. This may limit birthing options for patients with
     impairment in their lower limbs, such as cerebral palsy or spinal cord injury. The nurse should also ask the patient if
     they have any difficulty walking in order to determine the current or future need for assistive devices during
     pregnancy.

     Circulation is assessed by palpating the radial and pedal pulses bilaterally and examining the lower extremities for
     varicosities. The absence of edema in the lower extremities is expected at the first prenatal visit. The presence of
     edema at the first prenatal visit may indicate preexisting renal or cardiac disease and requires further investigation.

     Additionally, the patient's patellar deep tendon reflexes (DTRs) and the presence or absence of clonus are assessed
     bilaterally. Normal reflexes and the absence of clonus are expected in the patient who is pregnant. Hyperreflexia
     and the presence of clonus at less than 20 weeks of gestation may be normal for some patients. At 20 weeks of
     gestation or more, hyperreflexia and the presence of clonus (if not present at the first prenatal visit) are one sign of
     pre-eclampsia, a medical condition limited to pregnancy, as discussed in Chapter 12 Pregnancy at Risk.

     Anterior Thorax and Breasts
     The examination of the anterior thorax includes assessment of the skin, shape of the rib cage, breasts, heart, and
     lungs. The skin is assessed for color and the presence of acne, nevi, and scars. The shape of the rib cage is
     assessed, and any abnormal curvature is investigated. The patient is asked to lie down on their back on the
     examination table for the remainder of the head-to-toe exam.

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.1 · First Prenatal Visit                                                                                                           499

The breasts and nipples are inspected for symmetry in size, shape, and location. The nipples are also assessed for
inversion (Figure 11.2). Inverted nipples are linked with difficulty in breast-feeding. Referral to a lactation consultant
can assist the patient to overcome any obstacles to successful breast-feeding caused by inverted nipples. It is
important for the health-care provider to discuss the presence of breast tenderness before and during palpation of
the breasts.

FIGURE 11.2 Inversion of Nipples Comparison of the normal everted nipple to a flat and inverted nipple. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The heart sounds are auscultated at the aortic and mitral valves, using both the bell and diaphragm of the
stethoscope. If the heart sounds indicate possible aortic valve stenosis or mitral valve prolapse at the first prenatal
visit, the extra blood volume during pregnancy can exacerbate these conditions, resulting in heart failure. Early
recognition of abnormal heart sounds requires the nurse to review the patient's cardiac history and have the patient
evaluated by their cardiologist or arrange a referral to a cardiologist if needed. Systolic flow murmurs are common
after 24 weeks of gestation due to the normal increase in blood volume during pregnancy.

Breath sounds are auscultated through the anterior chest wall and are expected to be clear. Auscultation of the side
walls of the chest may be required when the patient has large breasts interfering with anterior chest auscultation.
Adventitious breath sounds require further investigation.

Abdomen
The abdominal examination starts with inspection of the skin for color, hair distribution, nevi, and scars. The contour
of the abdomen is noted, and any protuberance is assessed to rule out an umbilical hernia or other abnormality. As
the pregnancy progresses, the enlarged uterus will become visible as well as the linea nigra and striae gravidarum.
Auscultation of the bowel sounds in all four quadrants is performed next.

Palpation of the abdomen is performed to determine the lower liver margin and the absence of any distention or
abdominal masses. If the patient is at 12 or more weeks of gestation, the fundal height is noted. The fundal height
is the measurement from the symphysis pubis to where the fundus (or top) of the uterus is palpated. The uterine
fundus is expected to be at or right below the symphysis at 12 weeks of gestation, halfway between the symphysis
and the umbilicus at 16 weeks, and at or just below the umbilicus at 20 weeks of gestation. If the patient is at 10 or
more weeks of gestation at the first prenatal visit, fetal heart tones are auscultated via Doppler monitoring, and the
fetal heart rate is counted in beats per minute.

Pelvic Exam
A pelvic examination, if performed, has three steps: inspection and palpation of the external genitalia, the
intravaginal speculum examination, and the bimanual examination. The pelvic exam is performed with the patient in
the lithotomy position. The health-care provider performing the exam wears a pair of nonsterile latex-free exam
gloves. The pelvic exam may be deferred, especially if the patient is very young or has a history of sexual trauma.

External Genitalia
The patient's external genitalia and perineum are first inspected for normal development, placement of the urinary
meatus, and hair distribution. The presence of any rashes, lesions, or discharge is discussed with the patient to
500  11 · Prenatal Care

     determine if the symptom is new or ongoing. Any visible hemorrhoids are discussed with the patient. Normal
     findings and abnormalities are documented, and treatment is implemented per protocol as needed.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Genital Mutilation of Persons Assigned Female at Birth

     Female genital mutilation (FGM) is defined as all procedures that involve partial or complete removal of the external
     genitalia in those assigned female at birth (World Health Organization [WHO], 2023). There is no medical indication
     for FGM, and reasons for its continuance are sociocultural in 30 African nations, the Middle East, and Asia. In the
     antepartum period, the role of the nurse focuses on education of the pregnant person and partner/coach. The
     education includes a discussion on the medical complications linked to FGM and the myths and misconceptions
     surrounding resuturing after vaginal delivery. The conversation should be private and nonjudgmental. In the
     intrapartum period, the nurse may care for a patient who is scheduled for a cesarean birth due to the FGM or a
     patient who has chosen to deliver vaginally, and more time will be needed to repair the labia, vagina, and perineum.
     The nurse caring for the patient with FGM in the postpartum period will provide education on the importance of
     keeping the perineum clean and pain relief measures (Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2015).

     Speculum Exam
     Once examination of the external genitalia is completed, the patient is informed that the next step is inspection of
     the vagina and cervix using a vaginal speculum. The speculum is lubricated with warm water prior to insertion. It is
     important for the patient to understand they will feel discomfort when the speculum is inserted. Informing the
     patient that the nurse or other health-care provider is about to touch the opening of the vagina and insert the
     speculum helps to decrease the level of discomfort. Once the speculum is inserted, the nurse can also inform the
     patient that they are going to open the speculum and that the patient will feel additional pressure at both the
     opening of and within the vagina.

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Nursing Actions When Assisting with a Speculum Exam

     When assisting the health-care provider during a speculum exam, the nurse will perform the following actions:

       1. Have the necessary supplies ready. These include supplies needed to obtain any vaginal or cervical cultures
             and a Pap smear, if indicated.

       2. Ask the patient to remove clothing below the waist and provide the patient with a covering.
       3. Wear nonsterile exam gloves during the speculum exam.
       4. Assist the provider by handing the supplies to obtain any cultures or a Pap smear.
       5. Label the specimens obtained and complete any laboratory forms.
       6. Follow facility procedures for sending specimens to the laboratory for processing.

     Nursing Actions When Performing a Speculum Exam

       1. The nurse will explain to the patient why the speculum exam will be performed.
       2. The nurse should discover if this is the patient's first speculum exam.
       3. For the first speculum exam, the nurse should show the patient the speculum and discuss how the speculum

             is inserted and opened.
       4. Before the speculum is inserted, the nurse will ask the patient to relax by taking slow deep breaths or closing

             their eyes and visualizing themselves at the beach.
       5. While the speculum is in the vagina, the nurse will discuss any testing that is performed.
       6. The nurse will inform the patient that the speculum is being removed.
       7. The nurse will assist the patient into a sitting position and ask the patient if they have any questions.

     During the speculum exam, the vaginal mucosa is observed for color, moisture, edema, and lesions. The vaginal
     mucosa is expected to be purple with some edema and an increase in mucus production caused by the increase in

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.1 · First Prenatal Visit                                                                                                             501

blood supply to the pelvic organs during pregnancy. Excessive vaginal discharge that is not clear and is malodorous
needs to be investigated for the presence of a vaginal infection and treated based on the cause of the infection.
White patches on the vaginal walls are associated with candidiasis, overgrowths of vaginal tissue may indicate
human papillomavirus (HPV) lesions, and small blisters may be herpes simplex virus (HSV). Treatment regimens
safe during pregnancy will be prescribed.

Insertion of the speculum into the vagina also allows for visualization of the cervix. Like the vaginal mucosa, the
cervix is observed for color, moisture, size, discharge, erosion, and lesions. Pregnancy increases the blood supply to
the cervix, causing the cervix to appear blue or purple (Chadwick sign). If a patient has never been pregnant before,
the cervix and cervical os are smaller than in a person who has given birth or had an abortion (King et al., 2019)
(Figure 11.3).

FIGURE 11.3 Appearance of Cervical Os (a) The cervical os of a person who has never been pregnant or is pregnant for the first time is
round and small. (b) The cervical os of a person who has had one or more previous pregnancies will appear to be a slit. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Clear mucus is expected at the cervical os, and the cervix should be free of lesions. At this time a Pap smear is
performed, if indicated based on the patient's gynecologic history, and a chlamydia and gonorrhea culture is
obtained. Testing for chlamydia and gonorrhea is indicated for all patients at the first prenatal visit. Upon completion
of all testing and visualization, the speculum is withdrawn. When the speculum examination is performed,
documentation will include both normal and abnormal findings obtained during the exam.

Bimanual Exam
The bimanual exam is performed by the nurse or other health-care provider by inserting two fingers of one hand into
the vagina and placing the other hand just above the patient's symphysis pubis. The fingers within the vagina
palpate the vaginal walls to assess for normal contour and tone, any palpable growths such as HPV lesions, and the
presence of a cystocele or rectocele.

After palpating the vagina, the health-care provider palpates the cervical os, which is expected to be smooth, soft
(Goodell sign), and closed. If the cervical os is open, a finger is gently inserted to determine if only the external os or
both the internal and external cervical os are open. The cervical length is also assessed and expected to be 4 to 5
cm. A cervix that is open and is shortened at less than 20 weeks of gestation is associated with an increased risk of
pregnancy loss (King et al., 2019).

While applying gentle suprapubic pressure with the external hand, the provider palpates the lower uterine segment
for smoothness. HPV lesions and fibroids can be palpated if present. The size of the uterus can be estimated using
the distance between the external hand over the anterior uterus and the internal fingers touching the posterior
uterus. When an ultrasound is not available, determining the size of the uterus is important to confirm the patient's
current gestation and EDD. Using the anterior to posterior uterine diameter measurement fruit-equivalent method,
502  11 · Prenatal Care

     an 8-week uterus diameter is the size of a lemon, a 12-week uterus diameter is the size of a large orange, a 16-week
     uterus diameter is the size of a grapefruit, and a 20-week uterus diameter is the size of a cantaloupe.

     The bimanual exam is followed by clinical measurements of the pelvis. The assessment of the general shape and
     size of the patient's pelvis is clinical pelvimetry (King et al., 2019). The pelvic inlet, midplane, and outlet are
     assessed using the diagonal conjugate, prominence of the ischial spines, curvature of the sacrum and coccyx, width
     of the pubic arch, and width of the intertuberous diameter (Figure 11.4). Clinical pelvimetry at the first prenatal visit
     allows for identification of pelvic structure anomalies that may interfere with the normal progress of labor.

     FIGURE 11.4 Clinical Pelvimetry (a) The examiner assesses the diagonal conjugate by inserting two fingers into the vagina and measuring
     the length from the pubic arch to the sacrum. (b) Clinical pelvimetry will provide the health-care practitioner with information about the
     prominence of the ischial spines. (c) The examiner measures the angle of the pubic arch, which is expected to be greater than 90 degrees.
     (d) The examiner can measure the intertuberous diameter by placing their fist on the buttocks of the patient. Combined, the measurements
     of clinical pelvimetry are used to determine an increased risk for cesarean delivery. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
     CC BY 4.0 license)

     Initial Prenatal Laboratory Tests

     Multiple laboratory test specimens are collected during the first prenatal visit. These tests provide information on
     the presence or absence of specific STIs, immunity to or history of infections, and current status of a preexisting
     medical condition. The tests also determine risk for or presence of genetic abnormalities in the fetus.

     Blood Type, Rh, and Antibody Screen
     The patient's blood type, Rh factor, and antibody screen are obtained to determine if there might be a problem in
     obtaining needed blood products if the patient hemorrhages during the antepartum, intrapartum, or postpartum
     period. If the patient is Rh negative, antepartum Rho(D) immune globulin will be administered if pregnancy-related
     bleeding occurs at any time before labor. Rho(D) immune globulin prevents the development of isoimmunization

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.1 · First Prenatal Visit                                                                                                503

during pregnancy. A negative antibody screen demonstrates the patient has not developed isoimmunization from a
previous pregnancy or blood transfusion. A positive antibody screen at the first prenatal visit requires further
investigation for possible interactions between the pregnant person and the fetus, compromising the outcome of the
pregnancy.

Complete Blood Count (CBC)
The complete blood count (CBC) provides the patient's current number of white blood cells (WBCs) and red blood
cells (RBCs), hemoglobin and hematocrit (H&H), iron indices, and platelet count. The WBC count reflects the
absence or presence of infection in the patient. The RBC count, H&H, and iron indices determine the absence or
presence of anemia in the patient. If anemia is present, the values of the RBC, H&H, and iron indices can determine
if the anemia is due to an inadequate dietary intake or a medical condition. The platelet count reflects the ability of
the patient's blood to clot. A platelet count less than normal places the patient at risk for bleeding and can be
diagnostic of a clotting disorder.

Rubella Titer
The patient's current rubella titer is obtained to determine immunity to the disease. The rubella virus can pass
through the placenta and infect the fetus at any gestation of pregnancy and cause multiple congenital anomalies,
such as blindness, deafness, cognitive impairment, and heart disease. If the patient's rubella titer does not indicate
immunity to the disease, the patient is instructed to report exposure to any person with a rash or who has been
diagnosed with rubella. The rubella vaccine will be prescribed to the patient in the hospital after delivery and
administered before discharge from the postpartum unit. The vaccine is not administered during pregnancy because
it is a live vaccine and can transmit the virus to the fetus.

Hepatitis B and C
A hepatitis B and C panel is obtained to determine if the patient currently has an active hepatitis infection or has had
one in the past. The panel will also indicate if the patient has chronic hepatitis. If the patient is currently infected
with acute or chronic hepatitis, the virus can pass through the placenta and infect the fetus. Hepatitis during
pregnancy is associated with a high risk of maternal and newborn morbidity and mortality.

Sexually Transmitted Infections
A venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) test or rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test is performed to screen the
patient for syphilis. If the VDRL or RPR test is positive, the treponemal assay test is done using the patient's blood to
determine if there is a current infection. Treponema pallidum (the bacterium causing syphilis) crosses the placenta
and infects the fetus. Even with treatment, the fetus exposed to syphilis may contract syphilis and may die in utero,
especially if the patient goes untreated during the first 16 weeks of gestation. Fetuses who are born alive with
syphilis have similar congenital anomalies as infants who were exposed to rubella in utero. Treatment of the patient,
their current partner, previous partners, and the newborn is carried out based on current Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) guidelines.

        LINK TO LEARNING

The CDC's STI Treatment Guidelines website provides information on both testing and treatment for STIs
(https://openstax.org/r/77cdcsti) for both pregnant and nonpregnant persons. The guidelines also include education
on prevention and signs and symptoms. Nurses employed in Family Planning and STI Clinics will use these
guidelines to develop protocols and provide patient education.

An HIV antibody or antigen blood test is performed. If the test is positive, the patient will be started on zidovudine,
an antiretroviral drug known not to cause congenital anomalies in the fetus. When the parent is treated during
pregnancy and the infant is treated starting immediately after birth, the chance of the infant getting HIV is less than
1 percent (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, n.d.). Testing and treatment of the patient, current
partner, and previous partners is carried out based on current CDC guidelines.

Testing for gonorrhea and chlamydia infections is routinely done during the first prenatal visit. The test is most often
performed using a cervical specimen obtained during the pelvic exam. As with HIV and syphilis, testing and
treatment of the patient, current partner, and previous partners are recommended based on current CDC guidelines.
504  11 · Prenatal Care

     The bacteria causing gonorrhea and chlamydia do not cross the placenta. However, risk to the fetus occurs once the
     membranes have ruptured. Prophylactic antibiotics are administered to the newborn's eyes to prevent infection.

     Sexually transmitted infection testing is repeated for testing of cure when needed and during the final weeks of
     pregnancy. This second testing is most often performed around 36 weeks' gestation and will identify anyone who
     was recently exposed at the initial time of testing or a possible new exposure.

     Urinalysis and Urine Drug Screen
     In addition to the urine dipstick test performed in the office or clinic, the patient's urine specimen is sent to the
     laboratory for a urinalysis, urine culture and sensitivity (C&S), and (depending on facility protocol) urine drug screen
     (UDS). The urinalysis and C&S are ordered because urinary frequency is one of the signs of both pregnancy and a
     urinary tract infection (UTI). A pregnant patient may overlook the symptoms of a UTI or have asymptomatic
     bacteriuria and go untreated. The UDS is most often obtained as a screening tool for current use of substances. The
     most common drug categories included in the UDS are amphetamines, cocaine, marijuana, opiates, phencyclidine,
     benzodiazepines, barbiturates, methaqualone, and methadone (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
     Administration, 2023).

     If the UDS is positive, the nurse and health-care provider will first review the EHR and list of current medications to
     determine any links to the UDS results. It is important for the nurse or health-care provider to discuss the effects of
     the substance(s) on the patient, fetal growth and development, and pregnancy outcome, such as preterm delivery.
     The patient will also be informed about and consent to a random UDS to be repeated at one or more future prenatal
     visits and when admitted to the hospital for delivery (Ecker et al., 2019). Throughout the dialog with the patient, a
     nonjudgmental approach is indicated. A discussion of programs offering supportive services should be provided first
     before any discussion on mandatory reporting to social services is introduced.

     Genetic Screening
     Initial prenatal lab tests also screen the patient for sickle cell trait and disease. Cystic fibrosis gene mutation carrier
     screening is also offered during the first trimester. If either or both of the patient's screens are positive, the
     biological father of the fetus should also be tested, if possible. If either or both of the biological father's screens are
     also positive, chorionic villi sampling (if the patient is at 10 to 12 weeks of gestation) and amniocentesis are
     discussed with the patient.

     Cell-free DNA testing uses a sample of the patient's blood to screen for the presence of specific chromosome
     abnormalities of the fetus. The earliest the sample for the cell-free DNA screen can be drawn is at 10 weeks of
     gestation. The chromosome abnormalities screened for are trisomy 21, 18, and 13 and abnormalities in the sex
     chromosomes. Cell-free DNA is not as accurate as an amniocentesis or chorionic villi sampling.

     Additional Laboratory Tests
     Additional laboratory tests may be performed at the first prenatal visit (Table 11.4). These tests include, but are not
     limited to, the Pap smear, gestational glucose screen, complete metabolic panel (CMP), thyroid function panel, and
     herpes simplex titers. If the patient is 21 years or older, a Pap smear is obtained during the pelvic exam to screen for
     cervical precancerous and cancer cells. This test is done if indicated based on the patient's age and the amount of
     time since any previous cytology study was performed, as well as the patient's risk status depending on previous
     Pap smear results (ACOG, 2021a). The patient's blood is drawn for a CMP if they have a history of medical
     conditions, such as renal or liver disease, hypertension, or diabetes. Herpes simplex 1 and 2 antibodies are
     sometimes included with the initial prenatal lab tests to detect a current or previous infection.

     The 1-hour glucose challenge test (GCT), also known as the gestational diabetes screen, is performed if the patient
     is at increased risk for gestational diabetes. The most common risk factors are obesity, first-degree relative with
     diabetes, and gestational diabetes with a previous pregnancy. The thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level is
     included in the routine first prenatal visit lab tests because thyroid disease is often overlooked in women. A thyroid
     panel is performed if the patient has thyroid disease.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      11.1 · First Prenatal Visit          505

Laboratory Test            Obstetric Purpose                          Expected Results
                                                                      Blood type: A, B, AB, O
Blood type, Rh, and        Rule out isoimmunization                   Rh: negative or positive
antibody screen            Risk for ABO incompatibility               Antibody screen: negative
                                                                      All values are normal
CBC                        Rule out the presence of infection,        1.0 or greater indicates immunity
                                                                      Negative
                           anemia, or thrombocytopenia
                                                                      Negative
Rubella titer              Determine immune status                    Negative
                                                                      Negative
Hepatitis B and C          Determine history of hepatitis, current    Within normal limits (WNL)
                           infection, or chronic hepatitis infection  Negative
                                                                      Negative
Sexually transmitted
infections                                                            Negative
                                                                      Negative
HIV                        Diagnosis                                  Negative for trisomy 21, 18, and 13
                                                                      and sex chromosome abnormalities
Syphilis                   Diagnosis
                                                                      Normal cytology
  Gonorrhea and            Diagnosis                                  Less than 140 mg/dL
chlamydia                                                             All values are normal

Urinalysis                 Rule out or diagnose a UTI

Urine C&S                  Rule out or diagnose a UTI

UDS                        Diagnose substance use/abuse

Genetic screening

Sickle cell screen         Screening for fetal risk for genetic
                           conditions

Cystic fibrosis            Screening for fetal risk for genetic
                           conditions

Cell-free DNA              Screening for fetal risk for genetic
                           conditions

Additional laboratory
tests

Pap                        Screen for cervical cancer

  Glucose screen (glucose  Screen for gestational diabetes
challenge test, or GCT)

CMP                        Screen for electrolyte imbalance, liver
                           and renal function

TABLE 11.4 First Prenatal Visit Laboratory Tests
506  11 · Prenatal Care

     Laboratory Test                  Obstetric Purpose                     Expected Results

     TSH                              Screen for thyroid function           Normal value

     Thyroid function panel Check for normal thyroid function               Normal values

       Herpes simplex                 Determine history of or current infection Negative
     antibodies

     TABLE 11.4 First Prenatal Visit Laboratory Tests

     Patient Education at the First Prenatal Visit

     The patient education provided at the first prenatal visit focuses on health maintenance and prevention of
     complications of pregnancy. The major education topics include the following:

     · embryonic and fetal growth and development
     · health promotion and lifestyle activities
     · physiologic changes during early pregnancy
     · psychologic changes during early pregnancy
     · common discomforts of pregnancy
     · signs of complications
     · laboratory testing and results
     · schedule of routine prenatal care visits

     The nurse should sit down with the patient and discuss these topics directly rather than expecting the patient to
     review a lot of written material. Patients who are pregnant are typically very open to education, especially if this is
     going to be the patient's first child.

     Nutrition
     Pregnancy changes a person's nutritional needs, and these needs change as the weeks of gestation progress. The
     patient needs to consume between 70 and 100 grams of protein daily (depending on the patient's BMI and weeks of
     gestation), 1,000 mg of calcium daily if 19 or more years old (1,300 mg if less than 19 years of age), 600 mcg of
     folate every day, and 27 mg of iron each day when pregnant (ACOG, 2022). The patient also needs to drink eight to
     twelve 8-ounce glasses of water every day throughout the pregnancy. See Table 11.5 for essential nutritional needs
     during pregnancy and the best food sources to meet these needs.

     Nutrient            Daily Amount Food Sources                          Fetal and Patient Need

     Protein             70 g, weeks     Eggs, almonds, poultry, red meat,  Provides major elements in the
                         0-14            fish, lentils, dairy products,     structure of all cells; building
                         80 g, weeks     peanuts                            blocks of muscles and bones;
                         14-28                                              build and repair the body
                         100 g, weeks
                         28-42

     Calcium             1,000 mg (> 19  Dairy products, dark green leafy   Bones and teeth
                         yr)             vegetables
                         1,300 mg
                         (12-19 yr)

     TABLE 11.5 Essential Nutritional Needs during Pregnancy

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        11.1 · First Prenatal Visit                  507

Nutrient         Daily Amount Food Sources                              Fetal and Patient Need

Folate           600 mcg          dark green leafy vegetables,          Prevents neural tube defects
                                  beans, peanuts, fresh fruit and       Supports overall growth and
                                  juice                                 development of the fetus and
                                                                        placenta

Iron             27 mg            Organ meats, dark green leafy         Helps RBCs to carry oxygen and

                                  vegetables, legumes, lentils, iron- formation of fetal RBCs and

                                  fortified breads and cereals          additional RBC volume of the

                                                                        pregnant person

Vitamin B6       1.9 mg           Milk, carrots, spinach, bananas,      Nervous system development and
                                  eggs, tuna                            function
                                                                        Breakdown of fats, carbohydrates,
                                                                        and proteins

Vitamin B12      2.6 mcg          Poultry, fish, meat, dairy products   Helps in the formation of
                                  (vegans need to take a                additional RBCs in the pregnant
                                  supplement)                           person and fetus
                                                                        Helps uphold the nervous system

Vitamin C        85 mg (> 19 yr)  Citrus fruits, tomatoes, cruciferous  Collagen formation for bones and
                 80 mg (12-19     vegetables                            tendons
                 yr)                                                    Tissue growth and repair

Vitamin D        600              Dairy products, dark green leafy      Bones and teeth
                 international    vegetables
                 units

Vitamin A        770 mcg (> 19    Green leafy vegetables, orange        Development of the eyes and
                 yr)              and yellow vegetables                 other organs in the fetus
                 750 mcg
                 (12-19 yr)

Choline          450 mg           Eggs, peanuts, soy                    Neural tube development

Iodine           220 mcg          Seafood, eggs, and iodized salt       Brain development

Docosahexaenoic  200 mg           Fish and seafood                      Building block of brain and retina
acid (DHA)                                                              Reduces the risk for preterm birth

TABLE 11.5 Essential Nutritional Needs during Pregnancy

A patient's daily caloric intake during pregnancy is based on their BMI, activity level, and weeks of gestation. A
pregnant person with a normal BMI does not require additional calories during the first trimester of pregnancy
(ACOG, 2022). What is important is for the pregnant person to make their daily intake healthy. From 14 to 28 weeks
of gestation (the second trimester of pregnancy), the patient should eat around 300 more calories per day. The
additional calories can be ingested by drinking two 8-ounce glasses of whole milk. From 28 weeks of gestation to
delivery (the third trimester of pregnancy), the patient should eat around 400 more calories a day than when not
pregnant. Eating one-half of a sandwich with the 8 ounces of milk will supply the additional calories (ACOG, 2022).

The motivation to eat healthy is typically very high for the patient who is pregnant. The nurse can provide a
pamphlet on eating healthy during pregnancy or pull up the MyPlate.gov website and discuss key information on the
508  11 · Prenatal Care

     nutritional needs during pregnancy.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     In addition to general nutrition information, MyPlate.gov provides specifically tailored pregnancy and breast-feeding
     (https://openstax.org/r/77myplate) education. The education focuses on eating healthy, planning meals, vitamins
     and other nutritional supplements, and food safety during pregnancy and when breast-feeding.

     Weight Gain during Pregnancy
     The recommended total weight gain during pregnancy is based on the patient's BMI before conception. The
     recommended weight gain for patients with a normal BMI is 25 to 35 pounds. For patients whose BMI indicates they
     were underweight before conception, the recommended total weight gain is 28 to 40 pounds. Patients whose BMI
     indicates they were overweight before conception are expected to gain 15 to 25 pounds, and patients whose BMI
     indicates they were obese before conception are expected to gain 11 to 20 pounds (King et al., 2019). The weight
     gain during pregnancy is expected to begin after the first trimester of pregnancy (Table 11.6).

     Pregestational      Recommended Total  Recommended Weight Gain Each Week during the Second
     BMI                 Weight Gain        and Third Trimesters

     Underweight:        28-40 lb           1-1.3 lb/week
     < 18.5

     Normal weight:      25-35 lb           0.8-1 lb/week
     18.5-24.9

     Overweight:         15-25 lb           0.5-0.7 lb/week
     25.0-29.9

     Obese:              11-20 lb           0.4-0.5 lb/week
      30.0

     TABLE 11.6 Recommended Weight Gain during Pregnancy

     Despite the popular notion that a pregnant person is "eating for two," that is not really the case. If it were, 25-pound
     newborns would be the norm. So where does the "baby weight" go? The distribution of weight gained in pregnancy
     is as follows:

     · breasts, 1-3 pounds
     · uterus, 2 pounds
     · increased fluid volume, 2-3 pounds
     · increased blood volume, 3-4 pounds
     · fat, 6-8 pounds
     · term fetus, 7-8 pounds
     · placenta, 1.5 pounds
     · amniotic fluid, 2 pounds

     Exercise
     Exercise is recommended during pregnancy even if the patient did not exercise regularly prior to conception. For
     patients who exercised regularly prior to conception, 30 minutes of brisk walking or yard work 5 to 7 days a week is
     advised. Starting slowly is recommended for patients who did not have an exercise routine prior to conception. The
     patient is encouraged to exercise as little as 5 minutes per day and add another 5 minutes on a weekly basis until a
     total of 30 minutes each day is reached. Yoga and tai chi classes specifically for pregnant people are other good
     options.

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.1 · First Prenatal Visit                                                                                               509

        LINK TO LEARNING

In addition to general exercise information, the Move Your Way website provides education specifically tailored for
during and after pregnancy (https://openstax.org/r/77pregeducation) with fact sheets, videos, and a phone app with
an interactive tool for staying active. One of the coordinators of the website is the Office of Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion.

Nutritional Supplements
Prenatal vitamins (prescription and OTC) with 400 mcg of folic acid are recommended for all pregnant patients. The
vitamins and minerals supplied in the tablet or gummy keep the patient's body and fetus healthy and decrease the
risk for birth defects. Although iron is an ingredient in most prenatal vitamins, some pregnant patients require
additional supplemental iron. Iron tablets are available by prescription or OTC and should be taken only when
recommended by the health-care provider

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Prenatal Vitamins

Prenatal vitamins are routinely prescribed during pregnancy to meet additional requirements for supporting the
pregnancy and fetal growth and development.

    · Indications: pregnancy nutritional supplement
    · Mechanism of Action: increases essential vitamins and minerals needed during pregnancy for a healthy body

        and healthy fetus
    · Side Effects: nausea, abdominal cramping, constipation
    · Adverse Effects: anaphylaxis
    · Contraindications: known allergy to any ingredient in the tablet
    · Patient Education: Take with a full glass of water or citrus juice to increase absorption. Take at night if nausea

        occurs. The iron in the tablet may turn stools very dark brown or black and increase the risk of constipation.
    · Generic Name: prenatal vitamin
    · Classification: nutritional supplement
    · Dosage: one tablet by mouth daily

Supplemental water-soluble vitamins are safe during pregnancy because any excess is excreted in the patient's
urine. The fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K are stored in the body, increasing the risk for toxicity. Inadequate
vitamin A dietary intake has not been linked to fetal anomalies. Excess vitamin A supplements and the medication
isotretinoin (Accutane) used to treat acne have been linked to cranial, heart, and facial congenital anomalies,
especially when taken in the first 12 weeks of gestation (Dibley & Jeacocke, 2001).

Inadequate vitamin D dietary intake has been linked to congenital neurologic deficits and bone anomalies,
specifically rickets. Excess vitamin D intake (dietary or supplemental) during pregnancy has been linked to multiple
cases of fetal hypercalcemia (Moretti et al., 2019). Studies have shown that an inadequate intake of vitamin E during
pregnancy increases the risk of placental vascular disorders and gestational hypertensive disorders. Excess vitamin
E intake has been linked to newborn jaundice (Chen et al., 2018). So far, research on vitamin K does not support
conclusions about an effect on fetal development when not enough or too much vitamin K is consumed during
pregnancy (Kellie, 2017).

Inadequate patient intake of the minerals iron, selenium, copper, and zinc has been linked to an increase in risk for
lower birth weights in newborns (Brough et al., 2010). Excessive iron, copper, and selenium intake has been
associated with higher rates of preeclampsia, preterm delivery, and intrauterine fetal growth restriction (Georgieff et
al., 2019).

Ginger, an herbal supplement shown to decrease nausea, is safe to take during pregnancy. Black cohosh and dong
quai have been shown to cause preterm labor and delivery. Goldenseal is linked with an increase in newborn
510  11 · Prenatal Care

     jaundice. Yohimbe has been linked to seizure activity, hypertension, and heart attacks. Other herbal supplements
     linked to adverse effects during pregnancy are saw palmetto, blue cohosh, and ephedra.

     Herbal supplements and safety in pregnancy (Sarecka-Hujar & Szulc-Musiol, 2022) are discussed in Table 11.7.

     Herbal Supplement Safety in Pregnancy

     Ginger                           No increased risk for malformations or adverse effects on pregnancy

     Peppermint                       No increased risk for malformations or adverse effects on pregnancy

     Echinacea                        No increased risk for malformations or adverse effects on pregnancy

     Blue and black cohosh Preterm labor and delivery

     Dong quai                        Preterm labor and delivery

     Goldenseal                       Newborn jaundice

     Yohimbe                          Seizure activity, hypertension, and heart attacks in pregnant persons

     St John's wort                   Potential genetic mutations

     Ephedra                          Hypertension and heart attacks in pregnant persons

     TABLE 11.7 Herbal Supplements and Safety during Pregnancy

     Over-the-Counter Medications
     Minor pain relief medications such as aspirin (except for low-dose aspirin prescribed for reducing the risk of
     preeclampsia), ibuprofen, and naproxen are contraindicated in pregnancy unless the benefit to the patient
     outweighs the risk to the patient, embryo, and fetus. When not prescribed for risk reduction of preeclampsia, aspirin
     is contraindicated during pregnancy because it can interfere with the clotting cascade, increasing the chance of the
     bleeding in the patient during the perinatal period. Ibuprofen, naproxen, and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
     drugs (NSAIDs) are contraindicated at 20 weeks of gestation or later because NSAIDs can cause oligohydramnios
     and renal disease in the fetus and newborn (U.S. Food and Drug Administration [FDA], 2020) and is associated with
     premature closure of the ductus arteriosus.

     Acetaminophen used to be considered safe anytime in the perinatal period. However, it has been linked with
     abnormal liver function in patients who have a history of chronic hypertension prior to pregnancy, patients who
     develop any hypertensive complication of pregnancy, and patients who exceed the recommended amount of the
     drug in a 24-hour (3,000 mg) or 1-week interval at any time during the pregnancy (Cano Panlagua & Amariles
     Muñoz, 2017). Any link between prenatal use of acetaminophen and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or attention-
     deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in the child has not been substantiated (ACOG, 2021b).

     Medications for allergies, upper respiratory infections, and the flu are other OTC medications taken during
     pregnancy. Chlorpheniramine (Chlor-Trimeton), hydroxyzine (Vistaril), and dexchlorpheniramine (Polmon) are first-
     generation antihistamines known to be safe during pregnancy. Loratadine (Claritin) and cetirizine (Zyrtec) are
     second-generation antihistamines considered safe for a pregnant person to take after the first trimester (ACOG,
     2021c). The decongestant pseudoephedrine (Sudafed) is not recommended for a pregnant person to take during the
     first trimester and is contraindicated during pregnancy in patients with hypertensive disorders because it raises the
     blood pressure. There is no known link between the decongestant phenylephrine (Neo-Synephrine) and fetal harm
     or increased complications of pregnancy.

     Dextromethorphan, an antitussive, and guaifenesin, an expectorant, are found in many OTC medications for a cold.
     Multisymptom OTC cold or flu medications contain several different drugs. It is important for any patient to read the
     label on any multisymptom medication to determine its contents and not to exceed the recommended 24-hour

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.1 · First Prenatal Visit                                                                                             511

dosage.

Whenever a pregnant person is considering taking a medication, they should consult their obstetric care provider
first (Federal Drug Administration, 2021). The provider will have an informed discussion with the pregnant person
regarding the benefits and risks of any current or possible prescribed and over-the-counter medication to be taken
during the pregnancy.

Substance Use
Tobacco products, e-cigarettes (vaping), alcohol, marijuana, and drug use are contraindicated throughout the
pregnancy. Tobacco products and vaping contain nicotine, a known vasoconstrictor that affects placental function.
Tobacco products are associated with low birth weight, preterm delivery, and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).
Drinking alcohol during pregnancy is associated with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD), affecting cognitive
ability, behavior, and facial structure. Marijuana use during pregnancy has been linked to low birth weight and
abnormal neurologic development in infants, and symptoms sometimes do not present until the child is of school
age. Opioid and illicit substance use in pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of abortion, low birth weight,
abnormal neurologic development in infants, and SIDS. In addition, illicit substance use during pregnancy is also
linked with an increased risk of preterm delivery, placental abruption, intrauterine fetal demise, and withdrawal
symptoms in newborn infants (National Institute of Drug Abuse [NIDA], 2020).

Safety and Environmental Concerns
The same safety concerns and environmental hazards that may affect any person can affect a person who is
pregnant. These include, but are not limited to, motor vehicle accidents, pesticides, painting products, heavy metal
ingestion, chemical exposure, fall risks, and work hazards.

To decrease risk of injury, seat belts should be worn whenever the pregnant person is a driver or passenger in an
automobile, a passenger on an airplane, or an operator of any other type of motor vehicle. A person who is pregnant
should assess their home and work environments for fall risks.

Gloves and long sleeves should be worn and only organic products used when gardening. Latex paints are
recommended when painting. Exposure to paint thinners, toxic chemicals at work, or any other toxic ingredients
should be avoided throughout the pregnancy. These chemical exposures are associated with an increased risk for
abortion. The ingestion of mercury and lead is associated with neurologic deficits in the infant. Exposure to
secondhand smoke and toxic chemicals in the air has effects on the fetus similar to those the pregnant person's
smoking would have.

Pregnant persons with cats should be reminded not to change cat litter and avoid being scratched by outdoor cats.
Cat feces and nails can transport toxoplasmosis, a known infectious teratogen. Toxoplasmosis can also be
transmitted through undercooked meat.

        REAL RN STORIES

Nurse: Jamie, RN
Years in practice: 12
Clinical setting: Labor suite at not-for-profit hospital
Facility location: South Carolina

I remember one patient who was employed at an autobody shop and was at the office for her first prenatal visit. I
learned the patient's job was in the front office, greeting customers, answering the telephone, and inputting invoices
and payments. The shop repaired cars damaged in motor vehicle accidents, so this meant the fumes from the paint
and other chemicals came into the front office because the office was not sealed off from the workspace. Her
health-care team, and the patient herself, was concerned about her exposure to the fumes, and it was
recommended that she go on personal leave or quit her job. The patient then discussed her concerns with her boss,
the owner of the autobody shop, who arranged for her to work from home. The patient was able to keep working
during the pregnancy and is still employed at the autobody shop, working 2 days in the office and 3 days at home to
spend more time with the baby, who is now 2 years old.
512  11 · Prenatal Care

     Signs of Pregnancy Complications
     As discussed in Chapter 10 Pregnancy, the list of common discomforts of pregnancy is a lengthy one. Not
     surprisingly, it is not always easy for a person who is pregnant to determine if a symptom is expected and related to
     the pregnancy or is a sign of a pregnancy complication. The nurse investigates the symptoms to differentiate
     between symptoms that are expected, those that indicate the presence of a medical condition requiring evaluation
     and treatment, and those that indicate an obstetric complication or emergency requiring immediate evaluation.
     Symptoms associated with complications of pregnancy discussed at the first prenatal visit are listed in Table 11.8.

     Symptom                Possible Complication

     Persistent vomiting Hyperemesis gravidarum

     Dysuria                UTI

     Intermittent back      Pyelonephritis or preterm labor
     pain, pelvic pressure

     Vaginal bleeding       Abortion, placenta previa, or placental abruption; cervicitis

     Temperature >38.3°     Infection
     C (101° F)

     Persistent             Cholelithiasis, liver disease, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), preeclampsia, and
     abdominal pain,        HELLP (syndrome with hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet counts)
     epigastric pain

     Frequent dizziness Anemia, dehydration, infection, heart disease

     Leaking of fluid from  Vaginitis, premature rupture of membranes (PROM)
     the vagina

     TABLE 11.8 Signs of Pregnancy Complications Discussed at the First Prenatal Visit

     Nausea and vomiting frequently occur in the first trimester of pregnancy and are considered normal. Persistent
     vomiting accompanied by weight loss is not normal, and the patient needs to be evaluated for dehydration or
     hyperemesis gravidarum. Intravenous fluids and antiemetics may be needed.

     Increased frequency in urination is also considered normal during pregnancy because of the pressure the growing
     uterus places on the bladder. Dysuria and hematuria are symptoms of a urinary tract infection (UTI), and the patient
     needs to be evaluated and treated. An untreated simple UTI can progress to pyelonephritis, triggering preterm
     contractions.

     Intermittent back pain and pelvic pressure are common during pregnancy. The pelvic pressure is due to the weight
     of the growing uterus. The intermittent back pain is due to changes in the curvature of the spine because of the
     weight of the growing uterus. Intermittent back pain and pelvic pressure can be a sign of preterm contractions or
     UTI, and both need to be evaluated and treated as needed.

     Vaginal bleeding is never a normal symptom during pregnancy and always requires evaluation. Vaginal spotting may
     occur from a vaginal exam by the health-care provider, from simple cervical erosion due to vaginitis, or from the
     penis coming in contact with the cervix during intercourse. Vaginal spotting and bleeding may indicate that a
     possible abortion, preterm labor, placenta previa, or hidden placental abruption is occurring.

     When a person has a temperature >38.3° C (101° F), an infection is present. The cause of the infection needs to be
     established to determine if there is any possibility of injury to the pregnant patient, fetus, or both. A temperature
     >38.3° C (101° F) that is accompanied by nausea and vomiting can lead to dehydration and preterm birth.

     Pregnant patients often experience occasional epigastric or abdominal pain. This pain can be as simple as dyspepsia

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.2 · Care in the First Trimester of Pregnancy                                                                                 513

or flatus. However, epigastric pain may also indicate cholelithiasis or hepatic inflammation; both are associated with
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Abdominal pain can be a sign of placental abruption, appendicitis, or a
gastrointestinal infection.

The patient may experience an occasional dizzy spell in the early weeks of the pregnancy. Dizziness may indicate a
drop in blood glucose or blood pressure. Frequent episodes of dizziness may indicate anemia, dehydration, or an
underlying heart condition.

Leaking of fluid from the vagina may be stress incontinence or may indicate vaginitis. Fluid leaking from the vagina is
also a sign of spontaneous rupture of the membranes (SROM). When the membranes rupture in the first trimester,
an abortion is inevitable.

Follow-up
The final topic the nurse discusses with the patient is when to return to the office or clinic for the remainder of the
pregnancy. During the first 28 weeks of gestation, prenatal follow-up appointments are scheduled every 4 weeks. In
the third trimester, follow-up prenatal visits occur every 2 weeks from 28 to 36 weeks. Starting at 36 weeks of
gestation, follow-up visits are scheduled weekly until the patient goes into labor. This interval schedule is kept as
long as there are no signs of patient or fetal complications. The follow-up visits are scheduled more frequently if
early signs or a diagnosis of a complication of the pregnancy occurs.

11.2 Care in the First Trimester of Pregnancy

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Analyze the subjective and objective patient data obtained in the interval history since the previous
        prenatal visit during the first trimester

    · Explain the purpose of the laboratory tests obtained during the first trimester
    · Provide the patient education during the first trimester

The second prenatal visit is often the only follow-up visit in the first trimester, especially if the first prenatal visit was
at 8 weeks of gestation. Follow-up visits are less time intensive for the patient. The patient signs in when they arrive
at the office or clinic and waits for the nurse to call their name to obtain the intake data. The patient next has a
limited exam and visit with the health-care provider relevant to the weeks of gestation. After the exam, lab work is
performed (if indicated), and then the patient receives additional education from the nurse before scheduling the
next follow-up prenatal visit.

        LINK TO LEARNING

The Centering Healthcare Institute provides a health-care model that builds healthy communities
(https://openstax.org/r/77centeringhc) through increased access to health care, empowerment, education, and
combating isolation and vulnerability. Persons who are pregnant and their support person meet in groups of 8 to 12
at the time of a routine prenatal visit with the health-care provider to discuss patient concerns and learn about
pregnancy and risk factors. Research has demonstrated that the centering approach results in increased birth
weights, increased success with breast-feeding, and decreased risk of preterm birth.

Interval History Data

Before calling the patient back to begin the interval history, the nurse reviews the patient's EHR. Most offices and
clinics providing prenatal care have a method of documenting pertinent data to assist in the chart-review process,
especially when multiple health-care providers are performing prenatal care. This list of data (sometimes called the
problem list) assists with continuity of care and early identification of risk factors and complications throughout the
pregnancy. The pertinent data are added to the list as needed at each subsequent prenatal visit and include the
following:

    · age
    · gravida and para
514  11 · Prenatal Care

         · EDD
         · complications of current pregnancy
         · current medical conditions
         · previous obstetric and gynecologic surgeries
         · previous complications of pregnancy
         · blood type and Rh
         · date of antepartum Rho(D) immune globulin (RhoGAM) injection (if applicable)
         · rubella status
         · positive STI test results
         · integrated and multiple marker screening results

               cell-free DNA results (if applicable)
               amniocentesis results (if applicable)
         · diabetes screening results
         · GBS results
         · family considerations

     The nurse next calls the patient into the examination area, weighs the patient, and takes the patient's blood
     pressure. The nurse discusses the normal laboratory results from the first prenatal visit with the patient at this time.
     Abnormal results are usually discussed by the health-care provider with the patient. The interval history is obtained
     next. The nurse asks the patient if they are currently experiencing any of the following symptoms or have
     experienced them since the previous prenatal visit:

         · vaginal discharge, bleeding, or leaking of fluid
         · epigastric or abdominal pain
         · pelvic pressure or uterine cramping
         · back pain or dysuria
         · dizziness or syncope
         · headache

     If the nurse is the health-care provider and the patient responds yes to any of the symptoms, the nurse asks follow-
     up questions and determines if any additional testing needs to be ordered. If the patient has not already provided a
     urine specimen, the nurse asks them to provide one before going into the exam room. The urine is tested for
     glucose, protein, nitrites, blood, and ketones by dipstick when indicated by the interval data and physical exam.

     Physical Exam
     The physical exam at the second prenatal visit consists of documenting the location of the uterus and auscultating
     the fetal heart rate. If the patient is at 12 or more weeks of gestation, the fundus can be palpated. The fetal heart
     rate is expected to be 110 to 160 beats per minute. If the patient responded yes to any of the symptoms at the
     interval history, relevant data are obtained at this time, such as vaginal discharge or bleeding, and are reported to
     the health-care provider. The data obtained during the interval history and the physical exam results are
     documented in the EHR and include the following:

         · date of visit
         · week of gestation
         · weight
         · blood pressure
         · urine dipstick (when indicated)
         · interval history

               vaginal bleeding
               vaginal discharge or leaking of fluid
               nausea and vomiting
               epigastric discomfort
               uterine cramping or contractions
               lower back discomfort
               suprapubic discomfort
               dysuria

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.3 · Care in the Second Trimester of Pregnancy                                                                          515

          headache
          dizziness or syncope
    · fundal height
    · fetal movement
    · edema
    · other

Laboratory Tests

Important laboratory tests performed in the first and second trimesters of pregnancy to determine if there is an
increased risk for aneuploidy and neural tube defects in the fetus are called integrated or sequential screenings.
The first of the two integrated screens is performed at 10 to 13 weeks of gestation and includes a blood test and an
ultrasound. The second integrated screen includes only a blood test and is performed at 15 to 22 weeks of
gestation. As the word screening implies, these tests are performed to determine risk for, not to diagnose, an
abnormality in the fetus. The integrated screenings are discussed in more detail in Chapter 13 Prenatal Testing
(ACOG, 2019).

After the nurse informs the patient of the purpose of the screen, the patient decides if they want the testing to be
performed. The screen is encouraged for patients with risk factors for delivering a baby with chromosomal
abnormalities, such as the patient who is more than 35 years old, and is available to all pregnant persons. Some
patients choose not to have the screen done based on religious or personal choice or choose to rely on the second
trimester fetal anatomy ultrasound to rule out an anomaly in the fetus.

Education in the First Trimester

Education in the first trimester of pregnancy focuses on fetal growth and development, nutrition, common
discomforts of pregnancy, and signs of complications. At 12 weeks of pregnancy, the fetus is still vulnerable to
teratogens, and the nurse should reinforce the importance of a healthy lifestyle. If the patient is a smoker, the nurse
should determine if the patient has stopped or decreased cigarette smoking. When reviewing the signs of
complications of pregnancy, it is important for the nurse to stress when to call the health-care provider.

11.3 Care in the Second Trimester of Pregnancy

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Analyze the subjective and objective patient data obtained in the patient interval history and physical
        exam

    · Explain the purpose of the laboratory tests obtained during the second trimester
    · Provide the patient education during the second trimester

In the second trimester, follow-up prenatal visits also include obtaining the patient interval data, performing a
limited physical exam, having appropriate laboratory and diagnostic tests done, and providing patient education. A
second ultrasound is performed at 16 to 20 weeks of gestation to check the fetal anatomy. The gestational diabetes
screen is obtained at 24 to 28 weeks of gestation. If the pregnancy continues to be normal, the follow-up visits are
every 4 weeks in the second trimester.

Patient Interval Data

At each follow-up prenatal visit in the second trimester, the nurse obtains patient interval data similar to data in the
first trimester, such as reviewing the patient's chart, weighing the patient, taking the patient's blood pressure, and
asking the patient for a urine specimen to perform the dipstick urinalysis. If the patient's weight gain is more or less
than expected (or weight loss has occurred) at any prenatal visit, the nurse performs a 24-hour diet recall and
inquires about a change in appetite. If the patient's BP is 140/90 mm Hg or higher prior to 20 weeks of gestation,
this indicates preexisting hypertension. An elevated BP at or after 20 weeks of gestation requires further
investigation and is reported to the health-care provider (ACOG, 2020c). The nurse asks the patient additional
questions during the interval history throughout the second and third trimesters. One question relates to patient
awareness of fetal movements. Quickening most often occurs between 16 and 20 weeks of gestation and is
dependent on the patient's habitus (physical build). Patients who are multiparous (have given birth one or more
516  11 · Prenatal Care

     times after 20 weeks of gestation) often are aware of fetal movements sooner than primiparous (pregnant for the
     first time) patients. Another question the nurse asks is whether the patient is feeling any Braxton Hicks contractions.
     These contractions are the cause of false labor. The nurse discusses the results of any laboratory tests from the
     previous prenatal visit with the patient at this time as well.

     The interval history is obtained at each visit in the second trimester, and the nurse asks the patient if they are
     currently experiencing any of the following symptoms or have experienced them since the previous prenatal visit:

         · vaginal discharge, bleeding, or leaking of fluid
         · persistent vomiting
         · epigastric or abdominal pain
         · pelvic pressure or uterine cramping
         · Braxton Hicks contractions
         · back pain or dysuria
         · dizziness or syncope
         · headache
         · edema in the legs, hands, or face
         · visual disturbances
         · decrease in fetal movements

     If the patient responds yes to any of the symptoms, the nurse asks follow-up questions and determines if any
     additional testing needs to be ordered. These symptoms may indicate the patient is experiencing a complication of
     pregnancy. Table 11.9 lists the complications of pregnancy associated with each patient symptom in the second
     trimester of pregnancy.

     Symptom                           Possible Complication

     Persistent vomiting               Hyperemesis gravidarum, dehydration

     Dysuria, intermittent back pain   UTI

     Pelvic pressure, lower abdominal cramping Cervical insufficiency, preterm labor

     Vaginal bleeding                  Abortion, placenta previa, or placental abruption

     Change in fetal movement pattern  Fetal stress or intrauterine fetal demise

     Temperature >38.3° C (101° F)     Infection

     Persistent abdominal pain, epigastric pain Cholelithiasis, liver disease, GERD, preeclampsia, HELLP

     Frequent dizziness                Anemia, dehydration, infection, heart disease

     Leaking of fluid from the vagina  Vaginitis, PROM

     Headache                          Hypertension

     Edema                             Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy

     Visual disturbances               Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy

     TABLE 11.9 Signs of Complications in the Second Trimester of Pregnancy

     Physical Exam
     The physical exam during the second trimester includes assessing for edema, measuring the fundal height, and

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.3 · Care in the Second Trimester of Pregnancy                                                                                  517

auscultating the fetal heart rate, most often by fetal Doppler. If the patient is at less than 20 weeks of gestation, the
fundus of the uterus is located by palpation, and the height of the fundus is measured using the symphysis pubis
and umbilicus as landmarks (Figure 11.5). At 20 weeks of gestation and throughout the remainder of the pregnancy,
the fundal height is measured in centimeters from the top of the symphysis pubis to the top of the fundus of the
uterus. Between 20 and 36 weeks of gestation, the measurement of the fundal height in centimeters equals the
number of weeks of gestation plus or minus 2 weeks. The fetal heart rate is counted and assessed for normal rate
and rhythm. If the patient responded yes to any of the symptoms at the interval history, relevant data would be
obtained at this time, such as with a speculum exam for vaginal discharge or bleeding.

FIGURE 11.5 Fundal Height The height of the fundus corresponds to gestation at weeks 12 through 40. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Laboratory Tests

The laboratory tests routinely performed in the second trimester are the following:

    · the quad marker screen (also known as the second integrated screening if the patient had the first screening
        earlier in the pregnancy);

    · alpha fetoprotein;
    · H&H or CBC;
    · gestational diabetes screens (1 hr GCT, 3 hr glucose tolerance test [GTT]); and
    · a blood type, Rh, and antibody screen on pregnant persons who are Rh negative.

The quad marker screen measures the maternal serum levels of four pregnancy markers (alpha fetoprotein, hCG,
unconjugated estriol, and inhibin-A) and a blood sample is drawn when the patient is between 15 and 22 weeks of
gestation. After the nurse informs the patient of the purpose of the quad marker or the stand-alone alpha
fetoprotein (AFP) screen, the patient decides whether to have the marker screen done. The quad marker screen is
offered to all patients who are pregnant, but it is strongly encouraged when patients have risk factors for delivering a
baby with chromosome abnormalities, such as when the patient is older than 35 or the patient has previously
delivered a fetus or newborn with a neural tube defect. The measurement of the pregnant person's serum level of
alpha fetoprotein is encouraged for the patient to determine if there is an increased risk for neural tube defects. As
in the first trimester, some patients choose not to have any of the integrated or marker screenings performed. The
integrated screenings, quad marker screen, and alpha fetoprotein screen are discussed in more depth in Chapter 13
Prenatal Testing.

The patient's hemoglobin and hematocrit (H&H) or compete blood count (CBC) is done at least once a trimester. The
H&H is monitored to detect anemia. A patient whose hemoglobin drops below 10.5 g/dL during the second
trimester of pregnancy because of iron deficiency anemia is usually treated with iron supplements (ACOG, 2021d).
The CBC includes the iron indices to help diagnose nutritional anemia, and the platelet count is monitored for
518  11 · Prenatal Care

     thrombocytopenia. A significant drop in the platelet count from the previously drawn CBC at the first prenatal visit or
     a platelet count less than 150,000 per microliter of blood is associated with liver damage and hypertensive
     disorders of pregnancy.

     All pregnant patients are screened for gestational diabetes between 24 and 28 weeks of gestation unless they have
     preexisting diabetes mellitus or a confirmed diagnosis of gestational diabetes with the current pregnancy. The most
     commonly used diabetes screen is the 1-hour glucose challenge test (GCT). The GCT does not require the patient to
     be NPO before undergoing the test. The patient is instructed to drink a glucose solution (Glucola) containing 50
     grams of carbohydrate (dextrose derived from corn). One hour later the patient's blood glucose level is checked. If
     the glucose is elevated (>130 in serum or >140 using a fingerstick or whole blood), the patient is scheduled for a
     3-hour GTT (glucose tolerance test). The patient is instructed to be NPO the night before and the morning of the
     test. Blood is drawn right before the patient starts drinking a glucose solution containing 100 g of carbohydrate, and
     at 1, 2, and 3 hours after the patient finishes drinking the solution. If the patient's serum blood glucose level is
     elevated in any two out of the four blood draws, the patient is diagnosed with gestational diabetes and referred to
     nutritional counseling. The patient is also educated on the possible effects of gestational diabetes on the pregnancy
     outcome. (See Chapter 12 Pregnancy at Risk.)

     Pregnant patients who are Rh negative will have their blood type, Rh, and antibody screen repeated right before or
     at 28 weeks of gestation. If the patient's antibody screen is negative, the patient receives antepartum Rho(D)
     immune globulin (RhoGAM). Antepartum RhoGAM is administered to prevent the patient from producing antibodies
     against Rh-positive blood or Rh sensitization during the third trimester of pregnancy.

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     Rho(D) Immune Globulin (RhoGAM)

     A person who is Rh negative carries antibodies against Rh-positive blood. During pregnancy the placenta usually
     prevents a mixing of the pregnant person's and fetus's blood. During episodes of placental bleeding at any point in
     the pregnancy and at the time of delivery or abortion, the blood from the fetus may mix with the blood from the
     person who is pregnant and the Rh sensitization process starts. Rho(D) immune globulin is administered at the time
     of a bleeding episode or abortion, at 28 weeks' gestation, and after delivery to interrupt the Rh sensitization
     process.

         · Generic Name: Rho(D) immune globulin
         · Trade Name: RhoGAM, MicRhoGAM, WinRho SDF
         · Classification: immunoglobulin
         · Route/Dosage: 300 micrograms at 28 weeks of pregnancy and 50 micrograms after first trimester abortion,

             given intramuscularly (IM) or intravenously (IV)
         · Indications: prevention of Rh sensitization related to pregnancy in patients who are Rh negative and whose

             fetus is Rh positive
         · Mechanism of Action: prevents the body from producing antibodies that destroy Rh-positive blood cells
         · Contraindications: known allergy to any ingredient in Rho(D) immune globulin
         · Side Effects: pain and redness at the site if administered IM, slight elevation in temperature
         · Adverse Reactions: anaphylaxis and hemolytic reactions
         · Patient Education: Notify the health-care provider if experiencing shortness of breath, headache, or muscle

             pain. Carry the card provided after the injection in a wallet for identification as an Rh-negative person.

     Complete Obstetric Ultrasound

     A complete obstetric ultrasound (US) in the second trimester is performed at 16 to 20 weeks of gestation to assess
     the fetal anatomy. The US, performed by a trained sonographer, is used to:

         · determine the location of the placenta,
         · measure the fetus to determine the fetal weight and confirm the EDD,
         · measure the amniotic fluid,
         · observe fetal movement,

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.4 · Care in the Third Trimester of Pregnancy                                                                            519

    · auscultate the fetal heart rate,
    · evaluate fetal anatomy including external genitalia, and
    · determine the length of the cervix.

The exact gestation of the second trimester US is based on the health-care provider's preference. Some providers
prefer to assess the cervical length at no later than 16 weeks. Some parts of the fetal anatomy are not as well seen
at 16 weeks, and waiting until 20 weeks can significantly decrease the number of US scans that need to be
scheduled again.

Education in the Second Trimester

Education in the second trimester of pregnancy focuses on fetal milestones, nutrition and weight gain of the
pregnant person, and signs of complications of pregnancy. At 16 weeks of gestation, external genitalia of the fetus
are more easily viewed during the US, and meconium is starting to be produced. At 23 to 24 weeks, the fetus
becomes viable because the alveoli in the lungs are starting to produce surfactant. Viability at this point in the
pregnancy is defined as the fetus having the capability of living outside the uterus.

The importance of a healthy diet is reinforced in the second trimester. The nurse uses the patient's weight gain,
maintenance, or loss as the screening tool for adequate nutritional intake. Any weight loss is investigated for an
underlying cause, such as illness or lack of money for food. Unexpected weight gain may be due to fluid retention or
a sedentary lifestyle rather than eating nonnutritious foods. The nurse can help identify nutritious foods the patient
likes and can afford.

Patient education in the second trimester may discuss the same symptoms, such as vaginal bleeding, but the
complications change after 20 to 24 weeks of gestation. Uterine cramping and vaginal bleeding indicate possible
abortion when the patient is at less than 20 weeks' gestation. These same symptoms indicate possible preterm
labor after 20 weeks. The presence of edema before 20 weeks may indicate heart disease; after 20 weeks, edema
may be an early sign of a hypertensive disorder of pregnancy. Additional signs and symptoms of complications to
discuss with the patient in the second trimester of pregnancy include the following:

    · fetal growth and development
    · quickening
    · reinforcement of health promotion activities
    · physiologic changes during the second trimester of pregnancy
    · psychologic changes during the second trimester of pregnancy
    · common discomforts of pregnancy
    · review signs of complications
    · fetal movement
    · Rho(D) immune globulin if Rh negative
    · laboratory testing and results
    · choosing a newborn health-care provider
    · breast-feeding
    · childbirth preparation
    · birth plan

11.4 Care in the Third Trimester of Pregnancy

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Analyze the subjective and objective patient data obtained in the patient interval history and physical
        exam

    · Explain the purpose of the laboratory tests obtained during the third trimester
    · Provide the patient education during the third trimester

Third trimester follow-up prenatal visits, like the prenatal visits in the first and second trimesters, include obtaining
the interval history data, a limited physical exam, appropriate laboratory and diagnostic tests, and patient
education. Fetal movement is also assessed. Ultrasound scans are performed to monitor fetal weight when the
fundal height is more than 2 cm below or above the expected measurement. Additional laboratory testing is
520  11 · Prenatal Care

     performed at 36 weeks of gestation. The pregnant patient continues to be screened for complications of the
     pregnancy. If the pregnancy continues to be normal, the follow-up visits are scheduled for every 2 weeks until 36
     weeks of gestation and then weekly until delivery.

     UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Prenatal Care: Part 1

     Brianne is a 36-year-old high school teacher who has come to the OB/GYN office because of a positive home
     pregnancy test.

     Brianne states she and her partner, Trey, had discussed having children and stopped using birth control 6
     months previously. Trey came with Brianne to the office. Brianne also informs the nurse she has noticed her
     breasts are tender and her most recent period was 6 weeks ago.

     Past                Medical history:
     medical
     history                 · not currently taking any over-the-counter medications or herbal preparations
     (PMH)                   · negative history for STIs.
                             · denies any surgeries
                             · denies any previous pregnancies
                             · denies any history of medical conditions

                         Family history: Father has type 2 diabetes mellitus and mother has HTN

                         Social history: Brianne and Trey live in a two-bedroom apartment on the second floor in a
                         building with only a freight elevator. They have a small dog named Candy. Trey works for a
                         construction company and is 40 years old. Neither Candy nor Trey smokes. Trey does drink an
                         occasional beer. Candy does not drink alcoholic beverages.

                         No current medications and allergy to penicillin

     Flowchart           Height: 5 ft 3 in.
                         Weight: 135 lb
                         BMI: 26.9
                         First prenatal visit
                         BP: 112/72

     Lab                 Initial prenatal visit
     results             Rubella titer nonimmune
                         Urine culture positive for GBS
                         26 weeks' gestation
                         1-hour GCT 155
                         Hemoglobin 11.8
                         Hematocrit 34.2

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          11.4 · Care in the Third Trimester of Pregnancy                 521

Diagnostic  Initial prenatal visit
tests/      Intrauterine pregnancy
imaging     Fetal heart rate 160
results     6 weeks' gestation
            20 weeks' gestation
            Ultrasound negative for congenital anomalies
            Fetal heart rate 148

Provider's  Initial prenatal visit
orders      Prenatal vitamins: one tablet daily
            26 weeks' gestation
            Nutritional consult
            RhoGAM workup

1. Highlight the cues that are relevant to the purpose of Brianne's initial visit to the OB/GYN office.

2. Brianne is now at 26 weeks' gestation. The nurse is reviewing the prenatal lab tests obtained and
    diagnostic tests performed since the first prenatal visit. What test results are of most concern at this
    time? Select 3 that apply.
       a. rubella titer nonimmune
       b. 1-hour GCT 155
       c. hemoglobin 11.8
       d. hematocrit 34.2
       e. ultrasound negative for congenital anomalies
        f. urine culture positive for GBS

Interval History Data

In the third trimester, the nurse obtains intake data comparable to data obtained in the second trimester. The
interval history data include reviewing the pregnant patient's chart and pertinent data list, taking the patient's blood
pressure, weighing the patient, and performing the dipstick urinalysis if indicated. The nurse assesses the patient's
nutritional status if the patient's weight gain is more or less than expected at each prenatal visit. An elevated BP of
140/90 or higher in the third trimester can be a sign of preeclampsia (ACOG, 2020a).

The interval history data include asking the patient if the fetus is moving in a normal pattern. The nurse asks the
patient if they are aware of any Braxton Hicks contractions. The results of any laboratory tests from the previous
prenatal visit are reviewed with the patient before the nurse completes the interval history.

The interval history is obtained at each visit in the third trimester to screen the patient for complications of
pregnancy. The list of symptoms is the same in the third trimester as for the second trimester and includes the
following:

    · vaginal discharge, bleeding, or leaking of fluid
    · persistent vomiting
    · epigastric or abdominal pain
    · pelvic pressure or uterine cramping
    · Braxton Hicks contractions
    · back pain or dysuria
    · dizziness or syncope
    · headache
    · edema in the legs, hands, or face
    · visual disturbances
    · decrease in fetal movements

The nurse asks follow-up questions and, when the patient has an affirmative response to any of the symptoms,
522  11 · Prenatal Care

     determines if any additional testing is needed. Table 11.10 delineates each patient sign or symptom and links it with
     the associated complication of pregnancy in the third trimester of pregnancy.

     Symptom                           Possible Complication

     Decreased fetal movement          Intrauterine fetal demise or fetal distress

     Persistent vomiting               Hyperemesis gravidarum, dehydration

     Dysuria, intermittent back pain   UTI

     Pelvic pressure, lower abdominal cramping Preterm labor

     Vaginal bleeding                  Placenta previa or placental abruption

     Temperature >38.3° C (101° F)     Infection

     Persistent abdominal pain, epigastric pain Cholelithiasis, liver disease, GERD, preeclampsia, HELLP

     Frequent dizziness                Anemia, dehydration, infection, heart disease

     Leaking of fluid from the vagina  Vaginitis, ROM

     Headache                          Hypertension

     Edema                             Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy

     TABLE 11.10 Signs of Complications in the Third Trimester of Pregnancy

     Physical Exam
     The physical exam of the pregnant patient in the third trimester includes measuring the fundal height, auscultating
     the fetal heart rate, and assessing for edema. After 36 weeks of gestation, the measurement of the fundal height in
     centimeters no longer approximates the number of weeks of gestation. At this point in the pregnancy, the fetus
     begins descending into the pelvis of the pregnant patient in preparation for labor and birth. If the patient responded
     yes to any of the symptoms at the interval history, relevant data are obtained at this time, such as by drawing blood
     for a liver function panel if the pregnant patient has epigastric pain.

     Leopold's Maneuvers
     At 32 weeks or more of gestation, the physical exam of the pregnant patient includes Leopold's maneuvers.
     Leopold's maneuvers are a set of four steps (maneuvers) performed by the nurse when palpating the pregnant
     patient's abdomen. The maneuvers determine the fetal lie, fetal presentation, location of the fetal back, and fetal
     position in the pelvis. The fetal lie is the relationship of the fetal spine to the pregnant patient's spine. In the
     longitudinal lie, the fetal spine lines up vertically with the pregnant patient's spine. In the transverse lie, the fetal
     spine is horizontal to the pregnant patient's spine, like the plus (+) sign. When the fetal spine lines up diagonally
     with the pregnant patient's spine, the fetus is in an oblique lie (Figure 11.6).

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.4 · Care in the Third Trimester of Pregnancy                                                                                                        523

FIGURE 11.6 The Fetal Lie (a) In the longitudinal lie, the fetal spine lines up vertically with the pregnant patient's spine. (b) In the oblique
lie, the fetal spine lines up diagonally with the pregnant patient's spine. (c) In the transverse lie, the fetal spine lines up horizontally with the
pregnant patient's spine. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The fetal presentation is the part of the fetus entering the pregnant patient's pelvis first. When the fetal head enters
the pelvis first, the presentation is cephalic. When the fetal buttocks (or legs) enter the pelvis first, the presentation
is breech. When the fetus is in a transverse lie, the presentation is shoulder (Figure 11.7).

FIGURE 11.7 Fetal Presentation (a) The fetus is in the shoulder presentation. (b) The fetus is in the cephalic presentation. (c) The fetus is
in breech presentation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Performing Leopold's maneuvers assists the nurse in determining the best place on the pregnant patient's abdomen
to auscultate the fetal heart rate. The fetal heart rate is heard loudest through the fetal back around the shoulder
blades of the fetus. The movement of the fetal arms and legs interferes with the nurse's ability to auscultate the
fetal heart rate through the fetal chest, especially when using a Doppler monitor. The nurse counts the fetal heart
rate for 1 minute and assesses the rhythm. Leopold's maneuvers, along with the measurement of the fundal height,
can also be used to estimate the fetal weight.
The four Leopold's maneuvers are as follows:

  1. Palpate the sides of the pregnant patient's abdomen to determine the fetal lie.
  2. Palpate the fetus to determine the location of the fetal back.
  3. Palpate the fundus and identify the fetal parts in the fundus.
  4. Palpate the suprapubic area to identify the fetal presentation.
Descriptions of how to perform Leopold's maneuvers are found in Chapter 16 Electronic Fetal and Uterine
Contraction Monitoring.
524  11 · Prenatal Care

     Vaginal Exam
     Starting at 36 weeks' gestation or later, a vaginal exam is performed when indicated by the interval history or upon
     request by the pregnant patient. Using a gloved hand, the health-care provider places their lubricated index and
     adjacent finger gently into the patient's vagina. Using the two fingers, the health-care provider locates the cervix and
     estimates its length and then inserts one or both fingers into the cervical os to determine if the cervix is open. Next,
     the health-care provider palpates and identifies the fetal presenting part and determines how far down inside the
     pelvis the presenting part has descended. One purpose of the vaginal exam is to determine if the cervix is ripening.
     The softening and opening of the cervix as it prepares for labor is called cervical ripening, and it may occur as early
     as 37 weeks for multiparas and is more likely to occur at 39 weeks or later for primiparas.

     Laboratory Tests

     Laboratory testing on pregnant patients during the third trimester occurs at 36 weeks of gestation. The testing
     includes an H&H or CBC, VDRL or RPR, vaginal and rectal swab check for group B beta-hemolytic streptococcus
     (GBS), and cervical cultures for chlamydia and gonorrhea. The testing is performed at 35 to 37 6/7 weeks to have
     the results before the patient goes into labor and is valid for up to 5 weeks (ACOG, 2020b). A blood sample for the
     H&H or CBC is drawn to monitor the pregnant patient for anemia and a low platelet count. The VDRL or RPR and the
     cervical cultures for chlamydia and gonorrhea are repeated at 36 weeks of gestation. If testing is positive for any of
     the three STIs, there is time to treat the pregnant patient before labor and birth, decreasing the chance of newborn
     infection.

     Group B beta-hemolytic streptococcus is one of the leading causes of newborn infection. Twenty-five percent of
     pregnant patients are carriers of GBS. The vaginal and rectal swab for GBS is performed to identify carriers of GBS, if
     not already identified earlier in the pregnancy. If the GBS culture is positive, the pregnant patient is provided the
     results and treatment with antibiotics is recommended during the labor process. Treatment is delayed until labor
     because the GBS bacteria can recolonize the vagina before the birth when treated antepartum.

     Education in the Third Trimester

     In the third trimester of pregnancy, patient education topics are very similar to the topics discussed in the second
     trimester and include the following:

         · fetal growth and development
         · fetal movement counts
         · reinforcement of health promotion activities
         · travel
         · physiologic changes during the third trimester of pregnancy
         · psychologic changes during the third trimester of pregnancy
         · signs and symptoms of labor
         · childbirth education
         · choosing a health-care provider for the newborn
         · signs of complications
         · laboratory testing and results
         · breast-feeding
         · childbirth preparation
         · completion of birth plan

     The nurse continues to reinforce a healthy diet and regular exercise in the third trimester and provides education on
     fetal health. The importance of daily fetal movement counts is emphasized throughout the third trimester. As long as
     the pregnancy remains normal, pregnant patients can fly throughout the pregnancy (ACOG, 2018). If the pregnant
     patient is traveling a long distance by automobile, the patient is encouraged to stop frequently (hourly) to void and
     take a 5-minute walk. Additional topics for patient education are the need to choose a health-care provider for the
     newborn, childbirth education classes, and the signs and symptoms of labor.

     The pregnant patient can screen for fetal health by performing fetal movement counts every day, but not until the
     end of the second trimester. The nurse teaches the patient how to perform a daily fetal movement count. The
     patient is instructed to do the following:

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.5 · Family Assessment and Nursing Interventions                                                                    525

  1. Choose a start time when the fetus (baby) is most active.
  2. Count each time the baby moves.
  3. Note the amount of time it takes the baby to move a minimum of ten (10) times.

The fetus is expected to move a minimum of 10 times within 2 hours. If the fetus does not move 10 times within the
2 hours, the patient needs to call their health-care provider. Decreased fetal movement has been linked with low
blood sugar in the pregnant patient and poor placental perfusion, resulting in fetal stress and distress.

Patient education in the third trimester focuses on many of the same signs of complications of pregnancy as the
second trimester. Vaginal bleeding can occur with a known placenta previa or placental abruption, or it can simply
indicate normal bloody show of labor. The presence of edema is associated with hypertensive disorders of
pregnancy, or the edema may just be dependent edema in the lower extremities due to the weight of the gravid
uterus. See Table 11.10 for additional signs and symptoms of complications to discuss with the patient in the third
trimester of pregnancy.

11.5 Family Assessment and Nursing Interventions

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Obtain a comprehensive family assessment
    · Analyze the subjective and objective family data
    · Develop a plan of care based on the family assessment

Typically, nursing care of the person who is pregnant is family centered because the family plays a vital role in
providing support to that person. However, family functioning may also lead to challenges in maintaining the health
of the pregnant person, affecting the pregnancy outcome.

Three theoretical perspectives describe and explain the concept of family based on systems, structure and function,
and developmental stages of a family (Demarco & Healey-Walsh, 2020). The system perspective focuses on family
function as the interdependency of the people identified as members of the family. The structure and function
perspective of family centers on how the structure of the family delineates how the family functions. The
developmental perspective of family is based on the tenet that a family progresses through stages of expected
development. Two of the stages of expected development, the perinatal period and parenting, change the
interdependency of family members and how the family functions This section explains how to assess the family
based on the current characteristics, roles, functions, and expectations of the family and how to analyze the
assessment data to develop a plan of care to support the family and provide identified interventions (when
indicated) during the perinatal period.

Family Assessment

The purpose of a family assessment of a pregnant patient is to determine if the household is a safe and nurturing
environment for the patient and the newborn. The family assessment of a pregnant person begins with asking the
patient whom they consider a member of their family. For each family member, the nurse asks the patient for the
same personal and sociocultural data. These data include, but are not limited to, name, age, gender, race, spiritual
and religious orientation, highest level of completed education, language(s) spoken and preferred language, current
employment, current health status, and health-care beliefs. The next part of the family assessment focuses on
characteristics of the family as a whole. Data describing the roles of each family member, the communication
pattern used within the family, the power structure, the value system, safety practices, and lifestyle practices are
gathered. The data are obtained from the patient, significant other, and key family members. The characteristics of
the family's living environment are also part of the family assessment. The nurse obtains data about the housing,
neighborhood, water and food sources, and meal planning. This information is obtained to determine if the family's
physical and safety needs are met. The family's safety and health activities commonly practiced by the entire (or
majority) of the family members are also assessed. These activities include locking doors at night, wearing helmets
when bike or motorcycle riding, hygiene, frequency of house cleaning, and participating in outdoor family outings.
Developmental data include the number of generations living in the household, committed relationships, family
members enrolled in grades K through 12 and postsecondary education, and career goals met. Figure 11.8 provides
an example of a form to complete when performing a family assessment.
526  11 · Prenatal Care

     FIGURE 11.8 Family Assessment Form An assessment of the family provides information to ensure the household is a safe and nurturing
     environment for the patient and the newborn. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Family Assessment Analysis

     The information in the family profile is used to determine the organizational structure of the family biologically,
     legally, and socially. The family profile determines if the family is multigenerational, blended, single parent,
     cohabiting, same sex, gender fluid, or traditional. The roles of each member of the household delineate which
     member provides the most financial, emotional, and social support to the pregnant patient. The current health
     status of each family member indicates if there are any health risks to the pregnant person and the fetus and any
     stress on the family as a whole. All this information helps to build the foundation for the family characteristics that
     promote healthy relationships, such as communication, values, and spiritual support.

     The analysis of the habitat data provides answers about the physical environment of the household. Is the dwelling
     overcrowded? What is the crime rate in the neighborhood? Is the water supply safe and constant? Are convenient
     and cost-effective food sources accessible? Who prepares and cooks the meals? Are the meals nutritionally sound?

     Access for free at openstax.org
11.5 · Family Assessment and Nursing Interventions                                                                                        527

Is there reliable transportation? The answers to these questions help to determine any risks for the development of
complications during the pregnancy, such as nutritional anemia, dehydration, and communicable diseases.

Both the family profile and the habitat data help to determine the safety and health practices of the family. Does the
family lock their doors and windows at night? Are seat belts used consistently? Are immunizations up to date? Does
the family do outdoor activities? Is the family dysfunctional? Is there family violence? Do the family members
communicate effectively? Can the family problem-solve?

The nurse uses the analysis of the data to understand the complexity of interrelationships of the pregnant person
and each of the family members. Once analysis of the data is complete, the nurse asks the family to discuss how the
new baby is going to change these interrelationships and how the family is going to affect the health of the newborn.

Plan of Care

Together, the nurse, the pregnant person, and the family identify the priority problem and develop the plan of care.
The nurse uses their knowledge of community resources and the family uses their knowledge of the strengths and
resources of the family members to assist the pregnant person in integrating the newborn into a healthy
environment. Figure 11.9 provides an example of a care plan form.

FIGURE 11.9 Plan of Care for the Family The family care plan is a valuable tool to assist the pregnant person in integrating the newborn
into a healthy environment. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
528 11 · Summary

Summary

11.1 First Prenatal Visit

The initial prenatal visit includes a comprehensive history and physical of the person who is pregnant. The history
focuses on the pregnant person, the biological father (or sperm donor) of the baby, family, and lifestyle practices.
The intake provides subjective data related to the pregnancy, starting with events after the LMP. The physical
examination is a modified head-to-toe examination and a focused reproductive examination of the patient. The
specimens and blood for laboratory tests are obtained and assist in screening for preexisting and current conditions
placing the pregnancy at risk. Prenatal education at the first prenatal visit includes nutrition, avoiding teratogens,
adaptation to pregnancy, fetal growth and development, and warning signs to report to the health-care provider. The
first prenatal visit sets the foundation for future prenatal care.

11.2 Care in the First Trimester of Pregnancy

Prenatal care in the first trimester of pregnancy often involves reassuring the pregnant person. Auscultation of the
fetal heart rate using the Doppler monitor indicates fetal viability, and negative laboratory tests indicate the absence
of some risk factors. The monthly visits monitor the adaptation of the pregnant person to the pregnancy and provide
opportunities to reinforce education topics, such as nutrition and teratogens. Prenatal care starting in the first
trimester has a positive influence on pregnancy outcomes for both the pregnant person and newborn.

11.3 Care in the Second Trimester of Pregnancy

Prenatal care in the second trimester of pregnancy is anything but routine. The subjective and objective data
obtained at the monthly visits document the growth and development of the fetus and monitor the adaptation of the
pregnant person to the pregnancy. Laboratory tests performed in the second trimester screen for fetal
abnormalities, gestational diabetes, and anemia. Ultrasound during the second trimester can reveal abnormalities
as well as the sex of the baby. Education topics include recognition of fetal movement patterns and signs and
symptoms of complications specific to pregnancy.

11.4 Care in the Third Trimester of Pregnancy

Prenatal care in the third trimester of pregnancy is similar to care in the first two trimesters. The prenatal visits
involve obtaining subjective and objective data related to the growth of the fetus, preparing the patient for labor and
birth, and monitoring for complications. Laboratory and diagnostic tests are performed routinely and on an as-
needed basis. Education topics include recognition of signs of possible complications specific to pregnancy, the
process of labor and birth, and preparation for the newborn. The nurse plays a vital role throughout the pregnancy
as a provider of prenatal care.

11.5 Family Assessment and Nursing Interventions

The family provides physical and emotional support to assist the pregnant person to maintain their health and the
health of the fetus throughout the pregnancy. Assessment of the pregnant person's family provides data on the
roles, functions, characteristics, and expectations of those residing within or outside the household. The analysis of
the assessment data is the foundation for identifying current or possible problems and developing a plan of care. For
example, if a pregnant person is not gaining weight or becomes anemic, the assessment indicates the household
member who purchases the foodstuffs and who cooks the meals. The nurse would plan and implement nutritional
interventions that include the household member responsible for buying groceries and cooking meals as well as the
pregnant person. When the family assessment reveals the biological father of the baby is not a physical member of
the household, there may be more emotional stress on the pregnant person. Without the family assessment, the
outcome of the pregnancy for both the pregnant person and the newborn can be negatively affected.

Key Terms

breech presentation when the fetal buttocks (or legs) present into the pelvis first
cephalic presentation when the fetal head presents into the pelvis first
cervical ripening softening and opening of the cervix as it prepares for labor
clinical pelvimetry assessment of the general shape and size of the patient's pelvis
consanguinity shared ancestry, such as when the parents are first cousins

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         11 · Assessments 529

estimated date of delivery (EDD) date the pregnant patient is expected to give birth, plus or minus 2 weeks
fetal lie relationship of the fetal spine to the pregnant patient's spine
fetal presentation part of the fetus entering the pregnant patient's pelvis first
first trimester 0 to 13 weeks and 6 days of gestation
fundal height measurement from the symphysis pubis to where the fundus (or top) of the uterus is palpated in a

    patient who is pregnant
gravidity total number of times the patient has been pregnant (including the current pregnancy) regardless of the

    outcome or number of fetuses
integrated or sequential screenings tests performed in the first and second trimesters of pregnancy to determine

    if there is an increased risk for abnormal chromosome and neural tube defects in the fetus
Leopold's maneuvers a specific method of palpating the pregnant patient's abdomen to determine the fetal lie,

    fetal presentation, location of the fetal back, and, with deeper palpation, the fetal position; can also be used,
    along with measurement of the fundal height, to estimate the fetal weight
longitudinal lie when the fetal spine lines up vertically with the pregnant patient's spine
multiparous pregnant person who has given birth one or more times after 20 weeks of gestation
Naegele's Rule three-step calculation based on a 28-day menstrual cycle, used to determine a pregnant patient's
    due date: subtract 3 months from the first day of the last menstrual period (LMP); add 7 days to the LMP; and
    adjust the year as needed
oblique lie when the fetal spine lies on the diagonal of the pregnant patient's spine
parity number of pregnancies where the patient has reached 20 weeks of gestation or more regardless of whether
    the pregnancy ended in a live birth or stillbirth
primiparous person who is pregnant for the first time
quad marker screen measures the maternal serum levels of four pregnancy markers, alpha fetoprotein, hCG,
    unconjugated estriol, and inhibin-A, to determine if there is an increased risk for abnormal chromosome and
    neural tube defects in the fetus and is performed at 15 to 20 weeks of pregnancy
second trimester 14 to 27 weeks and 6 days of gestation
shoulder presentation when the fetus is in a transverse lie and the shoulder is presenting into the pelvis first
third trimester week 28 until delivery (usually by 42 weeks' gestation)
transverse lie when the fetal spine lines up horizontally with the pregnant patient's spine, like the plus (+) sign
trimester 14 weeks of pregnancy; the 280 days of gestation during pregnancy are divided into three periods,
    called trimesters

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. The nurse is discussing with the patient what laboratory tests are performed at the first prenatal visit. What
        tests for sexually transmitted infections does the nurse include in the discussion? Select all that apply.
           a. GBS
           b. VDRL
           c. chlamydia culture
           d. hepatitis B
           e. hCG

    2. The nurse is determining the G/TPAL of a patient at her first prenatal visit. The patient informs the nurse she
        delivered a set of twins at 32 weeks of gestation who are now 5 years old, delivered her first child 8 years ago
        1 week early, and miscarried at 2 months' gestation 3 years ago.

        What is this patient's Gravida [G] and Parity [P] using the G/TPAL nomenclature?

           a. G3 P1113
           b. G3 P2113
           c. G4 P1113
           d. G4 P2113

    3. The nurse is discussing the methods of confirming the pregnancy with a patient at the first prenatal visit.
530 11 · Assessments

        What method is used to confirm cardiac activity of the fetus?
           a. bimanual exam
           b. pelvic ultrasound
           c. serum pregnancy test
           d. urine pregnancy test

    4. The nurse is discussing the purpose of the physical examination with a patient at the first prenatal visit. What
        information does the nurse include in the discussion?
           a. The physical exam helps to confirm the patient's current health.
           b. The physical exam determines nutritional risk factors.
           c. The physical exam confirms the diagnosis of STIs.
           d. The physical exam includes urinalysis.

    5. A nurse is providing prenatal education to a patient who is 8 weeks pregnant. The nurse informs the patient
        that the developing fetus is most vulnerable to teratogens during what trimester of pregnancy?
           a. first
           b. second
           c. third
           d. fourth

    6. At the first prenatal visit, the patient informs the nurse that the first day of her last menstrual period (LMP)
        was February 18, 2024. Using Naegle's Rule, calculate the patient's EDD.
           a. November 11, 2024
           b. November 11, 2025
           c. November 25, 2024
           d. November 25, 2025

    7. A pregnant patient asks the prenatal nurse how much physical activity is safe during pregnancy. What is an
        acceptable response by the nurse?
           a. Decreasing physical activity decreases emotional and physical symptoms.
           b. Increasing physical activity increases emotional and physical symptoms.
           c. Physical activity during pregnancy should be limited to hygiene and household tasks.
           d. The level of activity prior to pregnancy is used to determine a safe activity level during pregnancy.

    8. What patient symptom at 10 weeks of gestation requires further investigation by the nurse?
           a. breast tenderness
           b. infrequent nausea
           c. change in appetite
           d. weight loss

    9. The nurse receives a phone call from a patient concerned about the results of the laboratory tests obtained at
        the first prenatal visit 10 days ago. What is the nurse's next action?
           a. ask the patient if they have checked their electronic chart
           b. inform the patient they will need to wait until the next office visit for the results
           c. provide the patient with the results of the tests
           d. verify the identification of the patient

  10. The nurse receives a phone call from a pregnant patient who states she has not felt the baby move. Identify
        the first question for the nurse to ask the patient.
           a. Have you experienced any recent vaginal bleeding?
           b. Have you experienced any recent vaginal discharge?
           c. How many weeks pregnant are you?
           d. When was the last time you felt the baby move?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      11 · Assessments 531

11. What assessments or tests would the nurse inform the pregnant patient they can expect to have at each
      prenatal visit?
         a. hemoglobin
         b. antibody screen
         c. ultrasound
         d. blood pressure

12. The nurse is providing education to a patient at 16 weeks' gestation who is undecided about consenting to
      the quad screen. How can the nurse explain the purpose of the quad screen to the patient?
         a. It indicates the risk of the fetus for heart defects.
         b. It indicates the risk of the fetus for neural tube defects.
         c. It indicates the risk of the fetus for neural tube defects and chromosome abnormalities.
         d. It indicates the risk of the fetus for chromosome abnormalities.

13. The nurse is performing the interval history on a patient at 30 weeks of gestation. What data would the
      prenatal nurse bring to the attention of the health-care provider?
         a. Hgb change from 12 g/dL (at first prenatal visit) to 11 g at 28 weeks
         b. negative ketones in the urine
         c. dysuria for 3 days
         d. weight gain of 3 pounds in the last 2 weeks

14. The nurse is measuring the fundal height of a patient who is at 34 weeks of gestation. What fundal height
      measurement is expected for a patient who is at 34 weeks of gestation?
         a. 31 cm
         b. 33 cm
         c. 37 cm
         d. 38 cm

15. The nurse is performing Leopold's maneuvers on a pregnant patient at 36 weeks of gestation and determines
      the fetal lie is longitudinal, palpates the fetal legs in the top of the uterus, and palpates the fetal head above
      the symphysis pubis. Which fetal presentation does the nurse document in the EHR?
         a. cephalic
         b. compound
         c. transverse
         d. breech

16. The nurse is discussing pregnancy concerns with a patient in the third trimester of pregnancy. What warning
      sign should the nurse teach the patient to report immediately to the health-care provider?
         a. chronic constipation
         b. decreased fetal movement
         c. early evening fatigue
         d. loss of appetite

17. The nurse is teaching a patient at 28 weeks of gestation how to perform fetal movement counts. What
      statement by the patient indicates the patient understands teaching?
         a. I need to count the baby's movements for 1 hour every day.
         b. I should wait to count the baby's movements after work.
         c. If the baby moves less than 10 times in 2 hours, I need to call the midwife.
         d. Once the baby moves 5 times, I can stop counting the movements.

18. The nurse is completing the family assessment on a patient at 10 weeks of gestation. What data are included
      in the family assessment? Select all that apply.
         a. annual income
532 11 · Assessments

           b. total number of cousins
           c. number of people living in the household
           d. person in the household who makes the major decisions for the family
           e. name of patient's sister who is deceased

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. Explain the importance of the genetic history for the patient and the biological father at the first prenatal visit.
    2. Explain why prenatal care is important.
    3. What is the purpose of the laboratory tests at the first prenatal visit?
    4. Describe the laboratory and diagnostic tests used to confirm the patient is pregnant at the first prenatal visit.
    5. What are the topics of prenatal education in the first trimester?
    6. What are preexisting risk factors during pregnancy?
    7. What is the difference between a prenatal screening test and diagnostic test?
    8. What are the warning signs of a possible pregnancy complication?
    9. What is the purpose of the 1-hour glucose challenge test (GCT)?
  10. In your opinion, what is the most important question to ask the patient at each prenatal visit during the

        second trimester of pregnancy? Why did you choose the answer to this question as the most important
        information to obtain?
  11. What is the purpose of Leopold's maneuvers?
  12. What are the topics of patient education in the third trimester?
  13. Why is a GBS culture performed in the third trimester?
  14. Describe several family strengths.
  15. What is the purpose of a family assessment during pregnancy?
  16. What is the difference between an organizational and social structure of a family?

Reflection Questions

    1. Discuss the actions of the nurse when the person who is pregnant informs the nurse they are refusing the
        speculum examination.

    2. Discuss the role of the nurse when the ultrasound at the first prenatal visit reveals an empty uterus.
    3. Why is it important to continue to screen for complications throughout pregnancy?
    4. Why are cultural considerations important when providing nutritional counseling to a person who is pregnant?
    5. What nursing actions are expected when the pregnant person answers yes when asked if they are

        experiencing any pain at a prenatal visit in the second trimester?
    6. How would the nurse explain viability to the pregnant person in the second trimester?
    7. Explain the difference between the fetal lie and the fetal presentation.
    8. Why is it important for the nurse to discuss the signs and symptoms of complications of pregnancy?
    9. How does the nurse determine a family's communication methods?
  10. Why is a family assessment important?

Critical-Thinking Questions about Case Studies

    1. Refer to Prenatal Care: Part 1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         11 · Assessments 533

        Brianne is 16 weeks' gestation and just found out her niece was exposed to rubella at school. Brianne asks
        the nurse if she should be concerned since she went to her niece's birthday party last week. How should the
        nurse counsel Brianne at this time?

    2. Refer to Prenatal Care: Part 1.
        Brianne is now 28 weeks' gestation. What can the nurse do to ensure Brianne is prepared for the process of
        labor and birth?

    3. Refer to Prenatal Care: Part 1.
        What potential problems related to the presence of GBS in the urine might Brianne encounter for the
        remainder of the pregnancy?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. What aspects of a patient's health history are essential to collect during the first prenatal visit?

    2. Identify subjective data mentioned in the chapter that pregnant patients may provide during the first prenatal
        visit.

    3. How do vital signs contribute to the objective data analysis during the first prenatal visit?

    4. Explain the different methods mentioned in the chapter for confirming a patient's pregnancy.

    5. What components are part of the physical examination performed during the first prenatal visit?

    6. Describe some laboratory tests mentioned in the chapter that are conducted during the first prenatal visit.

    7. What key information is included in the problem list (pertinent data) that the nurse reviews before calling the
        patient back for the interval history, and how does it contribute to continuity of care?

    8. What are the components tested in the urine dipstick, and why is it important to perform this test during the
        first trimester?

    9. What key areas of education should the nurse focus on regarding fetal growth and development in the first
        trimester?

  10. During the second trimester, the nurse assesses the patient's awareness of fetal movements. Why is this
        information important, and how does it influence the nursing care provided during this period?

  11. Describe the purpose of the quad marker screen and the conditions it aims to assess during the second
        trimester.

  12. Why is the hemoglobin and hematocrit (H&H) or CBC routinely done during the second trimester, and what
        conditions can be identified through this test?

  13. In the second trimester, the nurse emphasizes the importance of a healthy diet. How does the nurse use the
        patient's weight gain, maintenance, or loss as a screening tool for nutritional intake?

  14. In the third trimester, why is it essential for the nurse to assess the patient's awareness of fetal movements
        during the interval history? How does this assessment contribute to the overall evaluation of the pregnancy?

  15. Why is group B beta-hemolytic streptococcus (GBS) screening crucial during the third trimester, and how
        does the timing of the screening impact patient care?

  16. Why does the nurse emphasize the importance of daily fetal movement counts in the third trimester, and
        what should the patient do if there is a deviation from the expected fetal movement pattern?

  17. Why is it important for the nurse to inquire about personal and sociocultural data for each family member
        during a family assessment of a pregnant patient?

  18. How does analysis of the family profile, including roles, legal structure, and health status, help the nurse in
        understanding the family's support system and potential risks to the pregnant person and fetus?

  19. How do the nurse, the pregnant person, and the family collaboratively identify the priority problem during the
534 11 · References

        family assessment, and why is this step crucial in developing an effective plan of care?

References

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2014). Obstetrics data definitions (Version 1.0).
    https://www.acog.org/practice-management/health-it-and-clinical-informatics/revitalize-obstetrics-data-
    definitions

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017, Reaffirmed 2022). Methods for estimating the due
   date. ACOG Committee Opinion, 700. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-opinion/
    articles/2017/05/methods-for-estimating-the-due-date

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018). Air travel during pregnancy. https://www.acog.org/
    clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-opinion/articles/2018/08/air-travel-during-pregnancy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019). Prenatal genetic testing chart. https://www.acog.org/
    womens-health/infographics/prenatal-genetic-testing-chart

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020a). Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia. ACOG
   Practice Bulletin, 222. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practice-bulletin/articles/2020/06/
    gestational-hypertension-and-preeclampsia

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020b). Prevention of group B streptococcal early-onset
   disease in newborns. ACOG Committee Opinion, 797. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/
    committee-opinion/articles/2020/02/prevention-of-group-b-streptococcal-early-onset-disease-in-newborns

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020c). Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia. ACOG
   Practice Bulletin, 222. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practice-bulletin/articles/2020/06/
    gestational-hypertension-and-preeclampsia

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021a). Updated cervical cancer screening guidelines.
    https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practice-advisory/articles/2021/04/updated-cervical-cancer-
    screening-guidelines

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021b). ACOG response to consensus statement on
   paracetamol use during pregnancy. https://www.acog.org/news/news-articles/2021/09/response-to-consensus-
    statement-on-paracetamol-use-during-pregnancy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021c). What medicine can I take for allergies while I'm
   pregnant? https://www.acog.org/womens-health/experts-and-stories/ask-acog/what-medicine-can-i-take-for-
    allergies-while-im-pregnant

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021d). Anemia in pregnancy. ACOG Practice Bulletin, 233.
    https://files.medelement.com/uploads/materials/79d47979d88551445b4bdf6949ba8e0c.pdf

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022). Nutrition during pregnancy. https://www.acog.org/
    store/products/patient-education/pamphlets/pregnancy/nutrition-during-pregnancy

Brough, L., Rees, G. A., Crawford, M. A., Morton, R. H., & Dorman, E. K. (2010). Effect of multiple-micronutrient
    supplementation on maternal nutrient status, infant birth weight and gestational age at birth in a low-income,
   multi-ethnic population. British Journal of Nutrition, 104(3), 437-445. https://doi.org/10.1017/
    S0007114510000747

Cano Panlagua, A., & Amariles Muñoz, P. (2017). A structured review of hepatotoxic medicines during pregnancy.
   Revista Colombiana de Gastroenterología, 32(1), 38-46. https://doi.org/10.22516/25007440.128

Chen, H., Qian, N., Yan, L., & Jiang, H. (2018). Role of serum vitamin A and E in pregnancy. Experimental and
   Therapeutic Medicine, 16(6), 5185-5189. https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2018.6830

Demarco, R. F., & Healey-Walsh, J. (2020). Community and public health nursing: Evidence for practice (3rd ed.).
    Wolters Kluwer.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            11 · References 535

Dibley, M. J. & Jeacocke, D. A. (2001). Safety and toxicity of vitamin A supplements in pregnancy. Food and Nutrition
   Bulletin, 22(3), 248-266. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/156482650102200304

Ecker, J., Abuhamad, A., Hill, W., Bailit, J., Bateman, B. T., Berghelia, V., Blake-Lamb, T., Guille, C., Landau, R.,
   Minkoff, H., Pranhu, M., Rosenthal, E., Terplan, M., Wright, T. E., & Yonkers, K. A. (2019, March 27). Substance use
   disorders in pregnancy: Clinical, ethical, and research imperatives of the opioid epidemic: A report of a joint
   workshop of the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and
   American Society of Addiction Medicine. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2019.03.022

Erchick D. J., Khatry S. K., Agrawal, N. K., Katz, J., LeClerq, S. C., Rai, B., Reynolds, M. A., & Mullary. L. C. (2020). Risk
    of preterm birth associated with maternal gingival inflammation and oral hygiene behaviours in rural Nepal: A
   community-based, prospective cohort study. BMJ Open, 10, e036515. https://doi.org/10.1136/
    bmjopen-2019-036515

Georgieff, M. K., Krebs N. F., & Cusick S. E. (2019). The benefits and risks of iron supplementation in pregnancy and
   childhood. Annual Review of Nutrition, 21(39), 121--146. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
    nutr-082018-124213

Guest, H. (2021). A concept analysis of trauma-informed care. Nursing Forum, 56(4), 1000-1007. https://doi.org/
    10.1111/nuf.12626

Kellie, F. J. (2017). Vitamin K supplementation during pregnancy for improving outcomes. Cochrane Database of
   Systematic Reviews (6), CD010920. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD010920.pub2

King, T. L., Brucker, M. C., Osborne, K., Jevitt, C. M. (2019). Varney's midwifery (6th ed.) Jones & Bartlett.

Moretti, R., Morelli, M. E., & Caruso, P. (2019). Vitamin D in neurological diseases: A rationale for a pathogenic
   impact. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 19(8), 2245. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19082245

National Institute of Drug Abuse. (2020). Substance use while pregnant and breastfeeding. https://nida.nih.gov/
    publications/research-reports/substance-use-in-women/substance-use-while-pregnant-breastfeeding

Osterman, M. J. K. & Martin, J. A. (2018). Timing and adequacy of prenatal care in the United States, 2016. National
   Vital Statistics Reports, 67(3). https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/55174

Rodriguez-Blanque, R., Sanchez-Garcia, J. C., Sanchez-Lopez, A. M., & Aguilar-Cordero, M. J. (2019). Physical
   activity during pregnancy and its influence on delivery time: A randomized clinical trial. PeerJ, 7(e6370).
    http://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.6370

Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2015). Female genital mutilation and its management. Green Top
    Guideline No. 53. https://www.rcog.org.uk/media/au0jn5of/gtg-53-fgm.pdf

Sarecka-Hujar, B., & Szulc-Musiol, B. (2022). Herbal medicines--Are they effective and safe during pregnancy?
   Pharmaceutics, 14(1), 171. https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics14010171

Smaill, F. M., & Vazquez, J. C. (2019). Antibiotics for asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnancy. The Cochrane database
   of systematic reviews, 2019(11), CD000490. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD000490.pub4

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2023). Drug testing resources.
    https://www.samhsa.gov/workplace/drug-testing-resources

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (n.d.). Healthy People 2030: Pregnancy and childbirth.
    https://health.gov/healthypeople/objectives-and-data/browse-objectives/pregnancy-and-childbirth

U.S. Food & Drug Administration. (2014, updated March 5, 2021). Pregnancy and lactation labeling (drugs) final rule.
    https://www.fda.gov/drugs/labeling-information-drug-products/pregnancy-and-lactation-labeling-drugs-final-
    rule

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2020). FDA recommends avoiding use of NSAIDs in pregnancy at 20 weeks or
   later because they can result in low amniotic fluid. https://www.fda.gov/media/142967/download

World Health Organization. (2023, January 31). Female genital mutilation. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
536 11 · References

    sheets/detail/female-genital-mutilation

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 12

Pregnancy at Risk

FIGURE 12.1 Conditions That Increase Risk in Pregnancy Conditions that exist prior to pregnancy or problems that arise during
pregnancy place the pregnant person and fetus at increased risk for morbidity and mortality. Health-care professionals play a pivotal role
reducing these risks through provision of care before, during, and after pregnancy. (credit: "A glimpse into Labor and Delivery" by Airman
1st Class Kaylee Dubois/Joint Base Langley-Eustis, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
12.1 Preconception Conditions Affecting Pregnancy
12.2 Conditions Limited to Pregnancy
INTRODUCTION Some conditions that specifically occur during pregnancy and some that exist prior to pregnancy
are linked to increased maternal, fetal, and newborn morbidity and mortality. Awareness of preexisting conditions
and prompt diagnosis and treatment of pregnancy-specific conditions can optimize management through
individualized collaborative plans of care and lead to improved maternal, fetal, and newborn outcomes. As primary
caregivers, nurses play a key role in the implementation of the plans of care and early recognition of when the
unexpected occurs.
Nurses also collaborate with other health-care professionals, such as obstetricians, nurse practitioners, midwives,
social workers, nutritionists, and pharmacists, to develop comprehensive care plans that support health and well-
being during pregnancy and beyond. In addition, nurses advocate for patients by promoting informed decision
making and ensuring that patients receive the highest quality of care possible.
538  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     12.1 Preconception Conditions Affecting Pregnancy

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the association between maternal age and pregnancy outcomes and obstetric management
         · Explain the association between preexisting nutritional deficiencies and pregnancy outcomes and

             obstetric management
         · Explain the association between special populations and pregnancy outcomes and obstetric

             management
         · Explain the association between preexisting medical conditions and pregnancy outcomes and obstetric

             management

     A high-risk pregnancy refers to a pregnancy that has an increased likelihood of maternal and fetal complications.
     Some of the factors that can contribute to a high-risk pregnancy include maternal age, preexisting medical
     conditions, poverty, and nutritional deficiencies. Specific social determinants of health can also contribute to a high-
     risk pregnancy, with disparities noted in outcomes for Black, American Indian, and Alaskan Native populations.
     Table 12.1 summarizes preconception factors that place a pregnancy at risk. These pregnancies require additional
     monitoring, interventions, and management to improve maternal, fetal, and newborn outcomes.

     Category                Factors

     Physical and            Preexisting medical conditions (e.g., hypertension and diabetes), nutritional excess or
     mental                  deficits, mental health disorders, high-risk obstetric history

     Lifestyle               Alcohol and/or substance use, lack of physical activity, unhealthy eating habits, lack of
                             social support, high-risk behaviors

     Social                  Age, socioeconomic status, homelessness, undocumented immigrant status, migrant work
     determinants of
     health

     Environmental           Work hazards, radiation exposure, poor living conditions, teratogen exposure, air pollutants

     TABLE 12.1 Preconception Factors Placing the Pregnancy at Risk

     The role of the nurse in caring for persons whose pregnancies are at risk is crucial, as the nurse is often the first
     point of contact for patients seeking antenatal care. Nurses provide education and support to patients while
     identifying potential risk factors and assisting the primary care provider.

     Age

     The age of the pregnant person plays an important role before, during, and after pregnancy. Age extremes at
     conception have been linked with increased risk factors during pregnancy, specifically pregnancies that occur in
     persons less than 20 years of age or in persons 35 years of age and older. While these age extremes provide discrete
     cutoffs, risk factors present on a continuum. For example, the risk of adverse outcomes decreases with every year of
     increase in the age of the adolescent (de la Calle et al., 2021). Conversely, the risk of adverse outcomes increases
     for every year after 35, termed advanced maternal age. Identification of the patient's age during the initial
     assessment provides valuable information to help guide interventions during pregnancy.

     Adolescence
     The rate of pregnancy during adolescence varies by country but is generally predominant in low- or middle-income
     countries (World Health Organization [WHO], 2022). An adolescent pregnancy is one that occurs in persons
     between 10 and 19 years of age. Adverse maternal outcomes related to adolescent pregnancies include infection,
     hemorrhage, anemia, preeclampsia, and postpartum depression; neonatal adverse outcomes include prematurity,
     fetal growth restriction, stillbirth, and congenital anomalies (Maheshwari et al., 2022; Ursache et al., 2023).
     Pregnancy during adolescence is linked to poverty, unemployment, and social and psychologic problems (Govender

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.1 · Preconception Conditions Affecting Pregnancy                                                                         539

et al., 2020). The incidence of late or no prenatal care is increased in adolescent pregnancy and may be associated
with lack of knowledge about where to go for prenatal care (Hacker et al, 2021). Laws around parental consent
provide an additional barrier for adolescents who become pregnant and seek access to health care. However, laws
continue to evolve to allow persons under the age of 18 to consent to prenatal care. As of 2023, 33 states permit
health-care providers to provide prenatal care to persons under the age of 18 without parental consent, although 14
states still allow health-care providers to notify parents that their child is receiving prenatal care (Guttmacher
Institute, 2023).

The health-care team will evaluate the patient's support system, psychologic status, and access to resources. Steps
toward pregnancy prevention can minimize the risk of pregnancy. Nursing interventions at an individual level include
education on contraceptives and prenatal care. The nurse can refer the patient to resources such as social support
groups, counseling, and educational programs. Local programs such as Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) can
provide additional support to adolescents, including prenatal nutrition classes, breast-feeding assistance, referrals
for immunizations, employment assistance, and other social services.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) (https://openstax.org/r/77WIC) is a federally funded program that offers local
resources to women and their children of low-income status. Resources include breast-feeding support, nutrition
counseling, health-care referrals, and other supplemental services. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
regulates the WIC program through planning, program development, funding, research, and monitoring.

Age 35 and Older
A pregnant person who will be 35 years or older on the estimated date of delivery is said to be of advanced maternal
age. Advanced maternal age increases the pregnant person's risk of ectopic pregnancy, multiple gestation,
gestational diabetes, hypertensive disorders in pregnancy, cesarean delivery, and postpartum hemorrhage (Glick et
al., 2021; Sheen et al., 2018). Fetal risks include spontaneous miscarriage, chromosomal abnormalities, congenital
anomalies, prematurity, fetal growth restriction, and stillbirth (Glick et al., 2021). Preexisting medical conditions
more common in this age group (such as hypertension, diabetes, and hypothyroidism) may also complicate
pregnancy.

With the average age at first pregnancy increasing, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG)
developed recommendations for health-care professionals providing obstetric care to patients of advanced
maternal age (ACOG, 2022a). Recommendations include identifying patients and counseling them about risks to the
pregnant person's and fetus's health, considering prescribing low-dose aspirin to reduce the risk of preeclampsia,
using ultrasound to evaluate for multiple gestations and congenital anomalies, monitoring fetal growth, initiating
close patient monitoring for stillbirth risk, and promoting vaginal delivery, if it is safe. Nurses play an important role
in educating the pregnant person regarding lifestyle behaviors to decrease the incidence of complications.

        LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

Risk Factors Related to Advanced Maternal Age

Patients of advanced maternal age carry additional risks of genetic abnormalities of the fetus and an increase in
adverse outcomes for the pregnant person and the baby. Furthermore, differences exist between patients of
advanced maternal age who are primiparous versus multiparous. Primiparous patients over 40 have an increased
incidence of cesarean delivery, gestational hypertension, and preeclampsia when compared to multiparous patients.
Fetal birth weight is lower when the pregnant person aged 40 or older is a primipara (Genc, 2021).

Nutritional Deficiencies and Excess

Nutritional imbalances place a pregnancy at risk because certain nutrients are necessary to ensure maternal health
as well as fetal growth and development. As worldwide obesity rates rise, so do complications from obesity. The
imbalance of nutrition that results from excessive food intake is called overnutrition. Obesity places the pregnant
540  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     person at increased risk for preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, obstructive sleep apnea, cardiac dysfunction,
     stillbirth, and cesarean delivery (ACOG, 2021b). Risks to the fetus include congenital anomalies such as neural tube
     defects, congenital heart defects, limb or orofacial abnormalities, gastroschisis, and abnormal growth (ACOG,
     2021b).

     In contrast to nutritional excesses, inadequate weight gain before and during pregnancy can place the fetus at risk
     for undernutrition, which can negatively impact fetal health by causing brain defects, psychiatric disorders, vision
     and motor defects, and altered cognition (Cortés-Albornoz et al., 2021). Undernutrition occurs when there is
     inadequate intake of food and necessary nutrients. During routine prenatal visits, the health-care team can provide
     education on local services that provide access to food as needed. In the setting of inadequate weight gain, the
     team may also assess for other underlying medical conditions.

     Optimizing nutrition prior to pregnancy can reduce risks associated with nutritional imbalances. Because pregnancy
     involves an increased demand for nutrients, it is imperative to correct nutritional deficits prior to conception. Of
     note, nutritional deficits still occur in cases of overnutrition. Health-care providers can counsel patients prior to
     conception to manage weight and improve nutritional status through dietary modifications, physical activity, and
     changes in behavior. Counseling should be specific to each patient and will vary based on age and weight prior to
     pregnancy.

     Nurses should provide education on the intake of nutrients such as folic acid, iron, vitamin B12, calcium, vitamin D,
     iodine, and choline during pregnancy. Pregnant patients should take 400 mcg of folic acid per day starting at
     conception to decrease the risk of neural tube defects, prematurity, and low birth weight (U.S. Department of
     Agriculture [USDA], 2020).

     Iron needs during pregnancy often vary by patient, and iron can be obtained through prenatal vitamins, animal
     products, or iron-fortified foods. Adequate iodine intake supports fetal neurodevelopment and can be found in
     seafood, eggs, dairy products, and iodized salt (USDA, 2020). Vitamin B12 is most commonly found in animal
     products, so patients with a vegan or vegetarian diet may require supplementation. On initial assessment, the
     health-care team can evaluate the patient's dietary habits to evaluate for deficiencies in micronutrients. The nurse
     uses this information to assist the patient in identifying acceptable sources of needed nutrients to add to their daily
     intake.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Through its website, Cleveland Clinic (https://openstax.org/r/77ClevelandClin) provides a general overview of high-
     risk pregnancy. The website summarizes information on the definition, diagnosis, signs and symptoms, prevention,
     management, and prognosis of high-risk pregnancy. It offers education on what it means to have a high-risk
     pregnancy and advises patients on when to seek care from a health-care provider.

     Special Populations

     Social determinants of health, such as income, education, support systems, and physical living and working
     conditions, play an important part in determining if a pregnancy is at risk. Populations with low socioeconomic
     status, undocumented immigrant status, homelessness, and misuse of substances, as well as those engaged in
     farm work, are affected by social determinants of health. Table 12.2 summarizes pregnancy risks related to special
     populations. Through identification of risk factors specific to these populations, the health-care provider can
     support maternal and fetal health by providing comprehensive care and monitoring of the pregnant person for
     complications. Nurses provide education on and support for overcoming barriers to optimum health throughout the
     pregnancy (Girardi et al., 2023).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     12.1 · Preconception Conditions Affecting Pregnancy              541

Special Population              Risks for Pregnancy                 Effects on Fetus/Infant

Socioeconomic status (poverty)  Limited prenatal care               Preterm birth
                                Preeclampsia                        Miscarriage
                                Gestational diabetes                Decreased newborn care
                                Malnutrition
                                Increased maternal health problems
                                Limited social support

Migrant farm work               Limited prenatal care               Preterm birth
                                Exposure to occupational hazards    Low birth weight
                                Poor living conditions              Birth defects
                                Malnutrition                        Decreased newborn care
                                Infection
                                Limited education of prenatal care

Undocumented immigrant status   Limited or delayed prenatal care    Preterm birth
                                Mental health disorders             Low birth weight
                                Increased maternal health problems  Decreased newborn care
                                Infection
                                Lack of social support
                                Chronic stress

Homelessness                    Limited prenatal care               Preterm birth
                                Limited access to food              Low birth weight
                                Substance use or misuse             Decreased newborn care
                                Mental health disorders
                                Exposure to environmental hazards
                                Chronic stress
                                Physical harm and violence

Substance use or misuse         Infections                          Fetal drug exposure
                                Increased maternal health problems  Birth defects
                                Inadequate self-care                Low birth weight
                                Mental health disorder              Intrauterine fetal death
                                                                    Neonatal withdrawal
                                                                    Neurodevelopmental impairment

TABLE 12.2 Summary of Special Population Pregnancy Risks (McGeough et al., 2021; Zhou & Wen, 2022)

Socioeconomic Status (Poverty)
Socioeconomic status plays an important role in prenatal care. Limited resources related to low socioeconomic
status can lead to increased maternal and fetal complications, often related to limited prenatal care. Patients from
disadvantaged backgrounds often have limited access to health care, have poor nutrition, and live in stressful
environmental conditions, all of which can increase the risk of adverse outcomes such as preterm delivery,
preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and miscarriage (Kim et al., 2018). Additionally, patients with a low
socioeconomic status may be more likely to use tobacco, alcohol, or drugs, all of which can negatively impact fetal
development. Limited access to food can impair maternal nutrition. Patients may also experience increased levels of
stress and have inadequate support systems, which can lead to mental health and social support problems.

To support patients of low socioeconomic status, nurses can connect patients with local resources, provide
education on prenatal care, offer emotional support, and refer for financial assistance. Health-care providers can
advocate for patients by providing referrals, collaborating with social services, and encouraging patient self-
advocacy.
542  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

             LINK TO LEARNING

     The nonprofit Hastings Center (https://openstax.org/r/77HastingsCentr) provides links to programs developed to
     increase access to care and are available to persons who are pregnant, postpartum persons, and infants.

     Migrant Farm Work
     Migrant farm workers may experience limited prenatal care because of frequent relocation, limited resources, low
     socioeconomic status, and language barriers. Cultural and religious beliefs may influence the willingness of patients
     to receive routine prenatal care, especially pregnant patients who request only female providers. Migrant farm
     workers experience challenging occupational conditions, such as extreme temperatures, heavy lifting, and exposure
     to chemicals. Pregnant farm workers are at increased risk of preterm birth and having low-birth-weight infants.
     Health-care providers should evaluate occupational hazards during initial assessment and provide education
     accordingly. Collaborating with a medical interpreter to translate during the prenatal visit will ensure the correct
     information is conveyed to the pregnant person and can promote a trusting relationship.

     Undocumented Immigrant Status
     The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists advocates for undocumented immigrants by
     recommending access to quality health care for all persons and by opposing policies and strict enforcement of
     immigration laws that prevent prenatal care to non-US citizens (ACOG, 2023). Illegal residents, or undocumented
     immigrants, face limited access to health care because of federal policies and disqualifications from health-care
     insurance. These challenges may explain the increased risks for maternal morbidity and mortality, preterm birth,
     and low infant birth weight in this population (Gieles et al., 2019). Increasing access to health-care coverage can
     promote prenatal health and reduce associated risk factors. In addition to providing culturally sensitive quality care,
     the nurse can connect patients to local resources and social support programs.

     Homelessness
     Homelessness and unstable housing place a pregnancy at risk and have been linked with mental health and
     substance use disorders (McGeough et al., 2020). Factors related to homelessness include inadequate prenatal
     care, unsafe living conditions, exposure to environmental hazards, increased stress, and limited access to food.
     These factors are associated with an increase in morbidity and mortality for both the pregnant person and the fetus.

     Patients who are pregnant and experience homelessness may be at increased risk for physical harm and violence.
     Health-care providers may not be able to reduce the risk factors associated with homelessness but should instead
     focus on supporting the unique needs of the individual patient. Policy changes on a broader scale aimed at assisting
     with unemployment, supplying adequate housing, and reducing domestic violence can reduce the incidence of
     homelessness during pregnancy. Nurses can advocate for people experiencing homelessness by referring them to
     social services or WIC to help find prenatal classes where there is also access to prenatal vitamins and vouchers for
     more nutritious foods.

     Substance Use
     Health-care providers should ask about substance use prior to or during the first prenatal visits. Screening tools
     should inquire about the use of alcohol, tobacco, opioids, benzodiazepines, marijuana, and stimulants. By using
     validated screening tools such as the Parents, Partners, Past and Pregnancy (The 4P's), NIDA Quick Screen, or Car,
     Relax, Alone, Forget, Friends, Trouble (CRAFFT) on all patients, the risk of stereotyping is reduced (ACOG, 2017b).
     Identification of substance use disorder during the first visit can not only reduce risks to maternal and fetal health
     but also provide additional maternal support. The risks to both the pregnancy and the fetus are summarized in Table
     12.3. It is important for the health-care provider to establish a trusting relationship with the patient by using
     nonjudgmental and therapeutic communication. The health-care provider may then refer the patient to mental
     health resources or a local treatment facility as needed. When that referral is made, the nurse's role is to provide the
     patient with more detailed education regarding what services are provided by the agency the pregnant person is
     being referred to.

     Heavy alcohol intake during pregnancy has been associated with adverse fetal outcomes such as prematurity, low
     birth weight, and fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (Wilson et al., 2020). Alcohol is a known teratogen, and patients

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 12.1 · Preconception Conditions Affecting Pregnancy                 543

should be counseled to avoid it during pregnancy because no amount of alcohol intake has been proven safe. For
patients who have trouble quitting alcohol, the nurse can provide information and referrals for assistance.

Smoking tobacco in pregnancy has been associated with fetal growth restriction, miscarriage, prematurity, placental
abruption, stillbirth, tissue damage to the fetal lungs and brain, and neurodevelopmental disorders (Chen et al.,
2023; Cohen et al., 2017; Nida, 2021). Providing patients with resources and education on smoking cessation
during the preconception period or during pregnancy can reduce these risks for the pregnant person and fetus.
Because there is a dose-response relationship between number of cigarettes and risk factors (Marufu et al., 2015),
simply decreasing the number of cigarettes smoked per day can be beneficial.

Substance             Risk to Pregnancy                                            Risk to Fetus/Infant

Alcohol               Miscarriage or stillbirth                                    Preterm birth
                                                                                   Low birth weight
                                                                                   Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders
                                                                                   Developmental delay

Tobacco               Miscarriage or stillbirth                                    Fetal growth restriction
                      Placental abruption                                          Premature birth
                                                                                   Tissue damage to fetal lung and
                                                                                   brain
                                                                                   Neurodevelopmental disorders

Opioids               Maternal mortality                                           Premature birth
                      Stillbirth                                                   Neonatal abstinence syndrome
                      Poor nutrition                                               (NAS)
                      Domestic violence
                      Polysubstance use
                      Exposure to bloodborne pathogens
                      Inconsistent prenatal care

Benzodiazepines       Withdrawal symptoms                                          Neonatal abstinence syndrome
                      Physical dependence                                          (NAS)
                      Drug interactions                                            Hypotonia
                                                                                   Hypothermia
                                                                                   Lethargy
                                                                                   Respiratory problems
                                                                                   Feeding problems
                                                                                   Birth defects
                                                                                   Preterm birth
                                                                                   Low birth weight

Marijuana             Mental health problems                                       Neurodevelopmental
                      Respiratory problems related to                              impairment
                      smoking                                                      Low birth weight

Stimulants (cocaine,  Placental abruption                                          Congenital anomalies
methamphetamines)     Intrauterine growth restriction                              Preterm birth

TABLE 12.3 Risks of Substance Use or Misuse in Pregnancy (Cleveland Clinic, 2022)

Opioids may be prescribed, such as methadone and codeine, or nonprescribed, such as heroin. Opioid use during
pregnancy increases the risk for maternal mortality, stillbirth, preterm birth, and neonatal abstinence syndrome
(NAS) (Centers for Disease Control & Prevention [CDC], 2022a). Opioid use disorder can be linked with other
comorbidities, including alcohol, benzodiazepine and stimulant use, poor nutrition, domestic violence, exposure to
544  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     bloodborne pathogens, and inconsistent prenatal care (Wilson et al., 2020). Additional screening and testing may be
     indicated to evaluate for these comorbidities. Patients who become pregnant and use illicit drugs may be prescribed
     a safer alternative, such as methadone or buprenorphine, and referred to a treatment program to minimize
     withdrawal and prevent relapse (ACOG, 2017b). After birth, the infant will need to be monitored closely by a
     pediatric provider for signs of withdrawal.

     Evidence is unclear about the adverse effects of benzodiazepine use (prescribed or not prescribed) during
     pregnancy, but it may be associated with increased signs of neonatal abstinence syndrome (Wilson et al., 2020).
     There are reports of hypotonia, hypothermia, lethargy, respiratory problems, and feeding difficulties associated with
     benzodiazepine use during pregnancy. The nurse should provide the patient with education about these potential
     effects (Wilson et al., 2020).

     Because of the legalization of marijuana in some states, its use is on the rise and is quite controversial. Because of
     the concern for neurodevelopmental impairment and low birth weight, current recommendations discourage
     marijuana use prior to and during pregnancy (ACOG, 2017a; CDC, 2020).

     Stimulants such as cocaine and methamphetamines cause vasoconstriction and can increase the risk for placental
     abruption, congenital anomalies, intrauterine growth restriction, and preterm birth (Wilson et al., 2020). The nurse
     should educate pregnant patients using stimulants about the adverse effects and encourage them to discontinue
     use immediately and participate in programs. Of note, stimulant use after pregnancy is a contraindication to breast-
     feeding.

     Health-care providers can use screening tools to assess for substance misuse during pregnancy. The following
     screening tools are recommended, and their websites provide additional information on how these tools are used to
     screen for alcohol, tobacco, and drug use during pregnancy:

         · Parents, Partners, Past, and Pregnancy (The 4P's) (https://openstax.org/r/77The4Ps)
         · NIDA Quick Screen (https://openstax.org/r/77NIDAQuickScr)
         · Car, Relax, Alone, Forget, Friends, Trouble (CRAFFT) (https://openstax.org/r/77CRAFFT)

     Medical Conditions

     Patients with preexisting medical conditions often require a multidisciplinary approach to monitor maternal and
     fetal health before, during, and after pregnancy. A preexisting medical condition is one that is present prior to
     conception. High-risk pregnancies are often followed up by a maternal-fetal medicine specialist in addition to an
     obstetrician or midwife. Depending on the medical condition, additional specialties may be involved in patient care,
     including neonatology, nutrition, pharmacy, social work, case management, cardiology, nephrology, endocrinology,
     hematology, neurology, pulmonology, infectious disease, and others. The role of the nurse in this team is to educate
     the patient about why these additional specialties are needed, to encourage adherence to the overall care plan, and
     to support the patient in coordinating care.

     Counseling during the preconception period can allow time for the patient to optimize health in preparation for
     pregnancy. Nurses should encourage patients to discuss medications with their health-care provider to determine
     possible teratogens that could have detrimental effects on fetal development. Health-care providers can promote
     contraception until the patient is ready to conceive. Pregnancy planning with effective management of medical
     conditions prior to conception can reduce adverse outcomes and increase the likelihood of a healthy pregnancy.

     Hypertension
     Hypertension that is present prior to pregnancy or before 20 weeks' gestation or that persists 20 weeks following
     delivery is called chronic hypertension. It increases the risk of fetal growth restriction, stillbirth, preterm labor and
     delivery, fetal distress in labor, cesarean delivery, postpartum hemorrhage, gestational diabetes, and preeclampsia.
     During the preconception period, the health-care provider should evaluate for end-organ involvement and other
     comorbidities to maximize the health of both the pregnant person and the fetus (ACOG, 2019a). Nurses can provide
     education on lifestyle habits to increase the health of the pregnant person.

     Management of chronic hypertension includes monitoring blood pressure (BP) regularly (as shown in Figure 12.2)
     and evaluating for adverse effects, such as preeclampsia, uteroplacental insufficiency, and fetal growth restriction.
     Antihypertensive therapy is recommended to maintain BP below 140/90 mm Hg, especially in the presence of other

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.1 · Preconception Conditions Affecting Pregnancy                                                                                         545

medical conditions, such as renal disease (ACOG, 2019a). First-line antihypertensive medications during pregnancy
are nifedipine (Adalat) and labetalol (Trandate), while other hypertensive agents such as angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers are contraindicated because of teratogenic effects
(ACOG, 2019a). To reduce the risk of developing preeclampsia, daily low-dose aspirin should be prescribed between
12 and 28 weeks' gestation and continued until delivery (ACOG, 2019a).

FIGURE 12.2 Monitoring Blood Pressure during Pregnancy During routine prenatal visits, the blood pressure is carefully monitored to
assess for hypertensive disorders and evaluate maternal-fetal risk factors. (credit: "A Person Checking the Blood Pressure of the Patient"
by "Thirdman"/Pexels, CC0)

Surveillance of fetal well-being is conducted via ordered ultrasound (US) with Doppler, nonstress test (NST), and
biophysical profile (BPP). For more about these tests, see Chapter 13 Prenatal Testing.

Diabetes Mellitus
The incidence of diabetes continues to rise in the United States, likely related to the rise in obesity. The two primary
types of diabetes are type 1 and type 2. In type 1 diabetes, an autoimmune process that destroys the pancreatic
beta cells that produce insulin, resulting in an insulin shortage. In type 2 diabetes, the beta cells do not secrete
enough insulin in the setting of insulin resistance. Both types can affect patients of childbearing age.

During pregnancy, hormones fluctuate, resulting in alterations in insulin needs. During the first trimester, patients
with preexisting diabetes are increasingly sensitive to insulin (Alexopoulos et al., 2019). Therefore, patients are at
increased risk for hypoglycemia and may require lower doses of insulin. As the pregnancy progresses beyond 16
weeks' gestation, insulin resistance progressively increases, and patients often require increased doses of insulin
(Alexopoulos et al., 2019). Because of the increased risk for abnormal glucose levels throughout pregnancy, blood
glucose may need to be more frequently monitored. Nurses should counsel patients on the fluctuations in insulin
sensitivity and resistance during pregnancy and the importance of frequent glucose monitoring, as well as signs and
symptoms of hypo- and hyperglycemia.

Diabetes, especially when glycemic control is not present prior to conception and throughout the pregnancy, is
associated with an increased risk of maternal and fetal adverse outcomes, such as miscarriage, congenital
anomalies, stillbirth, preeclampsia, fetal macrosomia, and neonatal hypoglycemia (American Diabetes Association
[ADA], 2020). Table 12.4 contains a detailed list of maternal and fetal complications related to diabetes during
546  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     pregnancy.

                                      Affected Person Effects

                                      Pregnant person  Preeclampsia
                                                       Gestational hypertension
                                                       Polyhydramnios
                                                       Cesarean birth
                                                       Hypoglycemia
                                                       Diabetic ketoacidosis
                                                       Postpartum hemorrhage
                                                       Diabetic retinopathy
                                                       Diabetic kidney disease
                                                       Cardiac disease
                                                       Neuropathy
                                                       Early pregnancy loss
                                                       Preterm delivery

                                      Fetus            Neonatal hypoglycemia
                                                       Large for gestational age/Macrosomia
                                                       Fetal growth restriction
                                                       Shoulder dystocia
                                                       Respiratory distress syndrome
                                                       Congenital malformations:

                                                           · Neural tube defects
                                                           · Congenital heart disease
                                                           · Cleft lip and palate
                                                           · Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
                                                           · Abdominal wall defects
                                                           · Renal agenesis
                                                           · Limb abnormalities

                                                       Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia
                                                       Hypocalcemia
                                                       Stillbirth

                             TABLE 12.4 Maternal and Fetal Conditions Associated with
                             Preexisting Diabetes (CDC, 2022b)

     Testing for diabetes during the preconception period can minimize maternal and fetal complications. Testing
     includes a fasting glucose level or a hemoglobin A1c test. To minimize maternal-fetal risk, the target hemoglobin
     A1c should be less than 6.5 percent during the preconception period (ADA, 2020; Alexopoulos et al., 2019).
     Management of both types of diabetes during pregnancy involves insulin administration and requires an
     interdisciplinary approach. Patients with diabetes should be counseled on risks related to pregnancy and
     encouraged to closely monitor blood glucose levels during the preconception period. Elevated blood glucose levels
     during the first trimester have been linked with significant fetal abnormalities, such as congenital heart disease,
     anencephaly, microcephaly, renal anomalies, and caudal regression syndrome (ADA, 2020).

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     Insulin

     Insulin is used in some patients who are pregnant and have diabetes. Insulin decreases high blood glucose levels
     that pose an increased risk for both the pregnant person and the fetus. Uncontrolled diabetes during pregnancy can
     lead to complications such as high blood pressure, premature birth, stillbirth, and birth defects.

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.1 · Preconception Conditions Affecting Pregnancy                                                                           547

    · Generic Name: insulin
    · Class/Action: classified as a hormone and antidiabetic agent
    · Route/Dosage: Insulin is administered subcutaneously (SQ) with an insulin syringe but may also be

        administered intravenously (IV) in the form of a continuous drip in an acute care setting. Insulin dosage varies
        by individual patient, and doses are determined by an OB/GYN or maternal-fetal medicine specialist. Dosage
        adjustments may be necessary throughout pregnancy, as insulin requirements can change as the pregnancy
        progresses.
    · Indication: for the management of hyperglycemia in patients with diabetes
    · Mechanism of Action: Insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas that helps regulate the amount of
        glucose in the blood. During pregnancy, the placenta produces hormones, such as estrogen, progesterone,
        cortisol, and lactogen, that can interfere with insulin's ability to lower blood glucose levels. Insulin therapy can
        help overcome this resistance and maintain blood glucose levels within a normal range.
    · Contraindications: There are no absolute contraindications to insulin use; however, caution should be taken if
        allergy is a concern.
    · Adverse Reactions: Hypoglycemia can be a serious adverse effect if glucose levels drop too low. Severe
        allergic reactions to insulin are rare but can occur. Symptoms of an allergic reaction may include rash, itching,
        swelling, dizziness, and difficulty in breathing.
    · Side Effects: Common side effects of insulin use include injection site reactions such as pain, redness, and
        swelling. Other side effects may include hypoglycemia, weight gain, and fluid retention.
    · Patient Education: Pregnant patients with diabetes who require insulin therapy should be educated on proper
        injection techniques, storage and mixing of insulins, blood glucose monitoring, and signs and symptoms of
        hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia. Patients should also be advised to follow a healthy diet, engage in regular
        physical activity, and attend all prenatal appointments.

(Skidmore-Roth, 2024)

Type 1
The likelihood of hypoglycemia increases during the first trimester of pregnancy for patients with type 1 diabetes
due to increased insulin sensitivity related to hormonal changes as well as the nausea and vomiting that occur
during this time. The nurse should encourage patients with diabetes and their families to closely assess and monitor
for signs of hypoglycemia. Patient education should include the necessity for more frequent blood glucose
monitoring. In the second trimester, insulin needs start to increase and increase at a faster pace in the third
trimester. Patients with type 1 diabetes are also at an increased risk of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) during
pregnancy, which is an obstetric emergency. The nurse should educate patients on prevention, when to call the
provider, and the use of ketone strips (ADA, 2020). Signs and symptoms of hyperglycemia and DKA include dry
mouth, polydipsia, polyuria, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, altered level of consciousness, weakness, deep
breathing or tachypnea, fruity breath, tachycardia, dehydration, and ketonuria.

Type 2
Type 2 diabetes may be diagnosed during the first prenatal visit if a patient is at high risk, such as having obesity.
Patients with type 2 diabetes have a higher risk of other comorbidities than those with type 1 diabetes and therefore
may require additional monitoring and evaluation (ADA, 2020). Patients with type 2 diabetes will also need to
frequently monitor blood glucose levels, and insulin doses may need to be increased during pregnancy to achieve
euglycemia (ADA, 2020; ACOG, 2018a). Patients not taking any medication for diabetes prior to pregnancy may be
able to achieve normoglycemia through lifestyle modifications, such as improved dietary habits and increased
exercise. However, patients who take oral hypoglycemic medications will likely be transitioned to insulin during the
first trimester. This is because oral diabetic medications, such as metformin, cross the placenta and have a
decreased safety and efficacy profile (ACOG, 2018a; ADA, 2020).

Thyroid Disease
Evaluation and treatment of thyroid disease prior to pregnancy stabilizes maternal and fetal thyroid levels.
Management during the preconception period should focus on achieving normal thyroid function levels, which may
require adjusting medications and monitoring for side effects. Planning for pregnancy should prioritize stabilizing
thyroid function prior to conception. Screening for thyroid disease during the first trimester is not universal but may
548  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     be indicated if there is a history of thyroid disease in the patient or family, clinical signs or symptoms, or history of
     type 1 diabetes (ACOG, 2020a).

     Hypothyroidism
     The diagnosis for hypothyroidism is made when thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels are high (> 5 mIU/L) and
     thyroxine (free T4) levels are low (< 0.7 ng/dL). Clinical signs and symptoms include fatigue, weight gain,
     constipation, muscle cramps, cold intolerance, edema, hair loss, and dry skin. Adequate iodine intake is necessary
     for maternal and fetal thyroid health. Hashimoto thyroiditis, an autoimmune disorder, is a frequent cause of
     hypothyroidism during pregnancy (ACOG, 2020a). Hypothyroidism untreated during pregnancy increases the risk for
     low birth weight and impaired fetal neurodevelopment (Korevaar et al., 2017). Thyroid hormone replacement should
     be started prior to conception and will need be increased after conception due to increased demands related to
     pregnancy (Korevaar et al., 2017). Patients who are diagnosed with hypothyroidism after conception can be started
     on thyroid replacement medication at the full replacement dose (Korevaar et al., 2017). The nurse should counsel
     patients on the importance of adherence to medication regimens to promote stable thyroid levels.

     Hyperthyroidism and Thyroxine (free T4)
     In contrast to hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism is diagnosed when thyroxine (free T4) levels are high (> 2 ng/dL)
     and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels are low (< 0.5 mIU/L). Clinical signs and symptoms of
     hyperthyroidism include heat intolerance, weight loss, frequent stools, sweating, palpitations, insomnia,
     tachycardia, and hypertension. Hyperthyroidism left untreated can lead to miscarriage, stillbirth, fetal growth
     restriction, hypertension, and heart failure (Okosieme et al., 2018). Certain medications used to treat
     hyperthyroidism, such as methimazole (Tapazole), have teratogenic effects; and patients should be transitioned to a
     safer alternative, such as propylthiouracil (PTU), prior to pregnancy or during the first trimester (Morales et al.,
     2021).

     Graves disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy (ACOG, 2020a). Radioiodine treatment
     or surgery may be warranted for the treatment of Graves disease prior to conception. Because maternal antibodies
     from Graves disease can cross the placenta and affect fetal thyroid levels, the pregnancy should be monitored
     closely for fetal effects (ACOG, 2020a). Newborns born to persons with Graves disease should be followed up by a
     pediatric provider to monitor for neonatal Graves disease. As with other preexisting conditions, the nurse provides
     education to and support of the pregnant person regarding extra prenatal appointments for fetal surveillance and
     additional laboratory tests.

     Seizure Disorders
     Patients who have seizures and their support persons should be counseled on risk factors of the pregnant person
     and the fetus related to seizure disorders during pregnancy and the possibility of increased seizure activity. Fetal
     exposure to antiepileptic medications has been associated with congenital malformations, fetal growth restriction,
     and impaired neurodevelopmental outcomes (Li & Meador, 2022). Seizure disorders also increase the likelihood of
     complications of pregnancy, such as maternal and fetal mortality, cesarean delivery, preeclampsia, postpartum
     hemorrhage, preterm delivery, and chorioamnionitis (MacDonald et al., 2015). Physiologic changes during
     pregnancy can impact the dose of antiepileptic medication needed to achieve therapeutic effect. Frequent drug
     monitoring ensures therapeutic levels and can minimize the risk of seizures. Nurses play a key role in encouraging
     the pregnant person to keep appointments with the health-care provider who is monitoring the seizure disorder.

     Anemias
     A level of red blood cells or hemoglobin that is too low to supply enough oxygen to the tissues of the body is called
     anemia. The number of red blood cells or amount of hemoglobin necessary for adequate oxygen delivery varies by
     age, sex assigned at birth, smoking status, geographic elevation of living conditions, and pregnancy.

     Anemia affects populations worldwide in developed and developing countries (WHO, 2023a). During pregnancy,
     anemia has been linked with increased maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality, including postpartum
     hemorrhage, placental abruption, preterm birth, fetal growth restriction, and stillbirth (Shi et al., 2022). Current
     guidelines recommend screening for anemia during each trimester to minimize risks (ACOG, 2021a).

     Nutritional Anemias
     Dietary habits play an important role in preventing anemia. Diets deficient in iron, folate, and vitamin B12 can lead

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.1 · Preconception Conditions Affecting Pregnancy                                                                                              549

to anemia. For the prevention of iron deficiency anemia during pregnancy, current recommendations include taking
a daily iron supplement to support maternal and fetal iron levels (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine, 2020). Patients can be encouraged to increase iron levels by consuming foods rich in iron, such as meats,
beans or legumes, green leafy vegetables, iron-fortified cereals or whole grains, nuts, seeds, and dried fruits, shown
in Figure 12.3. Caffeine intake through tea and coffee can inhibit iron absorption, so patients should be counseled to
avoid caffeine around mealtimes. As with iron, folic acid can be supplemented through a prenatal vitamin to treat
anemia related to folic acid deficiency. Daily requirements for folic acid increase during pregnancy, and folic acid
intake can be increased by incorporating dark leafy vegetables, legumes, and animal proteins into a healthy diet.

FIGURE 12.3 Iron-Rich Foods Consuming iron-rich foods during pregnancy can reduce the risk of iron deficiency anemia. Iron-rich foods
include meats, beans or legumes, green leafy vegetables, iron-fortified cereals or whole grains, nuts, seeds, and dried fruits. (credit: "Foods
that increase iron levels" by "Forth with Life"/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Vitamin B12 deficiency is more common in patients with Crohn's disease or in those who have a history of
gastrectomy. Vitamin B12 deficiency may also be more common in vegan or vegetarian diets because vitamin B12 is
primarily found in meat, fish, eggs, and dairy. Monthly intramuscular (IM) injections with vitamin B12
(cyanocobalamin, a synthetic form of vitamin B12) or oral supplements can treat B12 deficiency during pregnancy.
The nurse can provide patient education at an individual or community level. Ensuring access to diverse food
options promotes a well-balanced diet and adequate intake of protein, vitamin C, vitamin A, and iron to minimize
anemia during pregnancy (Nana & Zema, 2018). Figure 12.4 shows foods rich in vitamin B12.
550  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     FIGURE 12.4 Foods Rich in Vitamin B12 Foods that contain high amounts of vitamin B12 include meat, fish, eggs, and dairy. Consuming
     these foods during pregnancy can help reduce B12 deficiency and therefore anemia. (credit: "Seafood Clams Free Stock Image" by Jakub
     Juszyski/stocksnap, CC0; "Higado de Ternera Blanca Fresco" by Javier Lastaras/Flickr, CC BY 2.0; "cereal, breakfast, food, . . ." by DMCA/
     pxfuel, CC0; "Small white round bowl of plain yogurt against a light colored background" by freefoodphotos/freeimageslive, CC BY 3.0;
     "Salmon on plate" by RDNE Stock project/Pexels, CC0; "3eggs" by ZabMilenko/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0)

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Nutritional Deficiency Due to Cultural Food Beliefs

     Cultural sensitivity is essential to establishing a trusting relationship with the patient and helping them understand
     their nutritional needs during pregnancy. A trusting relationship begins with respect for the patient's cultural food
     beliefs and practices. The nurse can take the following steps while caring for the patient:

         · Inquire about their beliefs, background, and practices related to food.
         · Educate the patient on the importance of adequate nutrient intake and the risks associated with anemia.
         · Identify food options that are culturally appropriate and nutrient dense.
         · Consult a nutritionist or health-care provider who has experience with the patient's cultural background.
         · Identify barriers to accessing nutritional food options.
         · Encourage the patient to interact with their family and support network to discuss ways to improve nutrition

             during pregnancy.
         · Collaborate with an interdisciplinary team, including a social worker and interpreter, to maintain respect for

             the patient's beliefs and practices.
         · Advocate for the health of the patient and the fetus.

     Sickle Cell Disease
     Due to advances in medicine, the average lifespan of people with sickle cell disease (SCD) is increasing. As a result,
     patients with SCD are able to become pregnant and give birth to healthy newborns. With regular prenatal care, these
     patients can reduce maternal and fetal risks during pregnancy. Some complications of SCD during pregnancy include
     preeclampsia, preterm labor, miscarriage, and fetal growth restriction. Preconception counseling and pregnancy
     planning can reduce the risks of these complications. Patients with SCD or sickle cell trait may be counseled on the
     need for additional genetic testing, reproductive technology, or prenatal testing. Nurses can provide emotional and
     psychosocial support to aid parents with the decision-making process.

     Physiologic changes of pregnancy can induce stress on various organs and lead to a sickle cell crisis, acute chest

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.1 · Preconception Conditions Affecting Pregnancy                                                                       551

syndrome, or preeclampsia and eclampsia. Sickle cell crises can be reduced by maintaining adequate hydration and
minimizing overexertion. Nurses can encourage patients to promptly visit their health-care provider when
experiencing nausea and vomiting during the first trimester. Patients with SCD who may become pregnant should be
counseled on the risks of pregnancy and the importance of prenatal care. Furthermore, patients taking medications
with teratogenic effects, such as hydroxyurea (Droxia), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, and iron
chelators, should be instructed to discontinue these medications prior to pregnancy (Jain et al., 2019).

Thalassemia
Thalassemia is an inherited blood disorder in which the blood contains an inadequate amount of hemoglobin. Two
types of polypeptide chains, alpha and beta, make up the hemoglobin molecule. Depending on which chain is
mutated, a person develops alpha thalassemia. When this occurs, the amount of hemoglobin decreases, and anemia
ensues.

Complications of pregnancy related to thalassemia include preterm birth, miscarriage, gestational hypertension,
gestational diabetes, placental abruption, urinary tract infection, and renal and gallbladder stones (Petrakos et al.,
2016). Patients with thalassemia should be monitored prior to and during pregnancy for cardiac problems, liver
dysfunction, infection, and endocrine disorders. Because the most common cause of mortality in people with
thalassemia is related to cardiac complications, it is important to closely monitor cardiac function. Liver dysfunction
may also occur due to iron overload and chronic anemia. Because patients may have a history of frequent blood
transfusions, testing for infections such as hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV, and cytomegalovirus may be indicated.
Screening for endocrine disorders such as diabetes or hypothyroidism can further reduce pregnancy risk. Chelation
therapy to decrease iron overload has been controversial during pregnancy and is generally reserved for severe
cases in which maternal risk outweighs fetal risk (Petrakos et al., 2016). For patients with thalassemia, the risk of
thrombosis increases with pregnancy, and patients should be educated on the prevention of blood clot formation
and monitored closely for signs of blood clots. Nurses can educate the patient on the signs and symptoms of blood
clots and the importance of undergoing testing and treatment as soon as possible.

Immune Thrombocytopenia
In the autoimmune disorder immune thrombocytopenia (ITP), platelets are destroyed, leading to low platelet
levels. Diagnosis is usually made when there is isolated thrombocytopenia without other associated etiologies
(ACOG, 2019b). First-line medications for treatment include corticosteroids and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG).
Platelet transfusions may be indicated if the platelet count is less than 50 × 109/L near delivery or if there are signs
of severe bleeding (ACOG, 2019b). Occasionally, newborns can develop thrombocytopenia from antibodies that
cross the placenta, although this is not common.

Respiratory Disorders
Management of respiratory disorders prior to and during pregnancy focuses on establishing adequate oxygenation.
Education on maternal and fetal risks related to pulmonary complications during pregnancy should be provided
during the preconception period or the first prenatal visit. Respiratory disorders that can complicate pregnancy
include cystic fibrosis, asthma, and tuberculosis.

Cystic Fibrosis
A genetic mutation in the transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene causes cystic fibrosis, a disorder in
which thick mucus builds up in various organs of the body, such as the lungs, pancreas, and intestines. Patients with
cystic fibrosis may experience pregnancy complications such as increased respiratory infections, impaired airway
clearance, pancreatic insufficiency, and nutritional deficiencies. Pancreatic insufficiency affects both insulin
production, resulting in diabetes, and production of digestive enzymes, resulting in malabsorption of some nutrients.
The nurse can promote healthy habits by encouraging patients with cystic fibrosis to adhere to their current regimen
related to medications, respiratory treatments, and dietary needs. Additional nursing interventions include
assessment and monitoring, collaboration with a multidisciplinary team, medication administration, assistance with
respiratory and nutritional support, and counseling and education. The other biological parent should be tested to
see if they are a carrier of CF to determine the risk of the fetus inheriting the disease.

Asthma
Patients with asthma who become pregnant have an increased risk of asthma worsening in severity. Acute asthma
exacerbations during pregnancy pose a risk for increased maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality. These risks
552  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     can be decreased when asthma is well controlled. Exacerbations may be characterized by shortness of breath,
     wheezing, cough, and chest tightness. Albuterol (Ventolin), shown in Figure 12.5, is the primary treatment for acute
     exacerbations during pregnancy. Inhaled or systemic steroids may be indicated if symptoms worsen or persist.
     Systemic steroids should be prescribed judiciously due to the risk of congenital anomalies, preeclampsia,
     gestational diabetes, and prematurity (American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology, 2023). Patients
     with asthma who become pregnant should be encouraged to identify and avoid exposure to triggers. The nurse
     should be prepared to teach patients about available medications and their side effects and remind them how to
     avoid triggers.

     FIGURE 12.5 Inhaler Use for Asthma during Pregnancy Inhaled bronchodilators, such as albuterol, can be used during pregnancy to
     treat asthma exacerbations and decrease the risk of maternal-fetal morbidity and mortality. (credit: "Asthma inhaler use" by United States
     National Institute of Health: Heart, Lung and Blood Institute/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

     Tuberculosis
     The bacterial illness tuberculosis (TB) is a global health problem that affects people of all ages. The bacterium
     Mycobacterium tuberculosis primarily impacts the lungs and can cause symptoms such as a chronic cough,
     hemoptysis, fever, night sweats, chills, fatigue, and chest pain; symptoms can range from mild to severe. People who
     live in close proximity with others, such as in overcrowded housing, homeless shelters, and prisons, are at an
     increased risk of exposure. A pregnant patient who has been exposed to TB should be promptly evaluated by their
     health-care provider. Screening can be done through a tuberculin skin or blood test, and if positive, a chest x-ray
     may be performed. The nurse can administer the tuberculin skin test and interpret the results 48 to 72 hours after
     administration, or the nurse may assist with collecting blood for the lab draw. Patients should be encouraged to
     adhere to the medication regimen, which can take several months, in order to eradicate the infection. Medications
     for active tuberculosis include isoniazid (Nydrazid), rifampin (Rifadin), and ethambutol (Etibi). All these drugs have
     an excellent safety record in pregnancy and are not associated with human fetal malformations. Monitoring for liver
     dysfunction, hepatitis, and medication interactions during treatment is generally recommended. A patient with
     tuberculosis should be placed in a negative pressure room on hospital admission to prevent the spread of infection.
     Untreated tuberculosis may increase the risk for low birth weight in the infant or, in rare cases, congenital
     tuberculosis (Leidecker & Dorman, 2016).

     Cardiac Disease
     Because pregnancy puts additional strain on the heart, patients with preexisting cardiac disease are at increased
     risk of cardiac complications. Preconception counseling should include the risk of further cardiac damage if the
     person becomes pregnant or whether the person's current cardiac status can support a pregnancy. The need to
     change cardiac medications based on risks to the growth and development of the fetus is also included in
     preconception counseling. Cardiac conditions prior to pregnancy include congenital heart disease, valvular disease,
     coronary artery disease, and aortic diseases.

     While congenital heart diseases range in severity, patients who become pregnant should be monitored primarily for
     arrhythmias and signs of heart failure. In cases of severe valvular disease, surgery may be indicated prior to
     conception. In patients with aortic diseases, the greatest risk during pregnancy includes aortic dissection or rupture,
     which can be fatal (Coleman, 2019; Kamel et al., 2016). Patients with coronary artery disease prior to pregnancy are
     at increased risk of acute cardiac events during pregnancy, such as myocardial infarction (Coleman, 2019).
     Monitoring during pregnancy may include routine cardiac assessment and imaging, such as echocardiogram and
     electrocardiogram. Patients should be counseled on the risk of cardiac dysfunction during pregnancy and the

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                 12.1 · Preconception Conditions Affecting Pregnancy                                      553

associated morbidity and mortality (Coleman, 2019). Classification of cardiac disease can assist the health-care
team with evaluating risk. Table 12.5 summarizes the risks to the pregnant person and the fetus based on type and
severity of cardiac disease (Meng et al., 2023). Management should involve a multidisciplinary approach, with
cardiology playing an active role when indicated and delivery occurring at a facility with a high-risk pregnancy unit.
Preexisting cardiac disease in the pregnant person increases the risk of fetal hypoxia and preterm birth.

Class      Increased Fetal Risk

Class I    No increased risk of maternal mortality
           None or mild increased risk of morbidity

Class II   Small increased risk of maternal mortality
           Moderate increased risk of morbidity

Class III  Significant increased risk of maternal mortality
           Significant increased risk of severe morbidity

                                 Class IV Extremely high risk of maternal morbidity and mortality

                                     TABLE 12.5 Maternal and Fetal Risks Associated with Classifications of
                                     Cardiac Disease

Renal Disease
Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) often experience decreased fertility. However, when pregnancy does
occur, maternal complications include decreased kidney function, hypertensive disorders, miscarriage, and
exacerbation of other medical conditions. Fetal complications include low birth weight, stillbirth, and prematurity.
Because of these risks, pregnancy planning is crucial, and contraception should be encouraged until the patient is
ready to conceive (Wiles et al., 2019). Preconception interventions include counseling patients on risks during
pregnancy, adjusting medications to minimize fetal risk, obtaining a baseline health assessment with diagnostic
tests, and managing other comorbidities. A multidisciplinary approach can incorporate nephrology to optimize renal
function during pregnancy. Interventions during pregnancy may include close monitoring of lab tests and imaging,
managing hypertension, preventing preeclampsia, optimizing nutrition, evaluating for gestational diabetes, and
monitoring therapeutic drug levels when indicated. Fetal imaging can evaluate growth and assess for congenital
anomalies.

Immune Disorders
Because autoimmune disorders are more common in persons assigned female at birth, they are often the most
common preexisting condition relative to pregnancy (Merz et al., 2022). Autoimmune disorders range in severity and
symptoms. Complications of autoimmune disease generally include miscarriage, stillbirth, fetal growth restriction,
and prematurity (Merz et al., 2022). Patient education prior to pregnancy plays a pivotal role in risk factor reduction.
Often this requires a multidisciplinary approach with increased involvement of multiple specialists for complex
cases. As with other preexisting conditions, optimizing disease management prior to pregnancy is pivotal. Pregnancy
planning should take into account the disease course and how medications impact conception and fetal
development.

HIV
A patient who has human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) can give birth to a healthy infant who does not have HIV.
While the virus can cross the placenta, viral suppression through antiretroviral therapy (ART) and adequate prenatal
care can significantly reduce this risk. Counseling prior to conception and during pregnancy should focus on
adhering to treatment regimens and minimizing risk factors. The nurse should teach the patient ways to reduce risks
of HIV perinatal transmission, such as limiting alcohol, tobacco, and illicit drug use and avoiding unprotected
intercourse. Patients who are planning to conceive can be educated on the increased risk of stillbirth, low birth
weight, and preterm delivery.

The CDC currently recommends HIV screening for all patients who are pregnant (CDC, 2022c), but additional
screening may be indicated for high-risk populations. Risk factors for acquiring HIV during pregnancy include
554  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     multiple sex partners, IV drug use, and recent diagnosis of another sexually transmitted infection (Szlachta-McGinn
     et al., 2020). Management during pregnancy includes antiretroviral therapy (ART), scheduled cesarean delivery in
     the presence of high viral loads, and antiretroviral therapy for infants born to people who are HIV positive. Health-
     care providers and nurses can educate patients who are HIV positive that they can use formula or donor milk for
     newborn nutrition, or patients who have taken ART during pregnancy, delivery, and postpartum can breast-feed if
     they understand that their risk of transmission to the newborn through breast milk is less than 1 percent (CDC,
     2023). Patients should continue ART while breast-feeding.

     The HIV-positive patient should be monitored for opportunistic infections, such as oral thrush, during pregnancy as
     well as evaluated for other sexually transmitted infections. Tuberculosis testing should be performed because of the
     risk that a latent tuberculosis infection can become active. Serial lab monitoring should include CD4 counts,
     complete blood counts, renal and liver function tests, and viral loads.

     Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
     In the autoimmune disease systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), the body's immune system attacks healthy
     tissues in multiple organ systems. Ideally, SLE should be in a dormant state for 6 months prior to conception. An
     increase in SLE flares can occur during pregnancy. The antibodies most concerning during pregnancy are the Anti-Ro
     (SSA) and Anti-La (SSB) antibodies because they cross the placenta and can lead to neonatal heart block or
     neonatal lupus. Screening for these antibodies during pregnancy can help evaluate the risk of neonatal lupus. In
     pregnancy, SLE carries an increased risk of miscarriage, stillbirth, preeclampsia, and thrombosis. The presence of
     anti-phospholipid antibodies increases the risk of thrombotic events, so anticoagulation may be initiated. The more
     severe the course of the disease, the greater the risk to the pregnant person and fetus. Pregnancy planning helps to
     stabilize the disease and reduce the risks. Identification and management of associated complications, such as
     lupus nephritis, can lead to better outcomes.

     Rheumatoid Arthritis
     The systemic autoimmune disease rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized primarily by joint inflammation, but it
     can impact other vital organs as well. Patients with RA are more likely to experience a cesarean delivery, develop
     preeclampsia, or deliver prematurely (Sim et al., 2023). Signs and symptoms of RA often improve in patients during
     pregnancy, beginning in the first trimester. Symptoms of RA during pregnancy include fatigue, joint pain, and
     swelling of the hands and feet. Health-care providers should review current medications to establish safe use during
     pregnancy. Certain medications, such as methotrexate (Trexall), are contraindicated during pregnancy. Patients
     should be counseled on the risk of adverse outcomes and the signs of RA to monitor during pregnancy.

     12.2 Conditions Limited to Pregnancy

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the pathophysiology and management of conditions limited to pregnancy occurring in the first
             trimester of pregnancy

         · Explain the pathophysiology and management of various conditions limited to pregnancy that occur
             throughout pregnancy

         · Explain the pathophysiology and management of conditions limited to pregnancy occurring in the second
             trimester of pregnancy

         · Explain the pathophysiology and management of conditions limited to pregnancy occurring in the third
             trimester of pregnancy

     In addition to preexisting conditions, certain other conditions can develop during pregnancy that increase the risk
     for adverse maternal-fetal outcomes. Conditions can range from mild to severe and can have a lifelong impact on
     the parent and the baby. This chapter outlines these conditions through discussion of their pathophysiology and
     management. Examples of conditions that arise during pregnancy include preeclampsia, gestational diabetes,
     abortion, placenta previa, and infection. Through increased understanding and awareness of these conditions,
     nurses can identify patients at risk and develop patient care plans to minimize adverse outcomes.

     First Trimester

     The first trimester, which spans the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, is critical to embryonic and fetal development.

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 · Conditions Limited to Pregnancy                                                                                    555

Conditions that arise during this time may lead to early pregnancy loss. Spontaneous abortions, or miscarriages, are
more common during this trimester. First prenatal visits often occur during this time to identify and evaluate risk
factors.

Abortion
The term abortion refers to any pregnancy loss during the first trimester or before 20 weeks' gestation. An abortion
may be spontaneous, as in cases of miscarriage, or induced, as through medical or surgical intervention. In early
pregnancy loss, there is an empty gestational sac or absent fetal heart rate before 13 weeks of pregnancy (ACOG,
2018b). More recently, the term early pregnancy loss has been used for unexpected losses during the first trimester,
and the term abortion is reserved for terminated pregnancies that are induced (Arendt & Long, 2020). For the sake
of simplicity, this chapter will use the term abortion to refer to any pregnancy that terminates or is terminated during
the first trimester.

According to the World Health Organization (2021), patients seek an induced abortion in six out of 10 unintended
pregnancies. Further, approximately 45% of all abortions are unsafe, nearly all of which occur in developing
countries (WHO, 2021). In the United States, the number of induced abortions reported in 2021 was 625,978, with
an abortion rate of 11.6 per 1,000 pregnancies for patients 15 to 44 years old (CDC, 2022d). Unsafe abortion is a
leading preventable cause of maternal morbidity and mortality and can negatively impact a patient's health, social
circumstances, and finances, while also creating additional strain for the community (WHO, 2021). While increasing
access to health care through policy change can promote opportunities to perform safe abortion care, nurses must
advocate and care for patients on an individual level.

Complete
Abortions can be classified into different categories including complete, incomplete, threatened, missed, recurrent,
and inevitable. A complete abortion occurs when a pregnancy terminates and all products of conception are
expelled from the uterus, such as the fetus, placenta, and other tissue. Because the uterus is empty, no additional
intervention is indicated.

Incomplete
In contrast, an incomplete abortion occurs when some of the products of conception are still present in the uterus
after the pregnancy terminates. These contents can include parts of the fetus, placenta, and other tissues. An
incomplete abortion is one complication of a medically induced abortion, spontaneous abortion, or surgical
abortion. Once the pregnancy is terminated, the uterus does not completely contract to expel all its contents. As a
result, the patient may experience persistent bleeding, cramping, or abdominal pain afterward and is at increased
risk of infection. Because of the risk of complications, patients who experience an incomplete abortion often require
medical intervention, by taking a medication called misoprostol (Cytotec), or surgical intervention, by undergoing a
cervical dilation and curettage (D&C) (England, 2023). A D&C is a surgical procedure in which the contents of the
uterus are removed by dilating the cervix and using a surgical instrument (curette) to evacuate the uterine tissue and
lining.

Threatened
A threatened abortion occurs when bleeding is present with no cervical dilation during the first trimester or before
20 weeks' gestation. This term may be used synonymously with threatened miscarriage because the patient
experiences signs and symptoms similar to a miscarriage, also known as a spontaneous abortion. Signs and
symptoms include vaginal bleeding, abdominal cramping, and back pain. While vaginal bleeding during the first
trimester occurs in approximately 25 percent of pregnancies, only about half of those patients actually experience a
spontaneous abortion; however, this incidence increases to approximately 80 percent if cramping coincides with
bleeding (Sapra et al., 2016).

Missed
A missed abortion, also referred to as a missed miscarriage, is a type of abortion with no expulsion of the products
of conception and a closed cervix. The patient may experience minimal to no signs or symptoms of miscarriage
(Cunningham et al., 2018). Instead, the pregnant person could continue to experience pregnancy signs and
symptoms such as breast tenderness and morning sickness. The diagnosis often occurs during routine ultrasound
when results reveal no fetal heart rate or growth. Because of the risk of complications, such as infection and
prolonged bleeding, the patient may need medical or surgical intervention to remove all the products of conception
556  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     from the uterus.

     Recurrent
     A recurrent abortion, also known as a recurrent pregnancy loss, refers to two or more consecutive spontaneous
     abortions that occur before 20 weeks' gestation. While the exact pathogenesis is unclear, suspected causes of
     recurrent pregnancy loss include genetic abnormalities, uterine defects, endometrial problems, infection,
     autoimmune disorders, hormone imbalances, and unhealthy lifestyle habits (Dimitriadis et al., 2020). Diagnosis and
     management involve a thorough medical history and physical assessment with additional testing to evaluate for
     underlying etiology.

     Inevitable
     An inevitable pregnancy loss occurs when the cervix dilates or the membranes rupture without delivery of the
     fetus or placenta (Arendt & Long, 2020). Usually, these circumstances lead to vaginal bleeding and imminent
     spontaneous abortion. Signs and symptoms are similar to those of a spontaneous abortion, which include vaginal
     bleeding, abdominal cramping, and back pain. Often, medical or surgical interventions may be indicated to ensure
     complete removal of all uterine contents.

     Termination
     Termination during the first trimester of pregnancy is a procedure that can be performed medically or surgically. It is
     generally considered safe and effective. Medical termination of pregnancy typically involves taking two pills:
     mifepristone (Mifeprex) followed by misoprostol (Cytotec). Mifepristone blocks the action of progesterone, a
     hormone needed to sustain a pregnancy. Misoprostol causes uterine contractions and cervical dilation, which induce
     labor to expel the products of conception. The recommended method of surgical termination of pregnancy is
     cervical dilation and curettage through electric vacuum suction or manual aspiration. Antibiotics may be prescribed
     before the procedure to reduce the risk of infection (Lui & Ho, 2020). Table 12.6 summarizes the different types of
     abortions and their symptoms.

     Type                                        Symptoms

     Complete Heavy bleeding or cramping, passing of tissue, loss of pregnancy symptoms

     Incomplete Persistent bleeding, cramping, abdominal pain, signs of infection

     Threatened Vaginal bleeding, abdominal cramping, and back pain

     Missed       No symptoms, but may still experience symptoms of pregnancy

     Recurrent    Vaginal bleeding, cramping, passing of tissue, loss of pregnancy symptoms, emotional distress in
                  two or more consecutive pregnancies

     Inevitable Vaginal bleeding, abdominal cramping, and back pain

     Termination  Vaginal bleeding, cramping, pain after the procedure, nausea and vomiting from medications,
                  emotional distress

     TABLE 12.6 Types of Abortions and Symptoms

     Nursing care for all types of abortion is the same and involves the following:

     · Assessment: severity of bleeding, symptoms of pregnancy, signs of infection, emotional and psychologic state,
        pain level

     · Medications: administration of medications for pain, infection, or to assist with termination
     · Monitoring: monitor for complications such as significant blood loss or infection
     · Support: emotional and psychologic support as needed; refer to grief counseling or mental health services
     · Referral: refer based on underlying etiology; patient may require fertility specialist or multidisciplinary

        approach due to comorbid conditions

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 · Conditions Limited to Pregnancy                                                                                   557

· Education: teach patients how to monitor for complications at home and when to seek medical attention

        LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

Nurse's Response to a Dilemma Related to Abortion Laws

Imagine you are the nurse caring for a patient who is pregnant and desires an abortion for personal and medical
reasons. However, the jurisdiction where you practice recently implemented laws that strictly limit access to
abortion services. These laws prohibit abortions beyond the gestational age that the patient has reached.

As a nurse, you understand that you have an obligation to respect patient autonomy, but also to comply with the
legal framework and professional guidelines. Patient autonomy means supporting the patient's right to make health-
care decisions about their own body. Meanwhile, nurses are expected to practice within the scope of the law. In this
scenario, you face the dilemma of supporting the patient's decision or adhering to the current law. What would you
do?

In this situation, the nurse can respect the patient's autonomy and right to make decisions by actively listening to
the patient's concerns and remaining nonjudgmental. The nurse can review options with the patient while
discussing current legal restrictions. If the nurse does not adhere to laws and regulations governing their nursing
practice, they may be subject to legal action, which includes the revoking of licensure. Nevertheless, the nurse can
continue to support the patient through advocacy, resource provision, and referral. The nurse can consult and
collaborate with other members of the health-care team, including an ethics committee, to navigate the complex
decision-making process. Ultimately, the goal of the nurse is to prioritize patient-centered care while abiding by the
legal and professional framework that guides nursing practice.

Medical Management
Management of abortion during the first trimester of pregnancy begins with evaluation of the underlying etiology
through identification of risk factors. Patients with recurrent pregnancy loss may undergo additional testing to
identify potential causes, such as chromosomal testing, ultrasound for uterine anomalies, thyroid functions,
antiphospholipid antibodies, and inherited thrombophilia (van Dijk et al., 2020). Patients who experience abortion
may also experience emotional and psychologic stress. Nurses can provide emotional support and education
regarding reproductive technology and referral to a grief counselor to assist with the current loss or to a fertility
specialist for future pregnancies.

Blighted Ovum
A blighted ovum is also referred to as an anembryonic pregnancy because a fertilized egg implants into the uterus,
but an embryo does not form. The exact pathophysiology is unknown but is likely related to underlying genetic or
chromosomal abnormalities. Other risk factors include obesity, advanced maternal age, uterine defects, hormone
imbalances, or immune disorders (Chaudhry et al., 2023). Diagnosis occurs with ultrasound when there is evidence
of a gestational sac but no formation of an embryo. The patient may experience symptoms such as spotting,
bleeding, or cramping. Management includes serial monitoring of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels, serial
ultrasound scans, administration of misoprostol, or surgical treatment with vacuum aspiration (Chaudhry et al.,
2023). Complications of treatment may include infection, heavy bleeding, or perforation of the uterus.

Ectopic Pregnancy
An ectopic pregnancy occurs when a fertilized egg becomes implanted outside the uterus. Common sites of
extrauterine implantation are shown in Figure 12.6. Key risk factors include prior ectopic pregnancy, pelvic infection,
infertility treatment, and tubal surgery (ACOG, 2018c). Patients may present with signs or symptoms such as vaginal
bleeding, abdominal or pelvic pain, syncope, or shock; however, a patient may be asymptomatic until rupture
occurs. Transvaginal ultrasound and serial hCG levels are used to rule out an intrauterine pregnancy and diagnose
an ectopic pregnancy.
558  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     FIGURE 12.6 Locations of an Ectopic Pregnancy An ectopic pregnancy occurs when a fertilized egg implants outside the uterus. This
     image demonstrates the many different locations where an ectopic pregnancy can occur. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
     under CC BY 4.0 license)

     An ectopic pregnancy may be managed medically or surgically. Medical or surgical intervention is indicated in the
     presence of worsening abdominal or pelvic pain, increasing hCG levels, or evidence of tubal rupture (ACOG, 2019). A
     medication called methotrexate (Trexall) can be prescribed to medically manage an ectopic pregnancy, but the
     patient must meet specific criteria, such as hemodynamic stability with sonographic evidence of a small gestational
     sac outside the uterus. Patients who are unstable require emergent surgical intervention due to the risk of rupture of
     the ectopic pregnancy, which can result in significant internal bleeding and maternal death. Surgery can be
     performed laparoscopically to remove the ectopic pregnancy, and removal of the fallopian tube may be needed if a
     tubal pregnancy is present. The nurse should monitor the patient for signs of shock and be prepared to administer
     rapid fluid resuscitation, blood products, and oxygen.

     Gestational Trophoblastic Disease
     Patients below 20 years or above 40 years of age are at increased risk for abnormal growth of placental
     trophoblastic tissue during pregnancy. This abnormal growth occurs inside the uterus after conception and results in
     a group of rare conditions termed gestational trophoblastic disease. Gestational trophoblastic disease can be
     categorized as molar pregnancies or gestational trophoblastic tumors. In a molar pregnancy, tissue in the uterus
     that would have formed the placenta instead grows abnormally as trophoblastic tissue. There is no viable fetus in a
     molar pregnancy. Patients with a molar pregnancy may experience irregular vaginal bleeding, enlarged uterus,
     elevated hCG levels, and hyperemesis (Ngan et al., 2021). Diagnosis is most often made by ultrasound during the
     first trimester. If left untreated, the trophoblasts and abnormal tissue in a molar pregnancy (or even normal
     pregnancy) can develop into gestational trophoblastic tumors, which can be benign or malignant. Treatment is a
     D&C and a follow-up series of serum quantitative hCG tests to ensure that all trophoblastic tissue was removed and
     that no malignant gestational trophoblastic neoplasms develop. It is recommended that the patient not conceive for
     up to 1 year to decrease the risk of developing a malignancy.

     Hyperemesis Gravidarum
     Severe nausea and vomiting during the first trimester, leading to electrolyte imbalances, weight loss, malnutrition,
     and dehydration, is a condition called hyperemesis gravidarum. The specific pathophysiology behind hyperemesis
     gravidarum is unknown; however, suspected underlying factors include hormonal changes due to elevated hCG
     levels, decreased gastric motility, genetic predisposition, and psychologic factors, such as stress and anxiety. While
     nausea and vomiting commonly occur during the first trimester, hyperemesis gravidarum is the most severe form
     and may require hospitalization for fluid and electrolyte replacement. Complications related to hyperemesis
     gravidarum can negatively impact fetal outcomes and lead to low birth weight and preterm birth (Fejzo et al., 2019).
     Patients may be prescribed antiemetic medications. Patients may be directed to take thiamine (vitamin B1) to
     reduce the risk of refeeding syndrome and Wernicke encephalopathy related to thiamine deficiency (Fejzo et al.,

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 · Conditions Limited to Pregnancy                                                                                      559

2019). Recent studies have identified specific placental proteins and hormone receptors that link the placenta to
the underlying etiology of hyperemesis gravidarum (Fejzo et al., 2019).

Diagnosis is often made by exclusion. The health-care provider evaluates for all causes of severe nausea and
vomiting in a patient during the first trimester. Other conditions with a similar presentation that must be ruled out
include gastrointestinal problems (appendicitis, cholecystitis, pancreatitis, and gastroenteritis), endocrine
abnormalities (hyperthyroidism, diabetic ketoacidosis), neurologic conditions (brain tumors, migraines,
hydrocephalus), drug withdrawal, urinary tract infection, or molar pregnancy (Fejzo et al., 2019). Once diagnosis is
confirmed, management focuses on optimizing the patient's fluid and nutritional status and often follows an
algorithm.

During the first trimester, nausea and vomiting are common symptoms and can be managed on an outpatient basis.
With appropriate intervention, the symptoms can be reduced to a tolerable level to improve the patient's quality of
life. The nurse's role in managing nausea and vomiting during the first trimester includes the following (Fejzo et al.,
2019):

  1. Assessment: The nurse should assess the severity of symptoms to determine the level of intervention.
  2. Support: The nurse can provide emotional support as indicated to promote an improved quality of life. The

        nurse can provide the patient with resources to ensure the patient receives the care they need.
  3. Education: Mild symptoms may require diet and lifestyle modifications. The nurse can educate patients to eat

        small frequent meals, avoid spicy foods, drink fluids, and rest.
  4. Medication administration and education: Moderate symptoms may require additional intervention, such as

        through complementary or pharmacologic treatments. The nurse may administer or recommend treatments
        based on patient assessment and should educate the patient on potential side effects. Examples of
        complementary treatments include ginger and acupuncture. Pharmacologic treatments include pyridoxine
        (vitamin B6), doxylamine (Unisom), diphenhydramine (Benadryl), metoclopramide (Reglan), promethazine
        (Phenergan), or ondansetron (Zofran).
  5. Outpatient or inpatient care: Severe symptoms may require hospitalization for management of dehydration
        and electrolyte imbalances such as decreased potassium. In cases of malnutrition, patients may be
        prescribed parenteral nutrition or enteral tube feedings. The nurse may be caring for the patient on an
        inpatient basis.

Conditions Occurring Throughout the Pregnancy

Certain conditions can occur throughout pregnancy and result in a high-risk pregnancy. These conditions include
multiple gestation, intrauterine fetal demise, and infection.

Multiple Gestation
A multiple gestation pregnancy is one in which there is more than one fetus. A twin pregnancy can be dizygotic
(fraternal), where there are two separate fertilized eggs, or monozygotic (identical), where a single fertilized egg
splits during development. Twin pregnancies can be further classified as monochorionic or dichorionic and
monoamniotic or diamniotic. The chorion refers to the placenta, so a monochorionic twin pregnancy has one
placenta, and a dichorionic pregnancy has two placentas. The amnion refers to the number of amniotic sacs, so a
monoamniotic pregnancy has one amniotic sac, and a diamniotic pregnancy has two. Depending on development in
the first trimester, a twin pregnancy may be categorized as monochorionic-monoamniotic, monochorionic-
diamniotic, or dichorionic-diamniotic. Figure 12.7 shows the development of these different categories.

Factors that increase risk for multiple gestation include a family history of multiples, older age, high parity, and being
African American. Advances in assisted reproductive technology increase the risk of multiple gestation, as through
the implantation of multiple embryos or the fertilization of multiple eggs. Patients with multiple gestation
pregnancies require increased monitoring due to increased risk of complications. These complications include
hyperemesis gravidarum, anemia, gestational diabetes, hypertensive disorders, placental insufficiency, increased
size of the uterus, preterm labor, preterm delivery, and twin-to-twin transfusion (D'Alton & Breslin, 2020).
Management includes ultrasound monitoring, nutritional support, bed rest, and pharmacologic therapies. Serial
ultrasound scans may be used to detect abnormalities in amniotic fluid volume, cervical length, and fetal growth
(D'Alton & Breslin, 2020). When a placenta is shared during a monochorionic pregnancy, both fetuses are at risk for
a twin-to-twin transfusion caused by an imbalance in fetal blood flow. Serial ultrasound scans can detect this
560  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     complication to determine the need for additional intervention. Patients with multiple gestation pregnancies may
     require nutritional counseling because of increased nutritional needs. Bed rest may be ordered in cases of
     impending preterm delivery. Medications may be prescribed to manage problems such as preeclampsia, gestational
     diabetes, preterm labor, and urinary tract infection. The method of delivery depends on a variety of factors and the
     presence of complications.

     FIGURE 12.7 Development of Twin Pregnancy Twin pregnancies are classified by the number of placentas (chorions) and the number of
     amniotic sacs (amnions). This image displays how each type develops during the first trimester.
     (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Intrauterine Fetal Demise
     The death of a fetus that occurs after 20 weeks' gestation is called intrauterine fetal demise, or intrauterine fetal
     death (ACOG, 2020b). An intrauterine fetal demise will be diagnosed when there is no fetal heart rate detected on
     ultrasound (ACOG, 2020b; Maslovich & Burke, 2022). This diagnosis may occur during a routine prenatal visit or
     during labor. Patients may experience decreased or absent fetal movement prior to diagnosis, which is one sign of
     impending fetal demise. According to ACOG, risk factors associated with fetal demise include non-Hispanic Black
     race, advanced maternal age, multiple gestation, male sex of fetus, maternal obesity, nulliparous pregnancy,

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 · Conditions Limited to Pregnancy                                                                                       561

smoking and alcohol use, history of prior fetal demise, pregnancy through reproductive technology, and comorbid
conditions (ACOG, 2020b). Specific comorbid conditions that increase the risk include hypertension, diabetes, renal
disease, autoimmune disorders, cholestasis of pregnancy, and antiphospholipid syndrome; specific causes may
include placental and umbilical cord abnormalities, fetal growth restriction, genetic and chromosomal conditions,
and infection; many times, no cause is found (ACOG, 2020b).

One complication of fetal demise is disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), which increases in likelihood
when the fetal demise is undiagnosed for several weeks. DIC is a serious condition categorized by widespread
coagulopathy and tiny blood clots that form throughout the body. It often follows placental abruption or sepsis, and
management involves fluid resuscitation, blood product replacement, antibiotic administration, frequent lab
monitoring, and close clinical evaluation (Maslovich & Burke, 2022). When intrauterine fetal demise or spontaneous
abortion occurs, fetal resorption may occur. During fetal resorption, fetal tissues are broken down into simple
molecules, which are absorbed by the body of the pregnant person. This is an unusual phenomenon, and there are
typically no signs of pregnancy. In the event of signs of bleeding or cramping, the patient should seek medical
attention for further evaluation and monitoring. Nurses play a key role in providing support to both the patient and
the support person, as well as monitoring the patient's status.

Infections
Patients can develop infection at any time during pregnancy. Infections that occur early in pregnancy typically have
more detrimental effects on the fetus due to organogenesis and critical fetal development that occurs during that
time. Infections can be vertically transmitted across the placenta, as with TORCH infections and COVID-19, or the
fetus can be exposed during the labor and delivery process, as with group B streptococcus. Screening for infection
during the first trimester can many times lead to identification and treatment to minimize risk to the pregnant
person and the fetus.

The nurse's role in caring for patients who are impacted by infection during pregnancy includes education,
prevention, assessment, screening, collaboration, referral, treatment and medication administration, and counseling
and support. Education and prevention involve discussing safe sex practices, discussing the maternal-fetal risks
related to infection, administering vaccinations, and promoting consistent prenatal care. The nurse assesses for
signs and symptoms of infections and performs routine screenings, such as for group B streptococcus and sexually
transmitted infections. The nurse collaborates with the health-care team to develop a multidisciplinary care plan,
then administers treatments and medications accordingly. Throughout the patient's pregnancy, the nurse provides
counseling and support to optimize maternal-fetal health and minimize risks.

Hepatitis
Hepatitis during pregnancy can lead to significant morbidity and mortality for both the pregnant person and the
fetus. Hepatitis B and hepatitis C viruses can be vertically transmitted to the fetus. Therefore, patients are routinely
screened during initial prenatal visits to minimize risk and initiate treatment. The initial screening test for hepatitis B
will detect the presence of hepatitis B antigen (HBsAg). If the test is positive, additional testing is performed, and
antivirals may be started, depending on viral load (Chilaka & Konje, 2021). Newborns of hepatitis B seropositive
birthing parents should receive the hepatitis B vaccine and hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) in the first 12 hours
of life. The initial screening test for hepatitis C detects antibodies to the hepatitis C virus that are present in the
blood. Patients positive for hepatitis C will undergo additional testing to assess viral load and liver function. Antiviral
therapy is generally deferred until the postpartum period because of the limited safety profile of the medication and
risks to the fetus (CDC, 2021a).

Patients infected with hepatitis may be at risk for complications such as preterm delivery, cholestasis of pregnancy,
gestational diabetes, and delivering infants of low birth weight (Nwaohiri et al., 2018). Additional complications
include preeclampsia, liver failure, and spontaneous abortion. Risk of vertical transmission increases in the
presence of HIV co-infection. Depending on the facility, patients may be screened universally or only in cases of high
risk (Nwaohiri et al., 2018). Antiviral therapy may be considered on an individual basis. Breast-feeding is not
contraindicated unless nipples are cracked and bleeding, which could lead to viral transmission. After birth,
newborns will need to be screened and monitored for the hepatitis C virus and be treated accordingly.

HIV
Patients with HIV are at risk for transmitting the virus to the fetus during pregnancy, during delivery, or following
562  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     birth through breast-feeding. (See HIV/AIDS earlier in this chapter.)

     TORCH
     TORCH infections can be vertically transmitted to the fetus from the pregnant person and significantly impair fetal
     development. Nurses provide education on the signs and symptoms of the different infections and the perinatal
     complications.

     Toxoplasmosis gondii
     Toxoplasmosis gondii is a protozoan parasite that infects domestic and nondomestic cats. It can be spread through
     contact with cat feces or through contaminated food, such as uncooked meat or raw vegetables. When a patient
     becomes infected, the parasite can cross the placenta to infect the fetus. Treatment depends on gestational age. For
     pregnancies less than 18 weeks, spiramycin (Selectomycin) is recommended and must be obtained from the U.S.
     Food and Drug Administration (CDC, 2022e). To reduce the risk of infection, patients who are pregnant or planning
     to become pregnant should be instructed to avoid handling cat feces and raw meat, to perform proper hand hygiene,
     and to thoroughly cook foods.

     Other (Syphilis)
     Syphilis is a bacterial infection caused by Treponema pallidum that can lead to intrauterine fetal demise, preterm
     birth, neonatal death, or congenital syphilis. Syphilis is spread through sexual contact or exposure to infected blood,
     as with infected needles. Vertical transmission also occurs from pregnant person to fetus. One sign of primary
     syphilis is the presence of a painless lesion (chancre) at the infection site that may be accompanied by
     lymphadenopathy. If untreated, primary syphilis can progress into secondary syphilis and cause more systemic
     effects. Patients are routinely screened for syphilis early in pregnancy during the first prenatal visit. Nontreponemal
     tests used to detect antibodies to the bacterium are the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test or the
     rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test. If either test is positive, a treponemal test, such as the fluorescent treponemal
     antibody absorption (FTA-ABS) test, may be ordered to detect the presence of bacteria (U.S. Preventive Services
     Task Force, 2018). Patients with positive screening tests often undergo additional testing in addition to treatment
     with penicillin. Both the pregnant person and the fetus are closely monitored during pregnancy to assess for
     additional complications.

     Rubella
     Rubella, a viral infection also known as German measles, is primarily transmitted through respiratory droplets.
     When a patient becomes infected during pregnancy, the virus can cross the placenta and cause congenital rubella
     syndrome. Infection during the first trimester carries the greatest risk. Infections that occur later in pregnancy have
     a lower risk of adverse fetal outcomes. Congenital abnormalities associated with rubella infection include congenital
     heart defects, cataracts, deafness, and central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities. Other abnormalities include
     fetal growth restriction, hepatosplenomegaly, and thrombocytopenia. Management centers on prevention through
     vaccination prior to pregnancy, since there is currently no treatment. In cases of rubella infection during pregnancy,
     the fetus should be closely monitored for complications, such as growth restriction. Postnatal management includes
     supportive care with engagement of a multidisciplinary team.

     Cytomegalovirus
     Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a virus in the herpesvirus family. When contracted during pregnancy, it can lead to
     congenital CMV infection. Transmission occurs through contact with body fluids, including breast milk, saliva, urine,
     and feces. Patients at the greatest risk of infection are childcare providers such as day care workers and teachers,
     patients who are immunosuppressed or have a history of transplant, patients located in high-risk areas, and nurses.
     Patients may be asymptomatic or have flu-like symptoms, although patients who are immunosuppressed can
     develop signs of severe systemic infection. Fetal complications of congenital CMV include hearing loss,
     thrombocytopenia, fetal growth restriction, ventriculomegaly, chorioretinitis, hepatosplenomegaly, and
     developmental delay (March of Dimes, 2021). There is no routine screening during pregnancy for congenital CMV;
     however, the patient may undergo additional testing based on ultrasound findings and a high-risk history of
     infection. Like many viral infections, management primarily involves supportive care. Prevention should focus on
     proper hand hygiene and minimizing exposure to infected persons.

     Herpes Simplex Virus
     Herpes simplex is a viral infection caused by herpesvirus HSV-1 or HSV-2 and is spread through sexual contact. It

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                12.2 · Conditions Limited to Pregnancy                    563

can also affect the mouth, lips, and oral cavity. Infection is commonly characterized by vesicular lesions around the
mouth or genital areas. Patients may also exhibit signs of fever, lymphadenopathy, malaise, and meningitis. There is
no cure for the virus, but treatment with antiviral therapy can reduce symptoms, shedding, and possibly
transmission. Neonatal herpes infection can result from the transmission of herpes during pregnancy or childbirth
and can lead to significant complications, such as blisters on the skin, eyes, or mouth (SEM), CNS effects such as
seizures, and disseminated effects such as organ failure and death. Patients should be monitored during pregnancy
for outbreaks and treated with antiviral therapy accordingly. The administration of antiviral suppressive therapy,
such as acyclovir (Zovirax), is recommended starting at 36 weeks' gestation for patients with primary outbreaks or a
history of genital herpes (Urato, 2020). If active lesions are present on the perineum, labia, or cervix at the onset of
labor or rupture of membranes, a cesarean birth is recommended to reduce the risk of transmission.

Varicella
Varicella, or chickenpox, is a highly contagious disease caused by the varicella zoster virus that is spread through
airborne particles or direct contact with infected persons. Infection during pregnancy can lead to intrauterine fetal
demise. Congenital varicella may result in skin scarring; eye, limb, or neurologic abnormalities; anemia;
thrombocytopenia; and low birth weight. Patients who are pregnant and have never been infected with the virus or
received the vaccine are at greatest risk. The greatest risk of newborns contracting neonatal varicella occurs when
the mother contracts varicella and develops a rash 5 days before or 2 days after delivery (CDC, 2022f). Management
includes supportive care, antiviral therapy, and close monitoring.

GBS
The bacterium group B streptococcus (GBS) is commonly found in the vagina or rectum of healthy patients. When
transmitted during delivery, it can lead to significant neonatal complications, including meningitis, pneumonia, and
sepsis. Screening for GBS occurs between 36 and 38 weeks' gestation to evaluate neonatal risk at delivery. Risk
factors for early-onset neonatal sepsis caused by GBS include prolonged rupture of membranes, low birth weight,
history of GBS, preterm labor, and chorioamnionitis. To prevent transmission during birth, patients are treated
prophylactically with IV antibiotics, such as penicillin, during labor. Neonates who are at risk for GBS infection are
closely monitored after birth. Table 12.7 summarizes the pregnancy risks associated with infections.

Infection        Complications

Hepatitis        Preterm delivery, cholestasis of pregnancy, gestational diabetes, low-birth-weight infant,
                 preeclampsia, transmission to fetus

HIV              Infection, side effects of antiretroviral therapy, gestational diabetes, preeclampsia,

                 transmission to fetus, preterm delivery, low-birth-weight infant

Toxoplasmosis    Spontaneous abortion or intrauterine fetal demise, congenital toxoplasmosis (fetal hearing
                 loss, blindness, developmental delay)

Syphilis         Intrauterine fetal demise, preterm birth, neonatal death, congenital syphilis (fever,
                 hepatosplenomegaly, neurologic impairment, bone and joint problems, anemia)

Rubella          Congenital rubella syndrome (congenital heart defects, cataracts, deafness, CNS
                 abnormalities, fetal growth restriction, hepatosplenomegaly, thrombocytopenia)

Cytomegalovirus  Flu-like symptoms, congenital CMV (hearing loss, thrombocytopenia, fetal growth restriction,
(CMV)            ventriculomegaly, chorioretinitis, hepatosplenomegaly, developmental delay)

Herpes           Fever, lymphadenopathy, malaise, meningitis, congenital herpes (SEM disease, disseminated
                 disease, or CNS disease)

TABLE 12.7 Infections and Pregnancy Complications (CDC, 2021b)
564  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     Infection               Complications

     Varicella               Intrauterine fetal demise, congenital varicella (skin scarring, eye, limb, or neurologic
                             abnormalities, anemia, thrombocytopenia, low birth weight)

     Group B                 Neonatal meningitis, pneumonia, and sepsis
     streptococcus
     (GBS)

     TABLE 12.7 Infections and Pregnancy Complications (CDC, 2021b)

     Second Trimester

     Conditions specific to the second trimester include abortion, cervical insufficiency, and Rh isoimmunization.
     Abortion during the second trimester can be spontaneous or induced. Cervical insufficiency can result in preterm
     delivery around the edge of viability. Rh isoimmunization can lead to severe fetal anemia, which may result in fetal
     death.

     Abortion
     Abortion during the second trimester (14 to 27 weeks' gestation) can occur spontaneously or through medical
     induction. Pregnancy complications that can lead to spontaneous abortion during the second trimester include
     placental abnormalities, infection, fetal anomalies, and maternal medical conditions. Placental abnormalities
     include placenta previa or placental abruption. Infection can be from prolonged rupture of membranes and
     chorioamnionitis. Fetal anomalies may include chromosomal abnormalities, congenital heart defects, or neural tube
     defects. Maternal medical conditions such as autoimmune disease, hypertension, diabetes, and other problems can
     lead to preterm birth or abortion (Wilson & Kahn, 2018). Patients experiencing vaginal bleeding, abdominal
     cramping, decreased fetal movement, or signs of infection should immediately be evaluated by a health-care
     provider to assess maternal-fetal status.

     Cervical Insufficiency
     Painless dilation of the cervix during pregnancy that often results in the inability to carry the fetus beyond the
     second trimester is called cervical insufficiency. Cervical insufficiency may also be referred to as an incompetent
     cervix or shortened cervix. The presence of cervical insufficiency may be associated with low back pain, pelvic
     pressure, and vaginal bleeding or discharge. If left untreated, abrupt delivery of the fetus can occur at a very early
     gestational age. A history of prior cervical surgery or pregnancy losses increases a patient's risk; however, the exact
     etiology remains unknown. To prevent preterm delivery, a cerclage may be placed, which involves a surgical
     procedure in which sutures are placed around the cervix to prevent it from dilating. See Figure 12.8 for suture
     placement. The sutures are then removed as the pregnancy approaches term.

     FIGURE 12.8 Cervical Cerclage A cervical cerclage can be placed to prevent preterm delivery. This surgical procedure involves the
     placement of sutures around the cervix to prevent cervical dilation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 · Conditions Limited to Pregnancy                                                                                   565

license)

Rh Isoimmunization
Rhesus (Rh) incompatibility between the pregnant person and the fetus is the leading cause of Rh isoimmunization
during pregnancy. When a patient's blood type is Rh negative, antibodies form against Rh-positive fetal blood. This
sensitization occurs during a first pregnancy with an Rh-positive fetus (regardless of outcome) and the formation of
IgM antibodies, which do not cross the placenta. When the patient is exposed to Rh-positive fetal blood during a
subsequent pregnancy, additional antibodies are formed that cross the placenta and cause hemolysis in the fetus.
This leads to hemolytic disease of the newborn and potentially hydrops fetalis and fetal or neonatal death (ACOG,
2022b). Prevention of Rh isoimmunization includes the administration of Rh immune globulin (RhoGAM) to Rh-
negative pregnant persons during pregnancy when there is any chance of maternal exposure to fetal blood, as with a
spontaneous abortion, invasive procedure, trauma, termination of pregnancy, at 28 weeks' gestation, or prior to
delivery (ACOG, 2022b). Rh immune globulin may be given again within 72 hours after birth to Rh-negative patients
to neutralize any fetal red blood cells that entered the patient's bloodstream during birth. Rh immune globulin will
cause the antibody screen to be falsely positive for 12 weeks. The nurse should educate the patient who is Rh
negative on the routine administration of RhoGAM and discuss its role in the prevention of hemolytic disease of the
newborn.

Conditions Occurring in Second and Third Trimesters

Conditions that arise during the second and third trimesters may relate to complications within the intrauterine
environment and pregnancy-induced medical conditions. Complications within the intrauterine environment include
amniotic fluid and placental abnormalities. Preterm labor and preterm rupture of membranes can also occur.
Pregnancy-induced disorders, such as gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, and gestational diabetes, are
diagnosed during this time. Prompt identification and diagnosis can lead to timely treatment.

Oligohydramnios
In oligohydramnios, an abnormally low volume of amniotic fluid is present. During the second and third trimesters,
amniotic fluid is primarily comprised of fetal urine, fetal lung and gastrointestinal secretions, and fluid from the
placenta and umbilical cord (Keilman & Shanks, 2024). When the production or secretion of amniotic fluid is
interrupted--such as from congenital renal and urinary tract anomalies, placental dysfunction, fetal growth
restriction, or ruptured membranes--a decreased volume in amniotic fluid results. Management includes close
monitoring of the amniotic fluid volume as well as fetal status and hydration of the pregnant person using IV or oral
fluids (Keilman & Shanks, 2024). In cases of nonreassuring fetal status or fetal distress, induction of labor or
emergent delivery may be performed.

Polyhydramnios
In contrast, polyhydramnios refers to an abnormally high volume of amniotic fluid present during pregnancy.
Certain maternal conditions can lead to polyhydramnios, such as maternal diabetes, anemia, or autoimmune
disorders (Hwang & Mahdy, 2023). Because the fetus swallows amniotic fluid, congenital anomalies that impair fetal
swallowing (such as a tracheoesophageal fistula) lead to polyhydramnios (Hwang & Mahdy, 2023). Multiple
gestation pregnancies can also cause polyhydramnios due to the overproduction of amniotic fluid caused by two or
more fetuses. Complications of polyhydramnios include preterm birth, placental abruption, premature rupture of
membranes, umbilical cord prolapse, or fetal malpresentation (Hwang & Mahdy, 2023). Management includes close
monitoring of maternal-fetus status to identify and minimize complications. An amnioreduction may be ordered in
cases of severe polyhydramnios. During this procedure, an amniocentesis is done to remove some of the excess
amniotic fluid. (See Chapter 13 Prenatal Testing for a full discussion.) The nurse will monitor the patient after the
withdrawal of amniotic fluid for signs of complications, specifically placental abruption.

Placenta Previa
In placenta previa, the placenta is located on the lower aspect of the uterus near the internal cervical os. Risk
factors for the development of a placenta previa include a history of placenta previa, multiple gestation pregnancy,
multiparity, history of prior uterine surgeries (including C-sections), uterine abnormalities, advanced maternal age,
use of assisted reproductive technology, and smoking. Severity ranges from the placenta lying near the internal
cervical os to the placenta completely covering the os and lower uterine segment (Jauniaux et al., 2019). The term
low lying placenta is often used to signify a placenta that does not entirely cover the internal os, reserving the term
566  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     placenta previa for when the os is completely covered (Jauniaux et al., 2019). See Figure 12.9 to contrast low lying
     placenta with placenta previa. Diagnosis is often made during the second trimester through ultrasound. The biggest
     risk of a placenta previa is hemorrhage. This can occur during pregnancy or labor. The signs include bright red
     vaginal bleeding with or without pain. Close monitoring for signs of bleeding and maternal-fetal status should occur
     during the second and third trimesters. Patients with placenta previa must undergo a cesarean birth. Vaginal
     delivery is contraindicated in cases of partial and complete placenta previa due to risk of bleeding and placental
     tearing. Similarly, vaginal exams should be avoided to prevent additional injury in the presence of a known placenta
     previa or other incidences of vaginal bleeding. A hysterectomy may be performed if hemorrhage occurs. The nurse
     should counsel patients to monitor for any signs of bleeding and to seek medical attention immediately if it occurs.
     Additionally, the nurse should educate the patient about what to expect in a cesarean birth. Physical activity may be
     restricted once placenta previa is diagnosed. In cases of high risk for hemorrhage, patients may be placed on bed
     rest and pelvic rest until delivery.

     FIGURE 12.9 Placenta Previa Placenta previa occurs when the placenta is located on the lower aspect of the uterus near the internal
     cervical os. The severity and maternal-fetal risk of a placenta previa can range from low lying placenta to complete previa. (modification of
     work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Placental Abruption
     A placental abruption occurs when the placenta or part of the placenta separates from the uterine lining, which
     may lead to significant maternal-fetal blood loss, intrauterine fetal demise, or maternal death. Risk factors for
     placental abruption include hypertension, smoking, cocaine use, and abdominal trauma during pregnancy. Signs of
     abruption of the placenta include sudden onset of severe abdominal pain with or without dark red bleeding.
     Diagnosis is made based on clinical assessment and recent history. The signs the nurse may see include prolonged
     uterine contractions or a uterus that remains contracted without achieving a resting tone and changes in the fetal
     heart rate pattern. An ultrasound can also provide additional information. Management includes close fetal
     monitoring with imminent delivery based on the severity of maternal or fetal distress. Hemodynamic monitoring
     (pulse, urine output, blood pressure) of both the pregnant person and the fetus is imperative. Fluid replacement
     with blood products or other fluids may be indicated in cases of significant blood loss with hemodynamic instability.
     For more about different presentations of abruption, see Figure 12.10. To compare and contrast the signs and
     symptoms of placenta previa and placental abruption, see Table 12.8.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     12.2 · Conditions Limited to Pregnancy                                                   567

FIGURE 12.10 Placental Abruption A placental abruption is an emergent situation because the placenta separates from the uterine lining,
which can lead to significant maternal-fetal blood loss, intrauterine fetal demise, or maternal death. The severity of a placental abruption
ranges from (a and b) partial to (c) complete abruption. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Disorder             Signs and Symptoms

Placenta previa      Vaginal bleeding, painless
                     May cause fetal distress
                     Cramping, uterine contractions

Placental abruption  Vaginal bleeding, painful
                     May cause maternal and fetal distress
                     Signs of maternal and fetal hemorrhage
                     Abdominal pain
                     Cramping, uterine contractions
                     Back pain

TABLE 12.8 Signs and Symptoms of Placenta Previa versus Placental
Abruption

Placenta Accreta
In placenta accreta, the placenta grows into the uterine wall beyond the endometrium and may invade other
nearby organs. Growth occurs on a spectrum from mild abnormal tissue growth to significant invasion of vital
organs. Risk factors include history of cesarean delivery, placenta accreta, or uterine surgery (ACOG, 2018d).
Diagnosis can be made through imaging, such as ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or the condition
may go undiagnosed until the third stage of labor. If diagnosed prenatally, patients must be monitored closely
throughout pregnancy using a multidisciplinary approach. A cesarean birth is performed to reduce risks to the
pregnant person and the fetus, but a hysterectomy is typically indicated because of the life-threatening nature of
the accreta (ACOG, 2018d). Blood is made available, and the patient will often have more than one IV access
because of the high risk of hemorrhage. A multidisciplinary team is often present during the cesarean delivery to
assess invasion of nearby tissues and perform additional surgery if indicated, such as a hysterectomy.

Preterm Labor
The onset of labor before term gestation, which occurs at 37 weeks' gestation, is considered preterm labor.
Preterm labor can be diagnosed by obtaining a detailed history, performing a thorough assessment, implementing
diagnostic tools, and monitoring contractions. Diagnostic tools include a fetal fibronectin test and transvaginal
ultrasound. A fetal fibronectin test detects a protein called fetal fibronectin that exists between the uterine lining
and the amniotic sac. A negative fetal fibronectin test provides strong predictive value against preterm labor and
568  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     delivery within 7 to 10 days (Berghella & Saccone, 2019). A transvaginal ultrasound can detect cervical length,
     where a shortened cervical length of less than 25 mm indicates preterm labor, but it is not a strong diagnostic tool.
     The nurse's primary role is to monitor the patient for contractions that are increasing in frequency and severity,
     which, along with cervical change, indicate impending preterm delivery.

     Risk factors for preterm labor include previous preterm birth, infection, cervical abnormalities, chronic medical
     conditions, multiple gestation pregnancy, and certain lifestyle factors, such as substance use, smoking, poor diet,
     stress, and limited access to health care (Griggs et al., 2020). Although risk factors have been identified, the exact
     underlying etiology remains unknown. Management for preterm labor aims to prolong pregnancy to allow the fetus
     to mature while minimizing maternal-fetal complications. Tocolytic medications may be administered to decrease
     contractions by causing relaxation of the uterus. Tocolytic medications include indomethacin (Indocin), nifedipine
     (Procardia), and magnesium sulfate (Mayer & Apodaca-Ramos, 2023). Corticosteroids, such as betamethasone
     (Celestone), may be given if preterm delivery is anticipated and the pregnant person is at less than 34 weeks'
     gestation. This medication helps to promote fetal lung maturity and reduce the neonate's risk of chronic lung
     disease. Magnesium sulfate can also be used for neuroprotection (protecting the brain from a hemorrhage) of the
     fetus. If there is concern for infection, antibiotics may be initiated to minimize transmission to the fetus and prevent
     sepsis. Close monitoring of preterm labor often occurs in a hospital setting, where both the pregnant person and the
     fetus can be closely observed until contractions cease and imminent delivery is no longer anticipated. In addition to
     frequent patient monitoring and assessment, the nurse administers tocolytics and other medications while
     collaborating with the health-care team to prepare for or delay preterm delivery long enough for the antenatal
     corticosteroids to be effective in improving fetal lung maturity.

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     Medications Prescribed for Preterm Labor

     Tocolytic Medications

     Tocolytic medications are administered to prevent or inhibit preterm labor by suppressing uterine contractions. By
     stopping or slowing preterm labor, tocolytic medications create time for fetal growth, additional interventions, and
     maternal transfer for specialized care.

     Terbutaline (Brethine)

         · Indication: used to stop preterm labor (tocolysis)
         · Mechanism of Action: causes uterine smooth muscle relaxation
         · Adverse Effects: restlessness, tremors, hypokalemia, hyperglycemia, hypertension, tachycardia, dizziness,

             headache, nausea and vomiting, diaphoresis, insomnia, chest pain, arrhythmia, pulmonary edema, neonatal
             hypoglycemia, increased fetal heart rate
         · Contraindications: prolonged tocolytic therapy for more than 72 hours, receiving maintenance tocolytic
             therapy, history of hypersensitivity or allergy; hold medication if the pulse of the pregnant person is > 120.
         · High Alert/Black Box Warning: The use of terbutaline for the treatment of preterm labor for more than 48 to
             72 hours is associated with maternal cardiac problems and death.
         · Patient Education: discussion of adverse effects
         · Classification: beta 2 agonist
         · Dose: IV 2.5 to 5 mcg/minute; may gradually increase to a maximum of 25 mcg/minute or 0.25 mg every 20
             to 30 minutes up to three doses in 4 hours

     Magnesium Sulfate

         · Indication: used to stop preterm labor (tocolysis)
         · Mechanism of Action: precise mechanism of action unknown, suspected to be related to relaxation of smooth

             muscle of the uterus by decreasing the release of acetylcholine
         · Adverse Effects: flushing, sweating, nausea, vomiting, headache, blurred vision, muscle weakness,

             respiratory depression, cardiac arrest
         · Contraindications: renal dysfunction, myasthenia gravis, cardiac disease

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 · Conditions Limited to Pregnancy                                                                                    569

    · Patient Education: Educate patients about adverse effects and when to seek medical attention.
    · Classification: antiseizure agent, electrolyte, tocolytic
    · Dose: loading dose of 4 to 6 grams administered IV over 20 to 30 minutes, followed by a maintenance dose of

        1 to 4 grams per hour

Nifedipine (Procardia)

    · Indication: used to stop preterm labor (tocolysis)
    · Mechanism of action: blocks calcium ions from entering the cell membrane, which ultimately results in

        uterine wall relaxation
    · Adverse Effects: nausea, vomiting, flushing, headache, dizziness, palpitations, hypotension, peripheral

        edema
    · Contraindications: Hypotension, heart failure, liver dysfunction, hypersensitivity
    · Patient Education: Discuss adverse effects and when to notify the health-care provider.
    · Classification: calcium channel blocker
    · Dose: 10 to 20 mg every 4 to 6 hours up to 48 hours

Indomethacin (Indocin)

    · Indication: used to stop preterm labor (tocolysis)
    · Mechanism of Action: inhibits prostaglandins that are released during labor
    · Adverse Effects: gastrointestinal upset (nausea, vomiting, reflux, abdominal pain), thrombocytopenia,

        oligohydramnios, renal dysfunction, hypertension, neonatal complications (chronic lung disease, patent
        ductus arteriosus, intraventricular hemorrhage)
    · Contraindications: low platelets, renal impairment, hypersensitivity to NSAIDs or aspirin, gastrointestinal
        bleeding, > 32 weeks' gestation
    · Patient Education: Discuss adverse fetal and neonatal effects.
    · Classification: cyclooxygenase inhibitor (COX inhibitor), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID)
    · Dose: 50 to 100 mg loading dose orally or rectally, then 25 mg every 4 to 6 hours for only 72 hours

Corticosteroid Medications

Corticosteroids are administered to patients in preterm labor before 34 weeks' gestation because these
medications promote fetal lung development and decrease the risk of respiratory distress syndrome of the newborn.
When administered 2 to 7 days prior to preterm birth, corticosteroid administration has a significant impact on the
reduction of adverse severe neonatal outcomes.

Betamethasone (Celestone) or Dexamethasone (Decadron)

    · Indication: promotes fetal lung maturity in the setting of anticipated preterm delivery before 34 weeks'
        gestation

    · Mechanism of action: stimulates the development of pneumocytes and the production of surfactant
    · Adverse effects: hyperglycemia, hypertension, uterine irritability, fetal heart rate changes, fluid retention,

        gastrointestinal upset
    · Contraindications: hypersensitivity to corticosteroids
    · Patient education: discussion of adverse effects and the positive impact on fetal lung outcomes
    · Classification: corticosteroid
    · Dose: ideally should be given more than 24 hours before birth to see the full benefits

          Betamethasone: 2 doses of 12 mg given IM 24 hours apart
          Dexamethasone: 4 doses of 6 mg given IM 12 hours apart

(Nursing 2024 Drug Handbook, 2024)

Preterm Premature Rupture of Membranes
Rupture of the amniotic sac before term gestation at 37 weeks, with leakage of amniotic fluid and concern for
imminent delivery, is called preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM). Risk factors include infection,
multiple gestation, and a history of prior preterm birth. Leakage of amniotic fluid from the vagina is the primary sign.
Complications of preterm premature rupture of membranes are infection, oligohydramnios, cord prolapse, and
570  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     preterm labor. In cases of unstable pregnant person or fetal status, induction of labor or cesarean delivery may be
     performed. If the rupture of membranes occurs at a very early gestational age, the patient may remain as an
     inpatient to allow the fetus time to mature. Nursing care includes monitoring for signs and symptoms of infection
     and preparing for a preterm birth.

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Confirmation of Preterm Rupture of Membranes Using Amnisure

     Confirming preterm premature rupture of membranes requires the nurse to insert a sterile swab into the vaginal
     discharge and place it into a tube containing the solvent vial for a minimum of 1 minute. After removing the swab,
     the solvent fluid is tested and if positive, confirms rupture of membranes.

     Nursing Actions to Prevent Infection

     Prior to and after confirmation of preterm rupture of membranes, a major goal is prevention of maternal and fetal
     infection while awaiting delivery. Nursing actions include:

         · handwashing
         · perineal hygiene
         · frequent changing of perineal pad
         · monitoring temperature
         · monitoring uterus for irritability and pain
         · monitoring the fetal heart rate (FHR) for evidence of stress

     Gestational Diabetes
     Gestational diabetes is diagnosed when high maternal glucose levels are present during the second or third
     trimester. Gestational diabetes occurs secondary to hormonal changes during pregnancy that lead to increased
     insulin resistance with insufficient insulin secretion to meet pregnancy needs, and genetic factors may also play a
     role. Preexisting diabetes can be ruled out during the first trimester through a glucose challenge test (GCT) in
     patients at high risk (ACOG, 2020c). In patients who are not at increased risk, the 1-hour glucose challenge test may
     be administered during the second trimester at 24 to 28 weeks' gestation.

     UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     12.1: Prenatal Care: Part 2

     See Prenatal Care: Part 1 for a review of the patient data.

                                      Flow Chart         28 Weeks' Gestation
                                                         BP: 124/74
                                                         Fundal Height: 29 cm
                                                         FHR: 136

                                      Lab Results        28 Weeks' Gestation
                                                         3-hour GTT
                                                         FBS: 110 mg/dL
                                                         1-hour glucose: 185 mg/dL
                                                         2-hour glucose: 149 mg/dL
                                                         3-hour glucose: 128 mg/dL

                                      Provider's orders  28 Weeks' Gestation
                                                         Provide glucose monitoring education
                                                         Instruct in daily fetal movement counts

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              12.2 · Conditions Limited to Pregnancy                     571

1. The nurse discusses the results of the test with Brianne and Trey. Brianne asks the nurse what caused her
    blood sugar to be abnormal and whether this means she will need insulin. Select the most appropriate
    option to complete the statement.

The nurse identifies the priority problem at this time as  .

a. knowledge deficit regarding gestational diabetes
b. increased risk for genetic congenital condition
c. knowledge deficit regarding labor and birth

2. The nurse prepares to discuss the importance of glucose control and possible complications regarding
    gestational diabetes with Brianne and Trey. What topics should the nurse include in the discussion at this
    time? Select all that apply.

       a. nutrition
       b. how to monitor her blood glucose
       c. relaxation techniques
       d. the expected range of the 2-hour postprandial glucose reading
       e. importance of daily fetal movement counts (FMC)
        f. preparing for a planned cesarean birth
       g. increased risk for genetic anomalies
       h. increased risk for pregnancy-induced hypertension (HTN)
        i. importance of exercise to regulate glucose

If the test results reveal concern for gestational diabetes, a 3-hour glucose tolerance test is administered to confirm
a diagnosis (ACOG, 2020c). Like preexisting diabetes, gestational diabetes can be associated with adverse maternal
and fetal outcomes when blood glucose levels are not well controlled. Because of the risks of hyperglycemia,
treatment targets normalizing blood glucose levels. Management of blood glucose levels can occur through dietary
and lifestyle modifications, frequent glucose monitoring, and insulin therapy (Johns et al., 2018).

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Medication Prescribed for Gestational Diabetes

Insulin is the preferred medication for the management of hyperglycemia in gestational diabetes. Because insulin
does not cross the placenta, it can safely lower maternal glucose levels with minimal risks to the fetus. Metformin
may be prescribed for patients who cannot take insulin or who refuse insulin, but it has limited use because it
crosses the placenta. Glyburide (DiaBeta) is not recommended, as it is linked with congenital defects. The nurse
should counsel patients on hypoglycemic agents as well as collaborate with a nutritionist to provide education on
lifestyles modifications, such as improving diet and exercise.

Insulin

    · Indication: decrease high blood glucose levels
    · Mechanism of Action: Insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas that helps regulate the amount of

        glucose in the blood. During pregnancy, the placenta produces hormones that can interfere with insulin's
        ability to lower blood glucose levels. Insulin therapy can help overcome this resistance and maintain blood
        glucose levels within a normal range.
    · Side Effects/Adverse Reactions: hypoglycemia, signs of allergic reaction
    · Contraindications: none, but use caution if there is concern for an allergy
    · Patient Education: Discuss how to perform proper injection technique, identify signs of hypoglycemia,
        monitor blood glucose levels, follow a healthy diet and exercise routine, and take medication as prescribed.
    · Classification: hormone and antidiabetic agent
    · Dose: varies by individual patient
572  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     Metformin

         · Indication: decrease high blood glucose levels, only used when patient refuses or cannot take insulin
         · Mechanism of Action: decreases glucose production in the liver, decreases absorption of glucose from

             gastrointestinal tract, increases insulin sensitivity
         · Boxed Warning: may cause lactic acidosis leading to death, hypotension, arrhythmias, and hypothermia
         · Side Effects/Adverse Reactions: hypoglycemia, signs of allergic reaction, gastrointestinal effects (nausea,

             vomiting, flatulence, diarrhea, abdominal pain), lactic acidosis, vitamin B12 deficiency, chest discomfort,
             palpitations, myalgia, headache
         · Contraindications: hypersensitivity to metformin, signs of renal dysfunction or metabolic acidosis
         · Patient Education: Inform the patient that metformin crosses the placenta, and there are limited data to
             support safe use during pregnancy. Counsel the patient on how to identify signs of hypoglycemia, monitor
             blood glucose levels, follow a healthy diet and exercise routine, and take medication as prescribed.
         · Classification: antidiabetic agent
         · Dose: oral route, 500 mg once or twice daily, taken with meals to minimize GI upset

     (Nursing 2024 Drug Handbook, 2024)

     Hypertensive Disorders of Pregnancy
     Hypertensive disorders during pregnancy place the fetus at increased risk for complications due to impaired blood
     flow to the placenta. Management of hypertension aims to reduce blood pressure to normal ranges while monitoring
     for adverse maternal conditions, such as HELLP syndrome and eclampsia, uteroplacental insufficiency, fetal growth
     restriction, and intrauterine fetal demise.

     Gestational Hypertension
     Gestational hypertension is hypertension that occurs after 20 weeks' gestation and may also be termed
     preeclampsia. Risk factors for gestational hypertension include obesity, nulliparity, history of preeclampsia,
     preexisting diabetes, renal disease, and multiple gestation pregnancy (Shen et al., 2017). A formal diagnosis can be
     made when systolic blood pressure exceeds 140 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure exceeds 90 mm Hg on more
     than one occasion. Gestational hypertension carries increased risk to both the pregnant person and the fetus.
     Antihypertensive therapy is often prescribed to prevent severe hypertension. Patients who develop severe
     gestational hypertension may need to be admitted to the hospital with close blood pressure and maternal-fetal
     monitoring. Delivery may be indicated at 37 weeks or before, depending on clinical status and lab findings.

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     Medications Prescribed for Hypertensive Disorders of Pregnancy

     A number of medications can be safely prescribed to treat hypertensive disorders of pregnancy.

     Labetalol hydrochloride (Trandate)

         · Indication: treatment of hypertensive disorders, such as gestational hypertension and preeclampsia, that
             develop during pregnancy

         · Mechanism of Action: blocks alpha and beta receptors, which reduces the effects of catecholamines that
             increase blood pressure, dilates blood vessels to decrease blood pressure

         · Adverse Effects: hypotension, bradycardia, shortness of breath, dizziness, headache, nausea, edema,
             flushing, drowsiness

         · Contraindications: COPD, asthma, heart failure, heart block, history of hypotension or bradycardia,
             hypersensitivity

         · Patient Education: Discuss how to take blood pressure and monitor adverse effects.
         · Classification: antihypertensive, beta blocker
         · Dose: starting dose is 100 mg twice daily; higher doses indicated for hypertensive emergency in pregnancy

     Nifedipine (Procardia)

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 · Conditions Limited to Pregnancy                                                                                 573

    · Indication: treatment of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy, such as gestational hypertension and
        preeclampsia, that develop during pregnancy

    · Mechanism of Action: blocks calcium ions from entering the cell membrane, which ultimately results in
        relaxation of coronary vasculature and decreases peripheral vascular resistance

    · Adverse Effects: nausea, vomiting, flushing, peripheral edema, headache, dizziness, palpitations,
        hypotension

    · Contraindications: hypotension, heart failure, liver dysfunction, hypersensitivity
    · Patient Education: Discuss adverse effects and when to notify the health-care provider.
    · Classification: antihypertensive, calcium channel blocker
    · Dose: varies depending on the patient, with starting dose of 10 to 30 mg orally and increased as indicated to

        target blood pressure

Magnesium Sulfate

    · Indication: treatment of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy, such as gestational hypertension,
        preeclampsia, and eclampsia, that develop during pregnancy

    · Mechanism of Action: decreases neuromuscular transmission
    · Adverse Effects: flushing, sweating, nausea, vomiting, headache, blurred vision, muscle weakness,

        respiratory depression, cardiac arrest
    · Contraindications: renal dysfunction, myasthenia gravis, cardiac disease
    · Patient Education: Educate patients about adverse effects and when to seek medical attention.
    · Classification: antiseizure agent, electrolyte, tocolytic
    · Dose: loading dose of 4 to 6 grams administered IV over 20 to 30 minutes, followed by a maintenance dose of

        1 to 4 grams per hour

Hydralazine hydrochloride (Apresoline)

    · Indication: treatment of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy, such as gestational hypertension
    · Mechanism of action: causes vasodilation and decreases systemic resistance to lower blood pressure
    · Adverse Effects: headache, nausea, dizziness, flushing, hypotension, lupus-like syndrome, acute myocardial

        infarction, palpitations, tachycardia, gastrointestinal upset
    · Contraindications: mitral valve rheumatic heart disease, coronary artery disease, cerebral artery disease,

        hypersensitivity
    · Patient Education: Instruct patients to take medication as prescribed, monitor blood pressure, and identify

        adverse effects.
    · Classification: antihypertensive, vasodilator
    · Dose: depends on the patient's needs; may be started orally at 10 to 20 mg every 4 to 6 hours. IV dosing may

        involve more frequent dosing to achieve target blood pressure.

(Nursing 2024 Drug Handbook, 2024)

HELLP Syndrome
HELLP syndrome is an acronym that stands for Hemolysis, Elevated Liver enzymes, and Low Platelet count.
Patients often experience signs and symptoms of preeclampsia, such as epigastric pain, headache, and vision
changes, but the patient may not necessarily develop hypertension or proteinuria (Alese et al., 2021). Signs and
symptoms specific to HELLP syndrome include fatigue and abnormal bruising (related to hemolysis), abdominal pain
(often right upper quadrant [RUQ]), edema, nausea, and vomiting (related to elevated liver enzymes), and petechiae
or prolonged bleeding time (related to low platelets) (Khalid et al., 2023). Diagnosis is based on low platelets and
lab values that indicate liver involvement. HELLP syndrome can be life-threatening to both the pregnant person and
the fetus, so close monitoring and prompt evaluation are necessary. Treatment options include anticipated delivery
if > 34 weeks' gestation based on lab values, supportive care, and management of possible hemorrhage (Khalid et
al., 2023). The nurse's role includes close monitoring of vital signs, assessing for worsening symptoms, and
promptly notifying the health-care team of any changes to clinical status. The nurse administers medications and
monitors fetal status using electronic fetal monitoring. Patient education should include discussion of the maternal-
fetal risks of HELLP and the possibility of preterm delivery. The nurse can prepare the patient for preterm birth by
discussing what to expect after delivery and by collaborating with a multidisciplinary team, including the NICU team,
574  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     to discuss the neonatal risks related to prematurity.

     Preeclampsia
     The multisystem disorder preeclampsia can occur after 20 weeks' gestation and up to 6 weeks postpartum and, if
     untreated, can lead to damage of the vital organs and seizures. Compared with gestational hypertension,
     preeclampsia has a greater risk of adverse outcomes, such as cesarean delivery, preterm birth, low Apgar scores,
     placental abruption, and small-for-gestational-age infants (Shen et al., 2017). The exact etiology of preeclampsia is
     unknown, but it is thought to be related to vascular changes in the placenta and uterus. The vascular changes
     damage the endothelial cells of the blood vessels, increasing vascular permeability leading to edema and increased
     glomerular damage leading to proteinuria. Risk factors for preeclampsia include nulliparity, extremes in maternal
     age, obesity, multiple gestation pregnancy, kidney disease, chronic hypertension, diabetes, and a personal or family
     history of preeclampsia. Signs of preeclampsia are high blood pressure, proteinuria, edema, headaches, vision
     changes, epigastric pain, and nausea or vomiting. Patients should be instructed to immediately see their health-care
     provider if they experience any of these signs or symptoms.

     Risk reduction is the first step toward management of preeclampsia. Daily low-dose aspirin beginning early in the
     second trimester is recommended for patients who are at risk (ACOG, 2020c). The most effective treatment of
     preeclampsia is delivery. However, prior to delivery, hypertension can be managed with antihypertensive therapy. In
     cases of preeclampsia with severe features, the patient may be started on magnesium sulfate to prevent the
     progression of preeclampsia to seizures. Therefore, the patient with severe symptoms will need to be hospitalized
     for monitoring until stabilization of blood pressures or until delivery. Delivery will depend on the severity of
     preeclampsia.

     During hospitalization, the nurse closely monitors for signs of worsening preeclampsia, which can lead to the onset
     of eclampsia. Hyperreflexia and the presence of clonus are warning signs for seizure risk. In addition to vital sign
     monitoring, the nurse should regularly assess the patient's neurologic status, including level of consciousness,
     reflexes, and signs of magnesium toxicity (loss of deep tendon reflexes, respiratory depression, and decreased urine
     output). Continuous electronic fetal monitoring may be ordered to evaluate fetal heart rate and uterine contractions.
     Additional monitoring of serial lab tests, such as magnesium levels and liver and renal function tests, may be
     indicated. Any significant change to maternal clinical status or fetal heart rate should be immediately reported to the
     health-care team.

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Safe Administration and Monitoring of Magnesium Sulfate during Pregnancy

     Disclaimer: Always follow the agency's policy for medication administration.

     Definition: Safely administer and closely monitor patients to reduce risks of side effects and magnesium toxicity.

     Knowledge: The nurse will review current evidence-based practice standards and facility policies related to
     magnesium sulfate administration and monitoring, and will reflect on risks to unsafe nursing practices.

     Skill: Demonstrate effective strategies to reduce the risk of magnesium toxicity. The nurse will do the following:

         · Identify indications and contraindications for magnesium administration.
         · Use standard drug packaging and preparation per pharmacy.
         · Follow the five rights of medication administration.
         · Utilize an infusion pump to set limits and ensure proper dose and infusion rate.
         · Implement standard parameters for administration as outlined by provider order and facility protocol.
         · Monitor and report magnesium levels per facility protocol and standing order.
         · Monitor for and respond promptly to signs of magnesium toxicity:

               Recognize signs of magnesium toxicity that include muscle weakness with decreased deep tendon
                   reflexes, nausea/vomiting/diarrhea, arrhythmia, hypotension, confusion, flushing, and respiratory
                   depression.

               Stop infusion immediately and notify health-care provider.

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 · Conditions Limited to Pregnancy                                                                                575

          Draw sample for a magnesium level immediately.
          Ensure accessibility of calcium gluconate (usually at bedside) as antidote; administer as ordered.
          In cases of respiratory depression, be prepared to provide respiratory support and notify rapid response

              team.
    · Provide patients with education about side effects (flushing, feeling hot, drowsiness, muscle weakness), the

        risk of magnesium toxicity, and what signs and symptoms to monitor.

Attitude: The nurse will respect individual role in preventing errors by adhering to safe, evidence-based practice
standards.

(AHRQ Safety Program for Perinatal Care, 2017)

Eclampsia
A diagnosis of eclampsia is made when signs of preeclampsia progress to seizure activity. Eclampsia can occur
during pregnancy or after birth. Eclampsia is associated with increased risk of death to the pregnant or newly
delivered person and the fetus. Maternal complications include pulmonary edema, acute renal failure, hemorrhage,
placental abruption, preterm delivery, neurologic damage, and cardiac arrest (Laskowska, 2023). Management of
eclampsia focuses on prevention by quickly identifying and treating preeclampsia. Magnesium sulfate may be
prescribed to control seizure activity. An emergent cesarean delivery may be performed to prevent adverse
outcomes, including maternal and fetal death.

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

Nursing Care of Pregnant Person with Eclampsia

    · Recognition of Seizure Activity
          There is sudden onset of tonic/clonic seizure activity.
          Seizures are typically 60 to 70 seconds in length.
          Seizures are followed by a postictal state.

    · Nursing Actions to Prevent Injury
          Remove any objects from the patient's bed.
          Loosen anything tight around the neck and waist.
          Lift side rails and cover with blankets.
          Stay with the patient.

    · Nursing Actions to Maintain Open Airway
          Lower the head of the bed to < 30 degrees.
          Turn the patient to their side.

Superimposed Hypertensive Disorders of Pregnancy
Chronic hypertension can progress to superimposed preeclampsia during late pregnancy. Superimposed
preeclampsia may be suspected if a patient diagnosed with chronic hypertension during the first trimester develops
increasing blood pressures after 20 weeks' gestation. Because of the similar presentation of elevated blood
pressure and proteinuria in chronic hypertension and preeclampsia, superimposed preeclampsia may be difficult to
differentiate. Management should focus on the administration of antihypertensives and the treatment of
preeclampsia to reduce morbidity and mortality.

Renal and Cardiac Conditions
Physiologic changes during pregnancy can place additional stress on the heart and kidneys, which can worsen
hypertension. Because the kidneys play a vital role in the regulation of blood pressure, damage to the kidneys often
causes hypertension during pregnancy. Patients with chronic kidney disease are at increased risk of complications
during pregnancy. These complications include preeclampsia, preterm delivery, and worsening kidney function
(Hladunewich, 2017). Hypertensive disorders related to kidney disease can be managed with antihypertensive
therapy and close collaboration with nephrology. Monitoring of proteinuria can reduce the risk of nephrotic
syndrome. Prevention of hypertensive disorders during pregnancy in patients with renal disease may include low-
dose aspirin and calcium supplementation. Cardiac conditions, such as aortic and coronary artery disease, that are
576  12 · Pregnancy at Risk

     present during pregnancy may place additional strain on the heart. Close collaboration with cardiology can ensure
     that cardiac function is adequate and that blood pressure is managed to minimize myocardial demand.

     Bleeding Disorders of Pregnancy
     Patients who have bleeding disorders during pregnancy must be closely monitored for signs of bleeding and/or
     blood clots prior to and after delivery. The nurse should monitor for signs such as prolonged bleeding time, easy
     bruising, petechiae, spontaneous bleeding, and frequent nosebleeds. Pale skin, tachycardia, and hypotension may
     indicate significant blood loss. Bleeding disorders that develop during pregnancy include immune thrombocytopenia
     purpura (ITP), disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), and antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). During ITP, the
     immune system mediates the destruction of platelets. Patients may develop severe thrombocytopenia with signs of
     bleeding and require a platelet transfusion. Additional treatments include immunoglobulin or steroids. DIC develops
     in response to organ dysfunction with interruption of the coagulation process. In these cases, DIC produces tiny
     blood clots that can lead to increased hemorrhage or further organ damage. DIC can occur secondary to severe
     preeclampsia, infection, or placental abruption. Antiphospholipid syndrome is an autoimmune condition that targets
     the phospholipids of the body's cell membranes and leads to increased blood clotting. Because of the increased risk
     of blood clots, patients may be placed on anticoagulation therapy to reduce the risk of maternal-fetal morbidity and
     mortality.

     Third Trimester

     Conditions that place a pregnancy at risk during the third trimester (weeks 28 to 40) include gallbladder and liver
     disease, postdated pregnancy, and trauma. Because of the increase in size of the uterus and the physiologic
     changes that occur, gallbladder and liver disease may develop or be exacerbated during the third trimester, resulting
     in adverse effects for the pregnant person and the fetus. Postdated pregnancy (42 weeks and beyond) can lead to
     placental insufficiency or additional growth of the fetus, which can complicate delivery. Finally, trauma that occurs
     during the third trimester can cause physical and emotional stress that can compromise maternal and fetal health.

     Gallbladder and Liver Disease
     Gallbladder disease during pregnancy includes the onset of biliary colic, cholestasis, acute cholecystitis, and
     choledocholithiasis. Hormonal changes and the increase in estrogen and progesterone can promote the formation of
     gallstones. Signs and symptoms vary by underlying condition, but patients generally experience different variations
     of right upper quadrant pain. Symptom management through dietary modifications and medications may help
     patients with mild to moderate symptoms. In more severe cases, surgery during or after pregnancy may be
     indicated to remove the gallbladder.

     Liver disease during pregnancy can vary depending on underlying etiology. Conditions that lead to liver dysfunction
     during the third trimester include cholestasis, HELLP syndrome, cirrhosis, and acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP).
     AFLP can be a life-threatening condition due to liver failure from an increased buildup of fat in the liver. AFLP may be
     difficult to differentiate from other conditions, such as cholestasis and preeclampsia, but ultrasound and computed
     tomography scans may be helpful. Prompt identification and management through supportive care and induction of
     labor can minimize adverse outcomes such as fetal demise.

     Postdated Pregnancy
     Postdated pregnancy, also referred to as postterm pregnancy, is a pregnancy that progresses past 42 weeks'
     gestation. Potential adverse outcomes include placental insufficiency, oligohydramnios, fetal hypoxia, macrosomia,
     meconium aspiration, intrauterine fetal demise, and labor complications, such as shoulder dystocia (Lockwood,
     2014). Because of these risks, health-care providers often prefer to deliver by induction of labor or cesarean section
     at 42 weeks (ACOG, 2014). Otherwise, patient and fetus status continue to be closely monitored as the pregnancy
     approaches 42 weeks.

     Fetal surveillance may include a nonstress test (NST) or biophysical profile (BPP). A biophysical profile may be
     ordered to evaluate fetal status and well-being. A biophysical profile includes a fetal ultrasound and nonstress test.
     An ultrasound can assess fetal movements, breathing movements, amniotic fluid volume, muscle tone, and the fetal
     heart rate. An NST may be performed as part of the biophysical profile or independently to evaluate the fetal heart
     rate reactivity and responsiveness. A nonreactive NST may indicate fetal distress related to fetal hypoxemia.

     Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 · Conditions Limited to Pregnancy                                                                                    577

Trauma during Pregnancy
Trauma during pregnancy can occur in the form of blunt force or penetrating trauma, emotional trauma, or intimate
partner violence. Regardless of the type of trauma, the patient should be closely evaluated and hospitalized in cases
of maternal-fetal instability. Blunt force or penetrating trauma can lead to significant physical and neurologic
damage. Falls and motor vehicle accidents are a common type of blunt force or penetrating trauma that affects the
pregnant population. Initial physical assessment establishes maternal stability, while an ultrasound can evaluate
fetal status. The nurse's role includes assessing physical injuries and vital signs, facilitating prompt evaluation from
the health-care team, fetal monitoring, and administering prescribed treatments and comfort measures to alleviate
pain and distress. Collaboration and consultation with other teams may be required; these include emergency
response, intensive care, and surgery teams. The nurse should facilitate communication with these teams to ensure
prompt patient care. Depending on the degree of injury, the patient may remain hospitalized until birth or until
maternal-fetal stability is achieved.

Intimate partner violence (IPV) may cause psychologic distress in addition to physical injury. The incidence of IPV
increases during pregnancy (Selwyn, 2020). The nurse should be able to identify signs and symptoms of IPV during
routine prenatal visits, including observing for physical injuries, emotional distress, or unexplained delays in seeking
care. The nurse should create a safe and nonjudgmental environment, actively listen to the patient, and ask
questions to assess for possible IPV. Additional nursing interventions include assisting the patient with the
development of a safety plan to prevent further IPV, providing emotional support, documenting injuries, educating
the patient on maternal-fetal risks and ways to improve prenatal health, and providing information on community
resources, such as a safe house. Collaboration with a psychologist and social worker may be necessary.
578 12 · Summary

Summary

12.1 Preconception Conditions Affecting Pregnancy

A high-risk pregnancy is one in which the pregnant person and fetus are at increased risk for adverse health
outcomes during pregnancy. Extremes in maternal age place a pregnancy at risk, so preconception and pregnancy
management should be tailored to individual patient age and health status. Nutritional imbalances from
overnutrition or undernutrition require specific nutritional interventions and monitoring during preconception and
pregnancy to prevent anemia and other complications. Certain conditions, such as migrant farm work,
undocumented immigration status, substance misuse, and homelessness require specialized management and
psychosocial support. Preexisting medical conditions, such as hypertension, diabetes, and thyroid disorders, should
be managed closely prior to and after conception with an interdisciplinary care team. The nurse provides education
about health concerns and treatment regimens, encourages compliance with ordered medications and tests,
coordinates access to social services or specialist care, and supports patients dealing with the stress of a high-risk
pregnancy.

12.2 Conditions Limited to Pregnancy

The physiologic changes that occur during pregnancy can lead to complications that impair maternal-fetal health.
The first trimester is a critical time for fetal development, so conditions that develop during this period can
significantly compromise fetal health. Abortions and pregnancy loss more commonly occur during the first trimester
as well. During the first trimester, patients begin to experience early signs of pregnancy and will often attend their
first prenatal visit. This prenatal visit is critical for the evaluation of maternal-fetal health and sets the stage for care
during pregnancy.

As the fetus and uterus continue to grow, the pregnant person's body accommodates the additional physiologic
changes that take place during the second trimester. Complications such as cervical insufficiency and preterm labor
can lead to early deliveries and adverse outcomes. Patients who are at high risk for complications will be monitored
closely with more frequent prenatal visits and serial diagnostic tests. The fetus grows the fastest during the third
trimester as the patient's body prepares for labor. Patients should be monitored closely for signs of fetal distress,
preterm labor, preeclampsia, hemorrhage, and other complications. Early detection and prompt management of
these conditions can decrease the risk of adverse outcomes for both the pregnant person and the fetus.

Nurses play a key role in monitoring the pregnant person and fetus in antepartum units and in clinics and private
practice. Nurses perform nonstress tests (NSTs) and analyze fetal monitor strips, educate the pregnant person on
the importance of fetal movement counts, and provide supportive care to decrease the stress of a high-risk
pregnancy.

Key Terms

adolescent pregnancy one that occurs in persons between 10 and 19 years of age
anemia level of red blood cells or hemoglobin that is too low to supply enough oxygen to the tissues of the body
blighted ovum also known as an anembryonic pregnancy, occurs when a fertilized egg implants into the uterus,

    but an embryo does not form
cerclage surgical procedure in which sutures are placed around the cervix to prevent it from dilating
cervical insufficiency painless dilation of the cervix during pregnancy that often leads to inability to carry the fetus

    beyond the second trimester
chronic hypertension high blood pressure that is present prior to pregnancy or before 20 weeks' gestation
complete abortion occurs when there is a termination of pregnancy that results in all the products of conception

    being expelled from the uterus, such as the fetus, placenta, and other tissue
cystic fibrosis genetic disorder caused by a mutation in the transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene,

    which causes thick mucus to build up in various organs of the body, such as the lungs, pancreas, and intestines
dilation and curettage (D&C) surgical procedure in which the contents of the uterus are removed by dilating the

    cervix and using a surgical instrument (curette) to evacuate the uterine tissue and lining
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) serious condition where there is widespread coagulopathy and tiny

    blood clots form throughout the body
eclampsia occurs when preeclampsia progresses and the patient develops seizure activity

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             12 · Key Terms 579

ectopic pregnancy occurs when a fertilized egg becomes implanted outside the uterus
fetal resorption occurs when fetal tissues are broken down into simple molecules, which are easily absorbed by

    the body of the pregnant person
gestational trophoblastic disease rare group of tumors caused by an abnormal growth of placental trophoblastic

    tissue during pregnancy
HELLP syndrome acronym that stands for Hemolysis, Elevated Liver enzymes, and Low Platelet count and is a

    complication of liver involvement related to preeclampsia
high-risk pregnancy pregnancy that has an increased likelihood of maternal and fetal complications
hyperemesis gravidarum condition characterized by severe nausea and vomiting during the first trimester that

    can lead to electrolyte imbalances, weight loss, malnutrition, and dehydration
hyperthyroidism diagnosed in the setting of high thyroxine (free T4) levels and low thyroid-stimulating hormone

    (TSH) levels; clinical signs and symptoms include heat intolerance, weight loss, frequent stools, sweating,
    palpitations, insomnia, tachycardia, and hypertension.
hypothyroidism diagnosed in the setting of high thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels and low thyroxine (free
    T4) levels; clinical signs and symptoms include fatigue, weight gain, constipation, muscle cramps, cold
    intolerance, edema, hair loss, and dry skin
immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) autoimmune disorder in which platelets are destroyed, which leads to low
    platelet levels
incomplete abortion occurs when some of the products of conception are still present in the uterus after the
    pregnancy has been terminated
inevitable pregnancy loss occurs when the cervix dilates or the membranes rupture without delivery of the fetus
    or placenta at less than 20 weeks' gestation
intrauterine fetal demise death of the fetus that occurs at any time during pregnancy
missed abortion also referred to as a missed miscarriage, a type of spontaneous abortion where there is no
    expulsion of the products of conception and the cervix is closed; the patient may experience minimal to no signs
    or symptoms of miscarriage
multiple gestation term used to describe a pregnancy in which there is more than one fetus
oligohydramnios abnormally low volume of amniotic fluid present during pregnancy
overnutrition imbalance of nutrition that results from excessive food intake
placenta accreta occurs when the placenta grows into or through the uterine wall, which can lead to the placenta
    attaching to nearby pelvic and abdominal organs
placenta previa placenta that is located near the internal cervical os or covering it
placental abruption occurs when the placenta separates from the uterine lining, which may lead to significant
    maternal-fetal blood loss, intrauterine fetal demise, or maternal death
polyhydramnios abnormally high volume of amniotic fluid that is present during pregnancy
preeclampsia multisystem disorder that can occur after 20 weeks' gestation and, if untreated, can lead to damage
    in the vital organs and cause seizures
preexisting medical condition medical condition that is present prior to conception
preterm labor onset of labor before 37 weeks' gestation, which is considered term gestation
preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) occurs when the membranes rupture before term gestation
    at 37 weeks and there is concern for imminent delivery
recurrent abortion also known as a recurrent pregnancy loss, refers to two or more consecutive spontaneous
    abortions that occur before 20 weeks' gestation
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) systemic autoimmune disease characterized primarily by joint inflammation
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) autoimmune disorder in which the body's immune system attacks healthy
    tissues in multiple organ systems
threatened abortion diagnosed when bleeding occurs without cervical dilation during the first trimester or before
    20 weeks' gestation
tuberculosis (TB) infection caused by the bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis that primarily impacts the lungs
    and can cause symptoms such as a chronic cough, hemoptysis, fever, night sweats, chills, fatigue, and chest pain,
    and symptoms can range from mild to severe
type 1 diabetes caused by an insulin shortage from an autoimmune process that destroys the pancreatic beta
    cells that produce insulin
580 12 · Assessments

type 2 diabetes caused by beta cells that do not secrete a sufficient amount of insulin in the setting of insulin
    resistance

undernutrition imbalance of nutrition related to inadequate intake of food and necessary nutrients

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. A pregnant person at which age is at increased risk during pregnancy? Select all that apply.
           a. 18 years old
           b. 20 years old
           c. 30 years old
           d. 35 years old
           e. 40 years old

    2. What is not a complication associated with chronic hypertension during pregnancy?
           a. preeclampsia
           b. gestational diabetes
           c. fetal growth restriction
           d. polyhydramnios

    3. What medication is not recommended for hypertension during pregnancy due to teratogenic effects?
           a. lisinopril
           b. nifedipine
           c. labetalol
           d. hydralazine

    4. What adverse fetal effect is associated with undernutrition?
           a. hyperglycemia
           b. impaired bone development
           c. cardiovascular disorders
           d. psychiatric disorders

    5. What should nurses do to support migrant farm workers receiving prenatal care?
           a. Offer medication to prevent preterm labor.
           b. Reinforce that heavy lifting is safe during pregnancy.
           c. Evaluate occupational hazards and provide education.
           d. Refer all patients for mental health resources.

    6. The health-care provider is caring for an adolescent patient who is pregnant. The health-care provider knows
        that pregnancy during adolescence is linked with what influencing factor or factors? Select all that apply.
           a. low socioeconomic status
           b. psychologic problems
           c. social problems
           d. unemployment
           e. poverty

    7. The nurse receives a phone call from a patient at 36 weeks' gestation who states they are having right upper
        quadrant pain that penetrates to the upper back. What priority information does the nurse need to obtain
        from the patient? Select 3 that apply.
           a. onset and characteristics of the pain
           b. any nausea or vomiting
           c. any vaginal discharge
           d. content of last meal

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      12 · Assessments 581

         e. last time patient felt the baby move
          f. patient's blood type
         g. any headache

 8. A patient at 25 weeks' gestation has just been diagnosed with gestational diabetes. What is the most
      important education for the nurse to provide the patient at this time?
         a. induction of labor
         b. nutrition
         c. potential fetal complications
         d. potential maternal complications

 9. A pregnant person is admitted with preeclampsia. Identify the data most often associated with this condition.
         a. dependent edema
         b. BP 152/99
         c. fatigue
         d. nausea, vomiting, and weight loss

10. A patient at 32 weeks' gestation is diagnosed with polyhydramnios. The patient asks the nurse if
      polyhydramnios can affect the baby. What is the nurse's response to the patient's question?
         a. No, polyhydramnios commonly occurs toward the end of pregnancy.
         b. No, polyhydramnios is a sign that the lungs are maturing.
         c. Yes, polyhydramnios increases the risk of a preterm delivery.
         d. Yes, polyhydramnios causes umbilical cord compression.

11. A patient at 10 weeks' gestation informs the nurse they are having vaginal bleeding and cramping. After
      completing a speculum examination, the health-care provider (HCP) informs the patient their cervix is open.
      What does the nurse anticipate the HCP will inform the patient they are experiencing?
         a. complete abortion
         b. incomplete abortion
         c. inevitable abortion
         d. spontaneous abortion

12. The nurse is caring for a patient admitted with vaginal bleeding and cramping who delivered a stillborn infant
      at 22 weeks' gestation. What data in the patient's health history are associated with this complication of
      pregnancy?
         a. motor vehicle accident 1 year ago
         b. hypertension times 4 years
         c. appendectomy 2 years ago
         d. nausea every day for the past 16 weeks

13. Which TORCH infection can be spread through respiratory droplets and cause congenital heart defects,
      cataracts, deafness, and central nervous system abnormalities?
         a. toxoplasmosis
         b. syphilis
         c. rubella
         d. cytomegalovirus
         e. herpes simplex

14. What virus is highly contagious, spread through airborne particles, and can cause intrauterine fetal demise,
      skin scarring, eye, limb or neurologic abnormalities, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and low birth weight in the
      fetus?
         a. toxoplasmosis
         b. syphilis
582 12 · Assessments

           c. rubella
           d. cytomegalovirus
           e. varicella

  15. What is the difference between a complete abortion and an incomplete abortion?
           a. In a complete abortion, the uterus is empty, while in an incomplete abortion, some products of
                conception are still present in the uterus.
           b. In a complete abortion, the cervix dilates, while in an incomplete abortion, the cervix remains closed.
           c. In a complete abortion, the patient experiences minimal to no signs or symptoms of miscarriage, while
                in an incomplete abortion, the patient experiences persistent bleeding, cramping, or abdominal pain.
           d. In a complete abortion, the fetus is delivered through the birth canal, while in an incomplete abortion,
                the fetus is removed through medical or surgical intervention.

  16. What term describes a spontaneous abortion with no expulsion of the products of conception and a closed
        cervix?
           a. incomplete abortion
           b. threatened abortion
           c. missed abortion
           d. recurrent abortion

  17. When providing care for a patient with placenta previa, what nursing action is essential?
           a. administering oxytocin (Pitocin) to induce labor
           b. assisting with a vaginal delivery
           c. assessing for signs of vaginal bleeding
           d. performing a vaginal exam

  18. What is a common sign or symptom of preeclampsia during pregnancy?
           a. abdominal cramps
           b. severe headache
           c. increased appetite
           d. elevated heart rate
           e. low blood pressure

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. Explain the difference between overnutrition and undernutrition.

    2. How can the nurse support a patient with preexisting medical conditions prior to and during pregnancy?

    3. Discuss how homelessness contributes to a high-risk pregnancy.

    4. Explain the condition hyperemesis gravidarum.

    5. Explain the potential complications associated with preterm rupture of membranes.

Reflection Questions

    1. Discuss some interventions the nurse can take to support patients of low socioeconomic status who are
        pregnant or planning to conceive.

    2. What steps can a nurse take to support the nutritional needs of the patient who is pregnant and experiencing
        overnutrition or undernutrition?

    3. Discuss some interventions the nurse can take to manage the patient with preeclampsia.

Critical-Thinking Questions about Case Studies

    1. Refer to 12.1: Prenatal Care: Part 2.
        Brianne is 32 weeks' gestation and the health care provider has informed Brianne of the need to begin insulin

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            12 · References 583

        because the fasting blood sugars are rising and have been above 110 every morning for the past two weeks.
        Brianne asks the nurse if she should be concerned about the current blood sugar levels. How should the
        nurse counsel Brianne at this time?

    2. Refer to 12.1: Prenatal Care: Part 2.
        Brianne is now 36 weeks' gestation and the health-care provider has increased the amount of insulin Brianne
        is to administer. Brianne asks the nurse why the blood sugar is rising even with following the diet. How does
        the nurse respond to Brianne's question?

    3. Refer to 12.1: Prenatal Care: Part 2.
        What potential problems related to gestational diabetes might Brianne encounter for the remainder of the
        pregnancy?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. How does maternal age impact pregnancy outcomes and obstetric management?

    2. How do preexisting nutritional deficiencies impact pregnancy outcomes and obstetric management?

    3. What is the association between special populations, pregnancy outcomes, and obstetric management?

    4. How do preexisting medical conditions impact pregnancy outcomes and obstetric management?

    5. Identify and describe two conditions limited to pregnancy that may cause abdominal pain and vaginal
        bleeding in the first trimester. What are the key differences in their pathophysiology, and how would the
        management approach differ?

    6. Discuss the diagnostic tools that can be utilized to investigate conditions limited to pregnancy, such as those
        causing abdominal pain and bleeding. How do these tools contribute to the understanding of the
        pathophysiology, and how might they guide management decisions?

    7. As pregnancy progresses into the second trimester, what conditions become more relevant, and how might
        the management strategies differ from those in the first trimester?

    8. Discuss the key considerations for managing conditions in the second and third trimesters. How does the
        focus of care shift, and what interventions might be initiated to address potential complications?

References

AHRQ Safety Program for Perinatal Care. (2017). Safe magnesium sulfate administration. https://www.ahrq.gov/
    sites/default/files/wysiwyg/professionals/quality-patient-safety/hais/tools/perinatal-care/modules/strategies/
    medication/tool_safe-mgso4.docx

Alese, M. O., Moodley, J., & Naicker, T. (2021). Preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome, the role of the liver. The Journal
   of Maternal-Fetal & Neonatal Medicine: The Official Journal of the European Association of Perinatal Medicine,
   the Federation of Asia and Oceania Perinatal Societies, the International Society of Perinatal Obstetricians, 34(1),
    117-123. https://doi.org/10.1080/14767058.2019.1572737

Alexopoulos, A. S., Blair, R., & Peters, A. L. (2019). Management of preexisting diabetes in pregnancy: A review.
   JAMA, 321(18), 1811-1819. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2019.4981

American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology. (2023). Asthma and pregnancy. https://www.aaaai.org/
    tools-for-the-public/conditions-library/asthma/asthma-and-pregnancy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2014). Practice Bulletin No. 146: Management of late-term
   and postterm pregnancies. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 124(2, PART 1), 390-396. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    01.AOG.0000452744.06088.48

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017a). Marijuana use during pregnancy and lactation:
   Committee Opinion, number 722. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-opinion/articles/
    2017/10/marijuana-use-during-pregnancy-and-lactation

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017b). Opioid use and opioid use disorder in pregnancy:
584 12 · References

   Committee Opinion, number 711. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-opinion/articles/
    2017/08/opioid-use-and-opioid-use-disorder-in-pregnancy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018a). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 201: Pregestational
   diabetes mellitus. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 132(6), e228-e248. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000002960

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018b). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 200: Early pregnancy
   loss. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 132, e197-e207.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018c). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 193: Tubal ectopic
   pregnancy. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 131(3), e91-e103. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000002560

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018d). Placenta accreta spectrum. Obstetric Care
   Consensus No. 10. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 132, e259-275.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019a). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 203 Summary: Chronic
   hypertension in pregnancy. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 133(1), 215-219. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000003021

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019b). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 207: Thrombocytopenia
   in pregnancy. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 133(3), e181-e193. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000003100

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020a). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 223: Thyroid disease in
   pregnancy Obstetrics & Gynecology, 135(6), e261-e274. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000003893

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020b). Management of stillbirth: Obstetric Care Consensus
   No. 10. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 135(3), e110-e132. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000003719

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020c). ACOG Practice Bulletin Summary No. 222:
   Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 135(6), 1492-1495. https://doi.org/
    10.1097/AOG.0000000000003892

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021a). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 233: Anemia in
   pregnancy. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 138(2), e55-e64. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000004477

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021b). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 230: Obesity in
   pregnancy. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 137(6), e128-e144. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000004395

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022a). Obstetric care consensus: Pregnancy at age 35 years
   or older. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 140(2), 348-366. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/obstetric-
    care-consensus/articles/2022/08/pregnancy-at-age-35-years-or-older

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022b). FAQs: The Rh factor: How it can affect your
   pregnancy. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/the-rh-factor-how-it-can-affect-your-pregnancy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023). Health care for immigrants: ACOG Committee
   Statement No. 4. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 141(2), e427-e433. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000005061

American Diabetes Association. (2020). 14. Management of diabetes in pregnancy: Standards of medical care in
   diabetes-2020. Diabetes Care, 43(Suppl 1), S183-S192. https://doi.org/10.2337/dc20-S014

Arendt, K. W., & Long, M. E. (2020). Problems of early pregnancy. In D. H. Chestnut (Ed.), Chestnut's obstetric
   anesthesia (pp. 350-367). Elsevier.

Berghella, V., & Saccone, G. (2019). Fetal fibronectin testing for reducing the risk of preterm birth. The Cochrane
   Database of Systematic Reviews, 7(7), CD006843. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD006843.pub3

Burchill, L. J., Lameijer, H., Roos-Hesselink, J. W., Grewal, J., Ruys, T. P., Kulikowski, J. D., Burchill, L. A., Oudijk, M.
    A., Wald, R. M., Colman, J. M., Siu, S. C., Pieper, P. G., & Silversides, C. K. (2015). Pregnancy risks in women with
   pre-existing coronary artery disease, or following acute coronary syndrome. Heart (British Cardiac Society),

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            12 · References 585

   101(7), 525-529. https://doi.org/10.1136/heartjnl-2014-306676

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). Pregnancy: What you need to know about marijuana use and
   pregnancy. https://www.cdc.gov/marijuana/health-effects/pregnancy.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021a). Know more about hepatitis: Test for hepatitis C during every
   pregnancy. https://www.cdc.gov/knowmorehepatitis/hcp/Test-For-HepC-During-Pregnancy.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021b). STDs during pregnancy treatment and care.
    https://www.cdc.gov/std/pregnancy/treatment.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022a). Substance use during pregnancy. https://www.cdc.gov/
    reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/substance-abuse/substance-abuse-during-pregnancy.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022b). Type 1 or type 2 diabetes and pregnancy.
    https://www.cdc.gov/pregnancy/diabetes-types.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022c). Screening recommendations. National Center for HIV, Viral
    Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/nchhstp/pregnancy/screening/index.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022d). Reproductive health: Data and statistics. https://www.cdc.gov/
    reproductivehealth/data_stats/index.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022e). Parasites: Toxoplasmosis (toxoplasma infection): Resources
   for health professionals. https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/toxoplasmosis/health_professionals/index.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022f). Chickenpox (Varicella): For healthcare professionals. National
    Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD), Division of Viral Diseases. https://www.cdc.gov/
    chickenpox/hcp/index.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023). Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). https://www.cdc.gov/
    breastfeeding/breastfeeding-special-circumstances/maternal-or-infant-illnesses/hiv.html

Chaudhry, K., Tafti, D., & Siccardi, M. A. (2023). Anembryonic pregnancy. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK499938/

Chen, D., Niu, Q., Liu, S., Shao, W., Huang, Y., Xu, Y., Li, Y., Liu, J., Wang, X., & Yang, H. (2023). The correlation
    between prenatal maternal active smoking and neurodevelopmental disorders in children: A systematic review
   and meta-analysis. BMC Public Health, 23(1), 611. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-023-15496-z

Chilaka, V. N., & Konje, J. C. (2021). Viral hepatitis in pregnancy. European Journal of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and
   Reproductive Biology, 256, 287-296. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejogrb.2020.11.052

Cleveland Clinic. (2022). Teratogens. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/articles/24325-teratogens

Cohen, A., Osorio, R., & Page, L. M. (2017). Substance misuse in pregnancy. Obstetrics, Gynecology and
   Reproductive Medicine, 27(10), 316-321. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ogrm.2017.07.003

Coleman, L. (2019). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 212: Pregnancy and heart disease. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 133(5),
    e320-e356. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000003243

Cortés-Albornoz, M. C., García-Guáqueta, D. P., Velez-van-Meerbeke, A., & Talero-Gutiérrez, C. (2021). Maternal
   nutrition and neurodevelopment: A scoping review. Nutrients, 13(10), 3530. https://doi.org/10.3390/
    nu13103530

Cunningham F. G., Leveno, K. J., Bloom, S. L., Dashe, J. S., Hoffman B. L., Casey, B. M., & Spong, C. Y. (2018).
   Williams obstetrics (25th ed.). McGraw-Hill.

D'Alton, M., & Breslin, N. (2020). Management of multiple gestations. International Journal of Gynaecology and
   Obstetrics: The Official Organ of the International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, 150(1), 3-9.
    https://doi.org/10.1002/ijgo.13168

de la Calle, M., Bartha, J. L., Lopez, C. M., Turiel, M., Martinez, N., Arribas, S. M., & Ramiro-Cortijo, D. (2021). Younger
586 12 · References

   age in adolescent pregnancies is associated with higher risk of adverse outcomes. International Journal of
   Environmental Research and Public Health, 18(16), 8514. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18168514

Dimitriadis, E., Menkhorst, E., Saito, S., Kutteh, W. H., & Brosens, J. J. (2020). Recurrent pregnancy loss. Nature
   Reviews: Disease primers, 6(1), 98. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-020-00228-z

Eltonsy, S., Forget, A., Beauchesne, M. F., & Blais, L. (2015). Risk of congenital malformations for asthmatic pregnant
    women using a long-acting -agonist and inhaled corticosteroid combination versus higher-dose inhaled
   corticosteroid monotherapy. The Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 135(1), 123-130. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.jaci.2014.07.051

England, A. (2023, June 22). Misoprostol (Cytotec) for missed miscarriage or spontaneous abortion. Healthline.
    https://www.healthline.com/health/cytotec-for-missed-abortion

Fejzo, M. S., Trovik, J., Grooten, I. J., Sridharan, K., Roseboom, T. J., Vikanes, Å., Painter, R. C., & Mullin, P. M. (2019).
   Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy and hyperemesis gravidarum. Nature Reviews: Disease Primers, 5(1), 62.
    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-019-0110-3

Genc, S., Emeklioglu, C. N., Cingillioglu, B., Akturk, E., Ozkan, H. T., & Mihmanli, V. (2021). The effect of parity on
   obstetric and perinatal outcomes in pregnancies at the age of 40 and above: A retrospective study. Croatian
   Medical Journal, 62(2), 130-136. https://doi.org/10.3325/cmj.2021.62.130

Gieles, N. C., Tankink, J. B., van Midde, M., Düker, J., van der Lans, P., Wessels, C. M., Bloemenkamp, K. W. M.,
    Bonsel, G., van den Akker, T., Goosen, S., Rijken, M. J., & Browne, J. L. (2019). Maternal and perinatal outcomes
   of asylum seekers and undocumented migrants in Europe: A systematic review. European Journal of Public
   Health, 29(4), 714-723. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurpub/ckz042

Girardi, G., Longo, M., & Bremer, A. A. (2023). Social determinants of health in pregnant individuals from
   underrepresented, understudied, and underreported populations in the United States. International Journal for
   Equity in Health, 22(186). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12939-023-01963-x

Glick, I., Kadish, E., & Rottenstreich, M. (2021). Management of pregnancy in women of advanced maternal age:
   Improving outcomes for mother and baby. International Journal of Women's Health, 13, 751-759.
    https://doi.org/10.2147/IJWH.S283216

Govender, D., Naidoo, S., & Taylor, M. (2020). "I have to provide for another life emotionally, physically and
    financially": Understanding pregnancy, motherhood and the future aspirations of adolescent mothers in
   KwaZulu-Natal South, Africa. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth, 20(1), 620. https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s12884-020-03319-7

Griggs, K. M., Hrelic, D. A., Williams, N., McEwen-Campbell, M., & Cypher, R. (2020). Preterm labor and birth: A
   clinical review. MCN. The American Journal of Maternal Child Nursing, 45(6), 328-337. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    NMC.0000000000000656

Guttmacher Institute. (2023, May 1). An overview of consent to reproductive health services by young people.
    https://www.guttmacher.org/state-policy/explore/overview-minors-consent-law

Hacker, M., Firk, C., Konrad, K., Paschke, K., Neulen, J., Herpertz-Dahlmann, B., & Dahmen, B. (2021). Pregnancy
   complications, substance abuse, and prenatal care predict birthweight in adolescent mothers. Archives Belges
   de Santé Publique [Archives of Public Health], 79(1), 1-137. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13690-021-00642-z

Hladunewich M. A. (2017). Chronic kidney disease and pregnancy. Seminars in Nephrology, 37(4), 337-346.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semnephrol.2017.05.005

Hwang, D. S., & Mahdy, H. (2023). Polyhydramnios. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK562140/

Jain, D., Atmapoojya, P., Colah, R., & Lodha, P. (2019). Sickle cell disease and pregnancy. Mediterranean Journal of
   Hematology and Infectious Diseases, 11(1), e2019040. https://doi.org/10.4084/MJHID.2019.040

Jauniaux, E., Alfirevic, Z., Bhide, A. G., Belfort, M. A., Burton, G. J., Collins, S. L., Dornan, S., Jurkovic, D., Kayem, G.,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            12 · References 587

    Kingdom, J., Silver, R., Sentilhes, L., & Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. (2019). Placenta
   praevia and placenta accreta: Diagnosis and management: Green-top Guideline No. 27a. BJOG: An International
   Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 126(1), e1-e48. https://doi.org/10.1111/1471-0528.15306

Johns, E. C., Denison, F. C., Norman, J. E., & Reynolds, R. M. (2018). Gestational diabetes mellitus: Mechanisms,
   treatment, and complications. Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism: TEM, 29(11), 743-754. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.tem.2018.09.004

Kamel, H., Roman, M. J., Pitcher, A., & Devereux, R. B. (2016). Pregnancy and the risk of aortic dissection or rupture:
   A cohort-crossover analysis. Circulation, 134(7), 527-533. https://doi.org/ 10.1161/
    CIRCULATIONAHA.116.021594

Keilman, C., & Shanks, A. L. (2024). Oligohydramnios. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK562326/

Khalid, F., Mahendraker, N., & Tonismae, T. (2023). HELLP syndrome. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK560615/

Kim, M. K., Lee, S. M., Bae, S. H., Kim, H. J., Lim, N. G., Yoon, S. J., Lee, J. Y., & Jo, M. W. (2018). Socioeconomic
   status can affect pregnancy outcomes and complications, even with a universal healthcare system. International
   Journal for Equity in Health, 17(1), 2. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12939-017-0715-7

Korevaar, T. I. M., Medici, M., Visser, T. J., & Peeters, R. P. (2017). Thyroid disease in pregnancy: New insights in
   diagnosis and clinical management. Nature Reviews. Endocrinology, 13(10), 610-622. https://doi.org/10.1038/
    nrendo.2017.93

Laskowska, M. (2023). Eclampsia: A critical pregnancy complication demanding enhanced maternal care: A review.
   Medical Science Monitor: International Medical Journal of Experimental and Clinical Research, 29, e939919.
    https://doi.org/10.12659/MSM.939919

Leidecker, K., & Dorman, K. (2016). Pulmonary disorders complicating pregnancy. The Journal of Perinatal &
   Neonatal Nursing, 30(1), 45-53. https://doi.org/10.1097/JPN.0000000000000148.

Li, Y., & Meador, K. J. (2022). Epilepsy and pregnancy. Continuum (Minneapolis, Minn.), 28(1), 34-54.
    https://doi.org/10.1212/CON.0000000000001056

Lockwood, C. J. (2014, December 5). ACOG guidelines: Management of late-term and postterm pregnancies.
    https://www.contemporaryobgyn.net/view/acog-guidelines-management-late-term-and-postterm-pregnancies

Lui, M. W., & Ho, P. C. (2020). First trimester termination of pregnancy. Best Practice & Research Clinical Obstetrics
   & Gynaecology, 63, 13-23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2019.06.004

MacDonald, S. C., Bateman, B. T., McElrath, T. F., & Hernández-Díaz, S. (2015). Mortality and morbidity during
   delivery hospitalization among pregnant women with epilepsy in the United States. JAMA Neurology, 72(9),
    981-988. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.1017

Maheshwari, M. V., Khalid, N., Patel, P. D., Alghareeb, R., & Hussain, A. (2022). Maternal and neonatal outcomes of
   adolescent pregnancy: A narrative review. Cureus, 14(6), e25921. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.25921

March of Dimes. (2021). Cytomegalovirus and pregnancy. Healthy Moms. Strong Babies.
    https://www.marchofdimes.org/find-support/topics/planning-baby/cytomegalovirus-and-pregnancy

Marufu, T. C., Ahankari, A., Coleman, T., & Lewis, S. (2015). Maternal smoking and the risk of still birth: Systematic
   review and meta-analysis. BMC Public Health, 15(1), 1-15.

Maslovich, M. M., & Burke, L. M. (2022). Intrauterine fetal demise. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557533/

Mayer, C., & Apodaca-Ramos, I. (2023). Tocolysis. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK562212/

McGeough, C., Walsh, A., & Clyne, B. (2020). Barriers and facilitators perceived by women while homeless and
588 12 · References

   pregnant in accessing antenatal and or postnatal healthcare: A qualitative evidence synthesis. Health and Social
   Care in the Community, 28(5), 1380-1393. https://doi.org/10.1111/hsc.12972

Meng, M. L., Arendt, K. W., Banayan, J. M., Bradley, E. A., Vaught, A. J., Hameed, A. B., Harris, J., Bryner, B., Mehta, L.
    S., & American Heart Association Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, Council on
    Cardiopulmonary, Critical Care, Perioperative and Resuscitation, & Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease.
    (2023). Anesthetic care of the pregnant patient with cardiovascular disease: A scientific statement from the
   American Heart Association. Circulation, 147(11), e657-e673. https://doi.org/10.1161/
    CIR.0000000000001121

Merz, W. M., Fischer-Betz, R., Hellwig, K., Lamprecht, G., & Gembruch, U. (2022). Pregnancy and autoimmune
   disease. Deutsches Arzteblatt International, 119(9), 145-156. https://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.m2021.0353

Morales, D. R., Fonkwen, L., & Nordeng, H. M. E. (2021). Antithyroid drug use during pregnancy and the risk of birth
    defects in offspring: systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies with methodological
   considerations. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 87(10), 3890-3900. https://doi.org/10.1111/
    bcp.14805

Nana, A., & Zema, T. (2018). Dietary practices and associated factors during pregnancy in northwestern Ethiopia.
   BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth, 18(1), 183. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-018-1822-1

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2020). Nutrition during pregnancy and lactation:
   Exploring new evidence: Proceedings of a Workshop. National Academies Press (US).
    https://nap.nationalacademies.org/read/25841/chapter/1

Ngan, H. Y. S., Seckl, M. J., Berkowitz, R. S., Xiang, Y., Golfier, F., Sekharan, P. K., Lurain, J. R., & Massuger, L. (2021).
   Diagnosis and management of gestational trophoblastic disease: 2021 update. International Journal of
   Gynaecology and Obstetrics: The Official Organ of the International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics,
   155(Suppl 1), 86-93. https://doi.org/10.1002/ijgo.13877

NIDA. (2021, April 12). What are the risks of smoking during pregnancy? https://nida.nih.gov/publications/research-
    reports/tobacco-nicotine-e-cigarettes/what-are-risks-smoking-during-pregnancy

Nursing 2024 Drug Handbook (44th ed.). (2023). Wolters Kluwer.

Nwaohiri, A., Schillie, S., Bulterys, M., & Kourtis, A. P. (2018). Hepatitis C virus infection in children: How do we
   prevent it and how do we treat it? Expert Review of Anti-infective Therapy, 16(9), 689-694. https://doi.org/
    10.1080/14787210.2018.1509707

Okosieme, O. E., Khan, I., & Taylor, P. N. (2018). Preconception management of thyroid dysfunction. Clinical
   Endocrinology, 89(3), 269-279. https://doi.org/10.1111/cen.13731

Patel, S. I., & Pennell, P. B. (2016). Management of epilepsy during pregnancy: An update. Therapeutic Advances in
   Neurological Disorders, 9(2), 118-129. https://doi.org/10.1177/1756285615623934

Petrakos, G., Andriopoulos, P., & Tsironi, M. (2016). Pregnancy in women with thalassemia: Challenges and
   solutions. International Journal of Women's Health, 8, 441-451. https://doi.org/10.2147/IJWH.S89308

Sapra, K. J., Buck Louis, G. M., Sundaram, R., Joseph, K. S., Bates, L. M., Galea, S., & Ananth, C. V. (2016). Signs and
   symptoms associated with early pregnancy loss: Findings from a population-based preconception cohort. Human
   Reproduction (Oxford, England), 31(4), 887-896. https://doi 10.1093/humrep/dew010

Selwyn, C. N. (2020). Quality care for women's health: When home is not safe for mothers. The Journal for Nurse
   Practitioners, 16, 547-548. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nurpra.2020.04.013

Sheen, J. J., Wright, J. D., Goffman, D., Kern-Goldberger, A. R., Booker, W., Siddiq, Z., D'Alton, M. E., & Friedman, A.
   M. (2018). Maternal age and risk for adverse outcomes. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 219(4),
    390.e1-390.e15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2018.08.034

Shen, M., Smith, G. N., Rodger, M., White, R. R., Walker, M. C., & Wen, S. W. (2017). Comparison of risk factors and
   outcomes of gestational hypertension and pre-eclampsia. PloS One, 12(4), e0175914. https://doi.org/10.1371/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            12 · References 589

    journal.pone.0175914

Shi, H., Chen, L., Wang, Y., Sun, M., Guo, Y., Ma, S., Wang, X., Jiang, H., Wang, X., Lu, J., Ge, L., Dong, S., Zhuang, Y.,
    Zhao, Y., Wei, Y., Ma, X., & Qiao, J. (2022). Severity of anemia during pregnancy and adverse maternal and fetal
   outcomes. JAMA Network Open, 5(2), e2147046. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.47046

Sim, B. L., Daniel, R. S., Hong, S. S., Matar, R. H., Ganiel, I., Nakanishi, H., Mansour, R., Than, C. A., & Alrahmani, L.
    (2023). Pregnancy outcomes in women with rheumatoid arthritis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
   Journal of Clinical Rheumatology: Practical Reports on Rheumatic & Musculoskeletal Diseases, 29(1), 36-42.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/RHU.0000000000001935

Skidmore-Roth, L. (2024). Mosby's nursing drug reference (37th ed.). Mosby.

Szlachta-McGinn, A., Aserlind, A., Duthely, L., Oldak, S., Babriwala, R., Montgomerie, E., & Potter, J. (2020). HIV
   screening during pregnancy in a U.S. HIV epicenter. Infectious Diseases in Obstetrics and Gynecology, 2020,
    8196342. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/8196342

U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2020). Dietary Guidelines for
   Americans, 2020-2025. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2020-12/
    Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans_2020-2025.pdf

U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. (2018). Screening for syphilis infection in pregnant women: US Preventive
   Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation statement. Journal of American Medical Association,
   320(9):911-917. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2018.11785

Urato A. C. (2020). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 220: Management of genital herpes in pregnancy. Obstetrics &
   Gynecology, 136(4), 850-851. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000004115

Ursache, A., Lozneanu, L., Bujor, I., Cristofor, A., Popescu, I., Gireada, R., Mandici, C. E., Gin, M. A., Grigore, M., &
    Matasariu, D. R. (2023). Epidemiology of adverse outcomes in teenage pregnancy--A northeastern Romanian
   tertiary referral center. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 20(2), 1226.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph20021226

van Dijk, M. M., Kolte, A. M., Limpens, J., Kirk, E., Quenby, S., van Wely, M., & Goddijn, M. (2020). Recurrent
    pregnancy loss: Diagnostic workup after two or three pregnancy losses? A systematic review of the literature and
   meta-analysis. Human Reproduction Update, 26(3), 356-367. https://doi.org/10.1093/humupd/dmz048

Wiles, K., Chappell, L., Clark, K., Elman, L., Hall, M., Lightstone, L., Mohamed, G., Mukherjee, D., Nelson-Piercy, C.,
   Webster, P., Whybrow, R., & Braham, K. (2019). Clinical practice guideline on pregnancy and renal disease. BMC
   Nephrology, 20, 401. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-019-1560-2

Wilson, C. A., Finch, E., Kerr, C., & Shakespeare, J. (2020). Alcohol, smoking, and other substance use in the
   perinatal period BMJ (Clinical research ed.), 369, m1627. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m1627

Wilson, E. R., & Kahn, A. (2018). Second trimester pregnancy complications. Healthline.
    https://www.healthline.com/health/pregnancy/second-trimester-complications#outlook

World Health Organization. (2021). Abortion. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/abortion

World Health Organization. (2022). Adolescent pregnancy. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
    adolescent-pregnancy

World Health Organization. (2023a). Anaemia. Retrieved March 18, 2023, from https://www.who.int/data/nutrition/
    nlis/info/anaemia

World Health Organization. (2023b). Maternal mortality. Retrieved March 18, 2023, from https://www.who.int/news-
    room/fact-sheets/detail/maternal-mortality

Zhou, D., & Wen, X. (2022). Self-employment and health inequality of migrant workers. BMC Health Services
   Research, 22(1), 1-937. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-022-08340-4
590 12 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 13

Prenatal Testing

FIGURE 13.1 Prenatal Ultrasound Ultrasonography allows expectant parents to "see" their growing fetus. (credit: "Late second trimester
ultrasound" by Robyn Alvarez/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
13.1 Prenatal Testing during the First Trimester
13.2 Prenatal Testing during the Second Trimester
13.3 Prenatal Testing during the Third Trimester
INTRODUCTION Prenatal screening and diagnostic tests are recommended to provide baseline information.
Ultrasound can provide information such as gestational age, congenital abnormalities, and the condition of a fetus in
a high-risk pregnancy. Blood tests are used to determine blood type, Rh status, antibodies, STIs, genetic
abnormalities, anemia, and gestational diabetes. Expectant parents are educated on the reasons for, and risks and
benefits of, prenatal testing when deciding to have prenatal testing performed. Some prenatal tests should be
performed at specific times throughout the first, second, and third trimesters. It is important that these tests are
performed at the appropriate time. This chapter outlines the different types of prenatal testing for the first, second,
and third trimesters.
592  13 · Prenatal Testing

     13.1 Prenatal Testing during the First Trimester

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the purpose and results of ultrasound examinations performed in the first trimester of pregnancy
         · Explain the purpose and results of maternal assays and multiple marker screenings performed in the first

             trimester of pregnancy
         · Explain the purpose and results of cell-free DNA
         · Explain the purpose and results of carrier screening
         · Explain the purpose and results of chorionic villus sampling
         · List the routine lab tests performed in the first trimester of pregnancy
         · Discuss the patient education and nursing actions required when assisting with prenatal testing in the

             first trimester

     The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends that all pregnant persons be offered
     prenatal genetic assessment through screening and diagnostic tests regardless of risk factors (American College of
     Obstetricians and Gynecologists [ACOG], 2020c). A screening is a test used during pregnancy to identify whether a
     fetus is more or less likely to have certain birth defects, many of which are genetic disorders. Genetic testing allows
     patients the opportunity to seek counseling for obstetric management and recommendations, early referral to
     pediatric subspecialists, or earlier and safer pregnancy termination if the results are abnormal. Common reasons for
     prenatal testing are listed in Table 13.1. Unfortunately, some pregnant persons cannot afford expensive screening.

     Factor                 Indications

     Maternal                         · maternal age 35 years or greater
                                      · preexisting diabetes with insulin treatment
                                      · hypertension
                                      · known exposure to viral infections before or during pregnancy
                                      · sexually transmitted infections
                                      · parents carry or express a genetic disorder
                                      · systemic lupus erythematosus
                                      · sickle cell disease
                                      · renal disease
                                      · thyroid disorders that are poorly controlled
                                      · substance use or abuse
                                      · known exposure to teratogenic substance(s) before or during pregnancy
                                      · obesity

     Fetal                            · determining gestational age
                                      · suspected growth restriction
                                      · multiple gestation
                                      · fetal anomalies and aneuploidy
                                      · large for gestational age (LGA) or small for gestational age (SGA)

     Obstetric                        · previous stillbirth
                                      · history of multiple spontaneous abortions
                                      · history of abnormal serum markers
                                      · history of previous child with abnormalities

                       TABLE 13.1 Indications for Prenatal Testing

     The decision to have prenatal screening is up to each pregnant person. A positive screening indicates a higher risk of
     the fetus having a genetic, chromosomal, or structural abnormality. Further diagnostic testing is needed to confirm a
     diagnosis. Some couples choose to have prenatal testing to plan for medical care their child may need. Other

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.1 · Prenatal Testing during the First Trimester                                                                          593

couples choose to terminate the pregnancy if the results are abnormal.

Ultrasound

An ultrasound is a safe and painless diagnostic procedure that allows health-care providers to see inside the uterus
and examine the developing fetus without invasive measures (ACOG, 2017a). Ultrasounds use high-frequency
sound waves to detect objects in their path and return the waves as echoes. The returning sound waves return as
two or three-dimensional images that show the structure of the densities detected. Some expectant persons may
undergo ultrasound in their first trimester to confirm the pregnancy.

During pregnancy, health-care providers use two main types of ultrasound: transvaginal and abdominal.
Transvaginal ultrasound scans are usually performed in the first trimester and require the bladder to be empty. The
indications for a first trimester ultrasound are as follows:

    · Estimate gestational age.
    · Help screen for certain genetic disorders.
    · Count the number of fetuses.
    · Check the fetus's heart rate.
    · Check for suspected ectopic pregnancy.
    · Evaluate pelvic pain.
    · Evaluate vaginal bleeding.
    · Evaluate suspected trophoblastic disease.
    · Measure nuchal translucency.
    · Evaluate pelvic mass.
    · Provide information as an adjunct to chorionic villus sampling (William et al., 2023).

Ultrasound for Confirmation of Pregnancy
In early pregnancy, a transvaginal ultrasound scan may be recommended to identify the presence or absence of an
intrauterine gestational sac and evaluate if the pregnancy is viable. It will also look at the ovaries and fallopian tubes
of the patient to check for any abnormalities. Ultrasound can also assist in assessing suspected ectopic
pregnancies, multiple gestation, or any other pregnancy-related complications (ACOG, 2017a). During the first
trimester, a transvaginal ultrasound scan may be recommended following a positive human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG) level to establish the gestational age of the pregnancy. The gestational sac can be detected at 5 to 6 weeks.
The fetal pole and cardiac activity are detectable by ultrasound at 6 weeks (Murugan et al., 2020).

For a transvaginal ultrasound, educate the patient that a transvaginal probe encased in a disposable cover and
coated with gel will be inserted into the vagina. The patient may be asked to insert this probe themselves. The
patient will be instructed to lie on their back with their knees bent, and the ultrasound technician will assist with
positioning. The transvaginal ultrasound is performed with the bladder empty.

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

Patient-Centered Care

The nurse will focus on the patient's understanding and ensure privacy and comfort during the transvaginal
ultrasound.

    · During a transvaginal ultrasound, the nurse educates the patient on the procedure.
    · The nurse must ensure the patient is draped and feels comfortable.
    · The nurse will assess for pain or discomfort during the procedure.
    · If the patient is in pain during the procedure, the nurse will advocate for the patient's comfort.
    · The nurse will assess for pain or stress after the procedure.
    · If the patient continues to have pain after the procedure, the nurse will report symptoms to the health-care

        provider.

During an abdominal ultrasound exam, the gel is spread over the abdomen, and the ultrasound technician moves
the transducer over the abdomen to produce the picture (Figure 13.2). The patient can be positioned to see the
594  13 · Prenatal Testing

     images if desired. The patient may be asked to come to the ultrasound exam with a full bladder to help displace the
     intestines and evaluate the uterus with better visibility.

     FIGURE 13.2 First Trimester Ultrasound First-time parents may feel disappointed or concerned that the ultrasound image early in
     pregnancy does not "look like a baby." The nurse can provide reassurance while teaching about fetal development. (credit: "First trimester
     ultrasound" by Robyn Alvarez/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

     Nuchal Translucency
     The nuchal translucency screening is an ultrasound scan that measures the thickness of space at the back of the
     fetus's neck, known as the nuchal fold thickness. This screening assesses the risk of trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)
     and heart, abdominal wall, and skeleton defects. Nuchal translucency screening is usually done between 11 and 14
     weeks of gestation (Mount Sinai Health System, 2022).

     Abdominal ultrasound will be used to perform this test to measure the nuchal fold. During pregnancy, it is common
     for fetuses to have some fluid at the back of their neck. However, if the fetus has Down syndrome or another genetic
     disorder, there may be an increase in the amount of fluid present, causing the space to appear thicker on an
     ultrasound. (Mount Sinai Health System, 2022) (Figure 13.3).

     FIGURE 13.3 Nuchal Translucency Nuchal translucency is measured at the nuchal fold. Excess fluid indicates the fetus is at higher risk for
     chromosome abnormalities, such as trisomy 21. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     A nuchal translucency measurement is taken to determine the risk of the fetus having trisomy 21, or Down
     syndrome. When the results of the nuchal translucency test are normal, it is unlikely that the fetus has Down
     syndrome or any other genetic disorder (Mount Sinai Health System, 2022). However, if an excess amount of fluid

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.1 · Prenatal Testing during the First Trimester                                                                            595

(greater than or equal to 3 mL) is at the back of the neck, the test result is positive. This indicates that the fetus is at
a higher risk of having trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), trisomy 18, trisomy 13, Turner syndrome, or congenital heart
disease. The health-care provider may recommend an amniocentesis if the nuchal translucency screening returns
an abnormal result (Mount Sinai Health System, 2022).

In addition to the ultrasound, a multiple marker blood test will also be performed. The ultrasound and blood test
results are analyzed to determine the risk of the fetus having Down syndrome or another genetic disorder (Mount
Sinai Health System, 2022).

        LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

Effect of Age on Antepartum Testing

The risk of fetal genetic disorders in pregnancy increases with advanced maternal age of 35 or greater. With each
year over 35, the risk of genetic disorders and pregnancy complications increases. Prenatal screening
recommendations for advanced maternal age include:

    · first trimester ultrasound
    · detailed fetal anatomic ultrasound
    · ultrasonogram for growth assessment in the third trimester
    · prenatal genetic screening (serum screening with or without nuchal translucency ultrasound or cell-free DNA

        screening)
    · diagnostic testing (chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis)

(ACOG, 2022b)

Maternal Assays

Prenatal genetic screening and diagnostic testing should be offered to all pregnant persons regardless of their age
and risk of chromosomal abnormalities. Early and regular prenatal care helps to establish the accurate dating of the
pregnancy due to the gestation-specific timing of maternal assay testing. The nurse has an important role in
educating pregnant persons about the different prenatal screenings. Every pregnant person should have the
opportunity to accept or refuse the recommended screenings.

Multiple Marker Screen
A multiple marker screen is a blood test for pregnant persons that screen for chromosomal disorders and neural
tube defects. Between 10 and 14 weeks of pregnancy, a screening (also known as integrated screen part 1) can be
performed using PAPP-A and free B-hCG markers. If PAPP-A levels are low before the 14th week, there may be an
increased risk of Down syndrome and trisomy 18. Conversely, high levels of hCG may indicate an increased risk of
Down syndrome. An ultrasound scan is also used to measure fetal nuchal translucency, indicating an increased risk
for Down syndrome if the measurement is higher than normal for fetuses of the same age (Shiefa et al., 2013). The
ultrasound and blood work results are combined with the pregnant person's age to calculate the risk of the fetus
having Down syndrome, trisomy 18, or other defects (Palka et al., 2019).

Alpha-Fetoprotein
The alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) test is a blood test that measures the level of alpha-fetoprotein in the pregnant
person's blood. AFP is dispersed from fetal plasma into fetal urine and excreted into the amniotic sac. This
screening can be measured from maternal serum or from amniotic fluid. The AFP test is considered a screening, not
a diagnostic test. An abnormal result does not mean the developing fetus has an abnormality but suggests a
potential increase in risk (Chen et al., 2022). Measurement of the alpha-fetoprotein L2 variant in the first trimester
combined with the PAPP-A markers, free B-hCG, and nuchal translucency can also demonstrate an increase in fetal
risk of trisomy 21 (Chen et al., 2022).

Cell Free DNA (cfDNA)

A cell-free DNA (cfDNA) screening is a blood test that can be done as early as 10 weeks' gestation and up until
delivery that screens for certain conditions caused by an abnormal number of chromosomes. This test does not
596  13 · Prenatal Testing

     screen for all types of chromosomal disorders and is not diagnostic. Should the results come back abnormal,
     additional testing, like an amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling (CVS), would be needed to confirm a diagnosis
     (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2021b).

     The maternal blood sample obtained is analyzed for an abnormal amount of DNA from chromosomes 21, 18, and
     13. This test screens for trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), trisomy 18 (Edwards syndrome), and trisomy 13 (Patau
     syndrome) (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2021b). Cell-free DNA results are most accurate in screening for
     trisomy 21, 18, and 13 and for pregnant persons at higher risk for genetic disorders (Raymond et al., 2022).

     Cell-free DNA screening may be recommended for patients at high risk of having a fetus with a chromosome
     disorder. This population includes:

         · persons who are 35 or older
         · persons with a history of having a previous baby with a chromosome disorder
         · persons with abnormal ultrasound results
         · persons with other abnormal prenatal tests

     Some health-care providers offer this screening to all pregnant persons, regardless of their risk factors. This
     screening is low risk for complications because it involves just a blood draw, and it has a high accuracy rate
     compared to other prenatal screenings. It generally takes around a week to receive the results. If the results come
     back negative, it is unlikely the fetus has a chromosomal disorder. However, if the results are positive, the fetus is at
     risk for having a chromosomal disorder, and further testing is needed to confirm a diagnosis. (U.S. National Library of
     Medicine, 2021b).

     Carrier Screening

     A carrier screening can determine if a pregnant person or their partner carries a gene for specific genetic disorders.
     This screening can be done either before or during pregnancy and offers valuable insights into the probability of
     having a child with a genetic disorder. To determine if one partner is a carrier, a sample of blood, saliva, or cheek
     tissue is collected and tested. The partner with the higher likelihood of being a carrier is typically tested first. If the
     initial test comes back negative, no further testing is required. However, if the results indicate that the first partner is
     a carrier, the other partner will also undergo testing (ACOG, 2020a).

     Carrier screening is usually looking for recessive disorders. If a person has the gene for a disorder but does not
     manifest symptoms of the disorder, they are a carrier. Because a carrier does not have the disorder, they often do
     not know that they are a carrier. When both parents carry the gene for a disorder, their child has a 25 percent chance
     of inheriting the gene from each of them and developing the disorder. Additionally, the child has a 50 percent chance
     of being a carrier of the disorder. However, if only one parent is a carrier, the child has a 50 percent chance of also
     being a carrier of the disorder but will not develop the disorder (ACOG, 2020a). For a more detailed explanation, see
     4.2 Genetics.

     Persons considering pregnancy or currently pregnant should be offered carrier screening for cystic fibrosis,
     hemoglobinopathies, and spinal muscular atrophy. Patients also have the option to undergo targeted or expanded
     carrier screening for other disorders. Targeted carrier screening tests for disorders based on ethnicity or family
     history. Expanded carrier screening is done without regard to race or ethnicity (ACOG, 2022a).

     If the pregnant person and partner are both carriers of a genetic disorder, diagnostic testing can be done on the
     fetus with each pregnancy to determine if the fetus has the disorder. Some couples who are both carriers choose to
     use in vitro fertilization (IVF) with donor eggs or sperm to get pregnant. This option allows the embryo to be tested
     for the disorder before it is transferred to the uterus. Other couples who are both carriers may choose not to have
     children or to adopt a child (ACOG, 2020a).

     Carrier screening results are private health information. It is against the law for health insurers to request genetic
     testing results or use them to determine coverage, rates, or preexisting conditions, according to the Genetic
     Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA). GINA also prohibits employers from discriminating against
     employees or job seekers based on genetic information, but this law does not apply to life insurance, long-term care
     insurance, or disability insurance (ACOG, 2020a).

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.1 · Prenatal Testing during the First Trimester                                                                       597

        LINK TO LEARNING

Prenatal genetic testing is performed to both confirm normality of the fetus and screen for or diagnose
abnormalities. Take this quiz on prenatal genetic testing (https://openstax.org/r/77genetictestng) to test your
knowledge.

Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS)

A chorionic villus sampling (CVS) is a prenatal diagnostic test conducted between the 10th and 13th week of
pregnancy to diagnose fetal chromosomal, metabolic, or DNA abnormalities. This test involves taking a biopsy of the
placental tissue (chorionic villi) (Jones & Montero, 2022). CVS cannot diagnose neural tube or body wall defects, as
those require measuring alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) levels. CVS is generally recommended for persons with the
following risk factors:

    · abnormal cell-free DNA test
    · first trimester abnormal ultrasound
    · history of having a child with a structural birth defect, genetic disease, chromosomal abnormality, or

        metabolic disorder
    · advanced maternal age (35 or older) or paternal age (50 or older) by pregnancy due date
    · parental carrier of a chromosomal rearrangement
    · parental carrier of autosomal recessive disease
    · parental carrier of a genetic disorder such as Tay-Sachs disease, sickle cell disease, or neurofibromatosis

There are contraindications to having CVS. Extra care is required with patients who are taking anticoagulant
medication. In addition, patients with a bloodborne infectious disease, like human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection or hepatitis, should be informed that there is a potential risk of transmitting the disease vertically during
CVS testing (Jones & Montero, 2022).

Before the procedure, a maternal-fetal specialist must obtain informed consent from the pregnant person. The
pregnant person may also receive genetic counseling and counseling about the procedure before having it
performed. A blood type and screen will be performed to determine if the patient requires Rho(D) immune globulin
(RhoGAM) if they are Rh negative. Before the CVS, an ultrasound exam will be conducted to verify the gestational
age of the fetus by measuring the crown-rump length, checking fetal heart activity, and determining the location of
the placenta and cord insertion site (Jones & Montero, 2022).

A skilled provider and an ultrasonographer will perform the CVS. The CVS procedure can be done transcervically,
where a catheter is inserted through the cervix and then into the placenta to obtain the tissue sample (Jones &
Montero, 2022). Alternatively, it can be performed transabdominally, where a needle is inserted through the
abdomen and uterus and then into the placenta to obtain the tissue sample (Jones & Montero, 2022). The nurse can
assist with making sure that the pregnant person is as comfortable as possible, preventing patient movement, and
explaining what to expect during the procedure to help decrease anxiety. Postprocedure patient education should
include no intercourse or tub baths for 2 weeks or as directed by the provider; immediately notify the health-care
provider of any fever or vaginal bleeding, leaking of fluid, or discharge; and go to the follow-up appointment.

According to Jones and Montero (2022), chorionic villus sampling carries risks similar to those of amniocentesis.
These risks include the potential for pregnancy loss, bleeding, infection, ruptured membranes, limb defects, and
uncertain test results (Jones & Montero, 2022).

Routine Prenatal Lab Tests

In addition to blood tests done for genetic screening, other blood tests are performed during pregnancy. These tests
are described in more detail in Chapter 11 Prenatal Care and include (but are not limited to):

    · complete blood count (CBC)
    · blood type and Rh factor
    · rubella
598  13 · Prenatal Testing

         · hepatitis B and hepatitis C
         · sexually transmitted infections
         · human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)

     A CBC is recommended to assess for anemia, which is common in pregnancy. Typing the patient's blood and
     determining their Rh factor are recommended. An antibody screen is also recommended to determine the presence
     of an antibody that could affect the fetus. A urinalysis is performed to check for possible signs of urinary tract
     disease or infection. If a urinary tract infection (UTI) is suspected, a urine culture will be done to test for bacteria,
     and antibiotics will be needed to treat the UTI.

     Testing for rubella is recommended in all pregnant persons because this disease can cause birth defects if the
     patient is infected during pregnancy. Hepatitis, a virus that infects the liver, can be passed to the fetus during
     pregnancy. Routine screening for hepatitis B and C is recommended for all pregnant persons (ACOG, 2021e). All
     pregnant persons should be tested for sexually transmitted infections (STIs) during pregnancy. Syphilis, chlamydia,
     HIV, and gonorrhea testing is performed at the first prenatal visit. STI testing is recommended in early pregnancy
     but may also be repeated in later pregnancy based on the age and risk factors of the patient and facility policy, as
     STIs can cause complications to both the fetus and patient. HIV can be transmitted to the fetus; however, the rate of
     transmission is significantly decreased when antiretrovirals are taken during pregnancy.

     Nurse's Role

     Nurses may be involved in planning, implementing, and administering or evaluating first trimester screenings and
     tests. While nurses can be trained to collect blood samples or other lab specimens, many facilities may use lab
     technicians.

     Nurses should be aware of recommended screenings to better educate pregnant persons who may need to undergo
     prenatal testing and lab tests. It is important for nurses to understand why a test is recommended or ordered so
     that they can provide appropriate information and support to the pregnant person and their partner or family.
     Information about recommended screening is summarized in (Table 13.2). Nurses who work in a perinatal care
     practice setting will need to have more in-depth knowledge of pregnancy screenings and tests.

     Testing    Criteria

     Screening

     Carrier                · This test can be done anytime, but it is best performed prior to pregnancy.
     testing                · This test uses blood or a tissue sample from inside the cheek to detect whether the

                               pregnant person, their partner, or both, are carriers of a mutated gene for specific genetic
                               disorders such as cystic fibrosis and sickle cell anemia.

     First                  · This screening is done between 10 and 13 weeks' gestation.
     trimester              · This screening includes blood tests (pregnancy-associated plasma protein A, hCG) and a
     marker
     screening                 nuchal translucency ultrasound.
                            · This screening tests for trisomy 21, trisomy 18, and trisomy 13.

     Cell-free              · This screening is performed at 10 weeks' gestation or beyond.
     DNA                    · This screening is a blood test that screens for trisomy 21, trisomy 13, and trisomy 18, as
     screening
                               well as sex chromosome abnormalities.

     TABLE 13.2 Prenatal Genetic Screening and Diagnostic Tests in the First Trimester (ACOG, 2019b)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                             13.2 · Prenatal Testing during the Second Trimester                      599

Testing    Criteria

Diagnostic Tests

Chorionic         · CVS testing can be performed between 10 and 13 weeks' gestation.
villus            · This test examines fetal cells in a sample of chorionic villi to detect trisomy 21, trisomy 13,
sampling
(CVS)                trisomy 18, and other genetic disorders except neural tube defects.

TABLE 13.2 Prenatal Genetic Screening and Diagnostic Tests in the First Trimester (ACOG, 2019b)

Because pregnancy screening is voluntary, patients may refuse it. With any screening process, the first step is for
the health-care provider to obtain informed consent. Nurses will need to educate their patients on what each
screening or test is recommended for, what it can detect, what a positive screening suggests, and that the pregnant
person may accept or reject a screening. After the pregnant person has been educated on the recommended
screening or test, the health-care provider will obtain informed consent to signify that the pregnant person was
given appropriate information on the screening and understands the risks and benefits of it (Gordon et al., 2023).

The health-care team will need to notify the pregnant person of the results, explain what the results mean, and talk
to the pregnant person about any additional testing or referrals that the provider recommends. The team member
should allow time for the pregnant person to ask questions. It may be appropriate for the pregnant person to
discuss the options with their provider in person, and the pregnant person should be given a contact number to call
if they have any additional questions (Gordon et al., 2023).

13.2 Prenatal Testing during the Second Trimester

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Explain the purpose, results, and nursing care when obstetric ultrasound is performed in the second
        trimester of pregnancy

    · Explain the purpose, results, and nursing care when maternal assays and multiple marker screenings are
        performed in the second trimester of pregnancy

    · Explain the purpose, results, and nursing care when prenatal diagnostic tests are performed in the
        second trimester of pregnancy

    · Explain the purpose, results, and nursing care when antibody titers are performed in the second trimester
        of pregnancy

    · Explain the purpose, results, and nursing care when fetoscopy is performed in the second trimester of
        pregnancy

    · Explain the purpose, results, and nursing care when MRI is performed in the second trimester of
        pregnancy

Second trimester prenatal testing may be routinely offered during pregnancy. It also may be recommended if
screenings done in the first trimester came back abnormal. Other reasons for second trimester prenatal testing
include:

· detecting congenital anomalies
· evaluating the condition of the fetus if the pregnancy is high risk and allow appropriate intervention
· providing baseline information

Prenatal testing in the second trimester is offered to all pregnant persons regardless of the risk factors present.
Nurses have an important role in educating pregnant persons about the prenatal tests that are offered or
recommended so that the pregnant person can decide whether to have testing done. Tests available during the
second trimester include the following:

· ultrasound
· umbilical Doppler study
· integrated screen part 2 (quad screening)
600  13 · Prenatal Testing

         · alpha-fetoprotein screening
         · percutaneous blood sampling (PUBS)
         · antibody titer
         · fetoscopy
         · Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

     The results of the screenings and tests can help pregnant persons and their families make decisions about
     continuing the pregnancy or preparing for the delivery of an infant who may have special needs or require additional
     medical care.

     Ultrasound

     Pregnant persons are offered a second trimester ultrasound exam to look for fetal structural defects. This is a
     routine screening to primarily assess fetal anatomy, detect any fetal anomalies, and assess the fetal weight. This
     ultrasound can help determine if any special care or interventions are needed for the remainder of the pregnancy.
     The second trimester fetal ultrasound scan should be performed between 18 and 22 weeks of gestation (ACOG,
     2023).

     An ultrasound technician will usually perform this test in the clinic. A two-dimensional grayscale abdominal
     ultrasound is routinely used to evaluate the fetal number, viability, gestational age, anatomic survey, placenta
     location, amniotic fluid, and maternal pelvic organs (Jabaz & Abed, 2023) (Figure 13.4).

     FIGURE 13.4 Second Trimester Ultrasound This is a common view expectant parents will have printed that shows the fetus's profile. The
     nasal bone, nose, mandible, and hard palate are visible. (credit: "Early second trimester ultrasound" by Robyn Alvarez/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

     The nurse has an important role in preparing the pregnant person for this screening. The nurse must validate and
     document the last menstrual cycle to determine that the ultrasound is completed during the appropriate time
     frame. The pregnant person should be instructed to arrive with a full bladder. This allows for better imaging of the
     lower uterine segment. The nurse informs the pregnant person that a semi-recumbent position is the most
     commonly used position for this screening. The pregnant person will be asked to lie on a padded table with a pillow
     during the procedure. The head of the bed can be slightly elevated. The ultrasound technician will instruct the
     pregnant person on the correct positioning for the screening (Jabaz & Abed, 2023).

     The ultrasound technician will take pictures of the fetal skull and brain, face and neck, thorax, abdomen, spine,
     extremities, and external genitalia. The placenta and amniotic fluid volume will also be assessed and measured
     during this screening. Pictures of the fetus can be printed for the pregnant person if desired. The pregnant person
     should tell the ultrasound technician if they do or do not want to know the sex of the fetus. During the screening, the
     pregnant person and their support person will be able to see the fetus moving and see the heart beating (Jabaz &
     Abed, 2023). Other indications for a second trimester ultrasound include the following:

         · screening for fetal anomalies
         · evaluating fetal anatomy
         · evaluating fetal growth

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.2 · Prenatal Testing during the Second Trimester                                                                   601

    · evaluating vaginal bleeding
    · evaluating abdominal or pelvic pain
    · checking for cervical insufficiency
    · checking for suspected multiple gestation
    · evaluating significant discrepancy between uterine size and clinical dates
    · evaluating pelvic mass
    · evaluating suspected hydatidiform mole
    · evaluating suspected fetal death
    · checking fetal well-being
    · performing umbilical Doppler flow studies
    · evaluating suspected amniotic fluid abnormalities
    · evaluating suspected placental abruption
    · evaluating premature rupture of membranes or premature labor
    · evaluating abnormal biochemical markers
    · evaluating fetal condition in later registrants for prenatal care
    · estimating gestational age
    · determining fetal presentation
    · guiding procedures like amniocentesis, cervical cerclage placement, or external cephalic version
    · following up on fetal anomaly
    · following up on placental location for suspected placenta previa
    · if history of previous congenital anomaly is present
    · assessing for findings that may increase the risk for aneuploidy

Umbilical Doppler Studies

An umbilical Doppler study (Figure 13.5) is used to check the blood flow in the umbilical arteries, which are blood
vessels located in the umbilical cord. The Doppler ultrasound is used with other tests when the fetus shows signs of
not growing well (ACOG, 2019a). This study can be performed as early as 22 weeks' gestation and is performed
during the second and third trimesters (Adekanmi, et al, 2022). The umbilical Doppler study is recommended if the
pregnant person has one or more of the following pregnancy-related or preexisting conditions (Maulik, 2022):

    · suspected fetal growth restriction (FGR)
    · previous pregnancy with FGR or fetal death in utero
    · decreased fetal movement
    · oligohydramnios
    · polyhydramnios
    · multifetal pregnancy
    · twin-twin transfusion syndrome
    · twin anemia-polycythemia sequence
    · gestational diabetes or preexisting diabetes mellitus
    · pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH), pre-eclampsia, or chronic hypertension
    · renal disease
602  13 · Prenatal Testing

     FIGURE 13.5 Umbilical Doppler Study When an umbilical Doppler study is performed, the ultrasonographer locates the umbilical cord and
     follows the blood flow through the umbilical arteries (purple). (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     For this procedure, the nurse will need to educate the pregnant person on what to expect before, during, and after
     the umbilical Doppler study. The pregnant person will be in a reclined or lying-down position during this test. An
     ultrasound transducer is gently rolled over the abdomen to project sound waves. An image of the artery being
     examined is viewed on the computer screen (ACOG, 2019a).

     A normal test result shows normal blood flow in the umbilical artery. If the test shows a problem with the blood flow
     in the umbilical artery, it could mean that insufficient oxygen is being delivered to the fetus (ACOG, 2019a). When
     abnormal results are obtained, it is recommended to have a further sonographic workup to test the degree of
     placental insufficiency with a fetal midcerebral arterial Doppler assessment, a ductus venous flow assessment, or
     an umbilical venous flow assessment (Murphy, 2023).

     Maternal Assay and Multiple Marker Screening in the Second Trimester

     Several blood tests are recommended in the second trimester of pregnancy, which are known as multiple marker
     screenings. These tests provide information about the patient's risk of having a fetus with certain genetic conditions
     or abnormalities.

     Integrated Screen Part 2 (Quad Screen)
     The integrated screen part 2, or quad screen, is a blood test taken between 15 and 20 weeks' gestation to screen
     for neural tube defects such as spina bifida and chromosomal disorders such as Down syndrome and trisomy 18.
     The integrated screen part 2 is performed as the quad screen when first trimester screening has not been
     performed. When the results of the first trimester integrated screen part 1 are combined with the integrated screen
     part 2, the results are more accurate (Nguyen, 2022).

     If a patient's first integrated screen test result showed low risk, the pregnant person will return for the integrated
     screen part 2. The second blood test measures the following:

         · Maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP): secreted by the liver of the fetus and then passed into the pregnant
             person's blood. Levels that are too high or too low have been associated with birth defects (Fuentes, 2018).

         · Estriol (uE3): highest amount of circulating hormone in a pregnant person. Low levels of estriol are associated
             with an increased risk for Down syndrome and trisomy 18 (Fuentes, 2018).

         · Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG): known as the pregnancy hormone. During the second trimester, the
             pregnant person produces less of this hormone than in the first trimester. High levels of hCG are associated
             with Down syndrome; however, there can be other reasons, like multiple gestation, for this hormone to be

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  13.2 · Prenatal Testing during the Second Trimester                    603

        elevated. Low levels of hCG hormone in the second trimester are associated with trisomy 18 (Fuentes, 2018).
    · Inhibin-A: hormone produced by the placenta (and ovaries). Adding inhibin A to the screening improves the

        accuracy of the multiple marker screen for identifying trisomy 21 in patients younger than age 35 (Fuentes,
        2018).

A positive result means that the developing fetus is at a higher risk for having Down syndrome, trisomy 18, or an
open neural tube defect. A positive result does not mean the fetus will have these problems, but they have a higher
risk. As a result, the health-care provider may recommend additional testing, such as a detailed fetus anatomy
ultrasound or amniocentesis (Palka et al., 2019).

Alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP) in the Second Trimester
The alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) test (by itself) is a blood test that measures the level of alpha-fetoprotein in the
pregnant person's blood to look for a risk of fetal neural tube abnormalities. AFP is dispersed from fetal plasma into
fetal urine and excreted into the amniotic sac. This screening can be measured from maternal serum or from
amniotic fluid. The AFP test is considered a screening, not a diagnostic test. An abnormal result does not mean the
developing fetus has a neural tube abnormality but suggests a potential disorder risk. This screening may be done
with other tests to determine if further diagnostic tests are needed (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2022c).

The AFP test is usually recommended between the 15th and 22nd weeks of pregnancy. All pregnant persons should
be offered AFP screening regardless of risk factors (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2022c). Patients at higher risk
include:

    · persons who have a positive family history of birth defects
    · persons age 35 or older
    · persons who use high-risk medications or drugs while pregnant
    · persons who have diabetes

If the AFP results are normal, there is a low risk of the fetus having a genetic, neural tube defect, or chromosomal
abnormality (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2022c). An abnormal AFP level may mean that the patient's due date
is earlier or later than expected. Inaccurate gestational age is the most common reason for AFP levels being
abnormal (Palka et al., 2019). Another reason that AFP levels may be abnormal is if the pregnant person is pregnant
with more than one fetus. Each fetus makes AFP, so AFP levels will be higher with two or more fetuses (U.S. National
Library of Medicine, 2022c). Conditions that can make the fetus release more or less AFP are summarized in Table
13.3.

Level of Alpha-Fetoprotein Associated Conditions

Elevated  · open neural tube defects (anencephaly, spina bifida)
          · esophageal obstruction
          · increased amount leaked by fetal kidney (hydronephrosis)
          · abdominal wall defects
          · threatened abortion
          · fetal death
          · amniotic fluid contaminated with fetal blood during amniocentesis
          · underestimation of fetal age
          · multifetal gestation
          · incorrect maternal weight (lower than true weight)
          · maternal insulin-dependent diabetes

Low       · chromosomal trisomies (Down syndrome)

          · gestational trophoblastic disease

          · overestimation of gestational age

          · incorrect maternal weight (higher than true weight)

TABLE 13.3 Conditions Associated with Abnormal Maternal Serum Alpha-Fetoprotein Levels
604  13 · Prenatal Testing

     Pregnant persons may choose to pursue AFP testing or not. Testing can provide opportunities for the expecting
     parents to pursue potential medical interventions that may be available, plan for a child with special needs before
     the birth, address anticipated lifestyle changes, identify support groups and resources, and make the decision to
     carry the pregnancy to term or terminate it (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2022c).

     Role of AFP in Screening for Genetic Disorders
     If the AFP levels are low and abnormal levels of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and estriol are also found, it
     may indicate the fetus is at higher risk for trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), trisomy 18 (Edwards syndrome), or another
     type of chromosomal abnormality (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2022c).

     If the AFP test comes back abnormal, additional diagnostic testing is recommended. Less invasive diagnostic testing
     includes:

         · a second AFP test
         · a complete triple-screen test (this test includes testing for AFP, hCG, and estriol)
         · high-definition ultrasound

     An amniocentesis may be recommended if the additional testing results are still abnormal. Approximately 20 to 50
     abnormal AFP tests result for every 1,000 pregnancy tests. Of those, only 1 in 16 to 1 in 33 results in a fetus with a
     neural tube defect or other chromosomal abnormality (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2022c).

     Role of AFP in Screening for Neural Tube Defects
     Neural tube defects are the most common birth defects in the United States, affecting about 1 in 1,000 births (U.S.
     National Library of Medicine, 2022c). The AFP screening test is a widely used mass screening technique that
     successfully screens for birth defects during pregnancy. This test is specifically designed to detect neural tube
     defects in addition to other structural malformations in the developing fetus. Maternal serum AFP screenings can
     detect 85 percent of neural tube defects (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2022c).

     The nurse can prepare the pregnant person for this test by educating the patient on what the test is looking for and
     why it is recommended. If the test result comes back positive, the nurse will need to educate the patient on the
     result and inform the pregnant person that there is an increased risk of the fetus having one of the listed disorders.
     It is important to remind the patient that the test is not diagnostic. The nurse provides support to the patient if the
     results come back positive and assists the provider in scheduling or ordering additional screening and diagnostic
     tests. Referring the patient to a genetic counselor may also be done (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2022c).

     Prenatal Diagnostic Tests in the Second Trimester

     During the second trimester, additional diagnostic testing may be recommended based on the age of the patient or
     other risk factors a patient might have. These diagnostic tests include an amniocentesis, percutaneous umbilical
     sampling (PUBS), antibody titer, fetoscopy, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

     Amniocentesis in the Second Trimester
     An amniocentesis is a medical procedure done during pregnancy that involves removing fluid and cells from the
     uterus (Figure 13.6). It is a diagnostic test that can tell if the fetus has a specific health problem, and it is very
     accurate (ACOG, 2021a). Once the sample is taken, it is tested to determine if the fetus has any genetic disorders.
     This diagnostic test can also check for infection and lung development (ACOG, 2021a).

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.2 · Prenatal Testing during the Second Trimester                                                                                             605

FIGURE 13.6 Amniocentesis During an amniocentesis, a large-bore needle is inserted under ultrasound guidance into a pocket of amniotic
fluid. A syringe is attached to the needle and fluid is withdrawn. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

An amniocentesis is recommended for pregnant persons who have an increased risk of having a fetus with a birth
defect. Common recommendations for a patient to have an amniocentesis include:

    · maternal age 35 years or older
    · chromosomal abnormality in a close family member
    · gender determination for a maternal carrier of X-linked disorder (hemophilia, Duchenne muscular dystrophy)
    · birth of previous infant with a chromosomal abnormality or neural tube or body-wall defect
    · pregnancy after multiple spontaneous abortions
    · elevated levels of maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein that remain unexplained
    · sensitization of maternal Rh-negative blood to fetal Rh-positive blood

The fluid tested is evaluated for missing, damaged, or extra chromosomes, which are signs of genetic disorders.
Specific disorders caused by genetic mutations can also be found by doing an amniocentesis. Amniocentesis tests
for the following disorders:

    · cystic fibrosis
    · Down syndrome (trisomy 21)
    · sickle cell disease
    · Tay-Sachs disease
    · neural tube defects like spina bifida and anencephaly

An amniocentesis is usually done between 15 and 20 weeks' gestation but can be performed up until birth. If the
results are negative, it means that the fetus does not have the disorder it was tested for. If the results are positive, it
means the fetus does have the disorder that it was tested for. The OB/GYN will discuss the results with the pregnant
person and will likely refer them to a genetic counselor to help provide guidance about choices and options for the
pregnancy. The pregnant person and their partner may want to talk with a specialist in the disorder to understand
more about the child's life expectancy, what treatments are available, and what type of care the child will need after
birth. Support groups, counselors, and social workers may also be beneficial for the pregnant person and partner as
they prepare for a child with a genetic disorder. They may also want to consider additional testing, like a specialized
ultrasound exam (ACOG, 2021c).

While the provider will discuss the risks and benefits of the procedure with the pregnant person while obtaining
informed consent, the nurse can help prepare the pregnant person by educating them on what to expect before,
during, and after the procedure. The nurse will review the pregnant person's chart for blood type, Rh, and antibody
screen and auscultate the fetal heart rate. The nurse will explain that during the amniocentesis the pregnant person
may feel mild stinging, pressure, or cramping. Afterward, the pregnant person may have mild abdominal discomfort
or cramping. Communicating with the pregnant person during the procedure and providing emotional support are
also part of the nurse's role.

An amniocentesis is usually performed in an office or medical center. The pregnant person will be asked to lie on
606  13 · Prenatal Testing

     their back on an exam table. The provider may apply a numbing medicine to the abdomen (ACOG, 2021a). A needle
     is inserted into the abdomen and into the uterus. An ultrasound is used to guide the needle into the correct location.
     Once the needle is inserted into the uterus, a small sample of amniotic fluid is withdrawn from the sac surrounding
     the fetus. The sample is then sent to the lab for testing. The procedure usually takes about 15 minutes. After the
     procedure, the nurse will auscultate the fetal heart rate and monitor the pregnant person per policy. The nurse will
     instruct the pregnant person to avoid any hard exercise or physical activity for the next 24 hours (ACOG, 2021a). The
     nurse will inform the pregnant person that vaginal spotting or leaking a small amount of amniotic fluid from the
     vagina may occur. Increased abdominal pain, vaginal bleeding, and fever should be reported to the health-care
     provider. Results can take 1 day to several weeks to return, depending on what disorders are being tested for
     (ACOG, 2021a). The risk of serious complications is low. There is less than a 1 percent chance of miscarriage with an
     amniocentesis (ACOG, 2021a).

     Planning ahead for a baby with a genetic disorder can be helpful. This can give the pregnant person and their partner
     time to learn about the condition and plan for any additional care their child might need. If the disorder is serious
     and has a short life expectancy, it allows the family to arrange palliative care for the baby right away. Some people
     may also choose to end the pregnancy. This can bring up many ethical and legal issues, as some conditions are
     unable to be definitively diagnosed until the second trimester. Many states have abortion restrictions that make it
     much more difficult to abort a fetus that is incompatible with life during the second trimester. If the pregnant person
     continues the pregnancy and the results are abnormal, consultations with other providers during the pregnancy will
     help in developing a plan of care on what actions will be taken at the birth and during the newborn's hospital stay.

             LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

     Ethics and Amniocentesis

     When genetic abnormalities are suspected, amniocentesis can provide the patient with more definitive information
     regarding the genetics of the fetus. Some parents, however, do not want to undergo this procedure. Parents might
     be fearful of losing the baby after the procedure. Some parents will decline amniocentesis because they do not want
     to know the results. Others may state that they would not terminate the pregnancy or do anything differently if they
     had the results. When patients decline testing, the nurse should support the patient's informed decision even when
     that decision is not one the nurse would make.

     Percutaneous Umbilical Blood Sampling

     The percutaneous umbilical blood sampling (PUBS) is a diagnostic test that looks for specific genetic or blood
     disorders in the fetus. PUBS can be performed starting at 18 weeks' gestation and is done to diagnose anemia,
     thrombocytopenia, other blood disorders, chromosomal abnormalities, infection, and isoimmunization in the fetus
     (Burd, 2016). PUBS provides the most accurate diagnosis of Down syndrome during pregnancy. However, it is not
     commonly used because it involves more risks than other tests, and it cannot be performed until the second
     trimester or later in pregnancy (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2022d). Before the procedure, the health-care
     provider will discuss the risks versus benefits and obtain informed consent. The nurse will obtain the fetal heart rate
     and review the pregnant person's chart for blood type and Rh.

     During the procedure, the health-care provider draws a sample of the fetus's blood directly from the umbilical cord
     (Figure 13.7). The sample is then sent to the lab to be analyzed for genetic disorders and other fetal health
     considerations. This procedure can also be used to deliver medications or blood transfusions to a fetus (Burd,
     2016).

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.2 · Prenatal Testing during the Second Trimester                                                                                       607

FIGURE 13.7 Percutaneous Umbilical Blood Sampling (PUBS) During a percutaneous umbilical blood sampling, a provider guides a
needle, with the aid of an ultrasound, into a blood vessel of the umbilical cord to collect a blood sample. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The nurse is often responsible for reinforcing patient education on what to expect before, during, and after the
procedure. If the pregnant person is having a PUBS test after 23 weeks' gestation, they may be instructed not to eat
or drink anything several hours before the test in case there are complications during the test that require surgery.
During the procedure, the pregnant person will be asked to lie still on an exam table. The provider will clean the
pregnant person's abdomen and apply gel to the abdomen for the ultrasound. A needle will be inserted through the
abdomen into a blood vessel in the umbilical cord. The patient may experience brief discomfort during the test. A
sample of blood will be collected, the needle will be removed, and the sample will be sent to the lab for testing (U.S.
National Library of Medicine, 2022d).

After PUBS, the nurse will monitor the fetal heart rate for a short time. The nurse will also inform the pregnant
person that they may experience cramping after the test and should avoid strenuous activity for the rest of the day
(U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2022d).

Potential risks of having PUBS include:

    · early delivery via emergent C-section
    · miscarriage
    · blood loss in the fetus and pregnant person
    · cord hematoma
    · slow fetal heart rate
    · infection in the fetus or uterus
    · separation of the placenta from the uterus

The nurse will instruct the pregnant person to watch for any signs or symptoms of infection after the procedure. The
pregnant person is advised to call the doctor's office if they experience chills, cramps that do not get better
throughout the day, decreased fetal movement, fever, leaking amniotic fluid, or vaginal bleeding. Results are
normally available a few days after the procedure is done. If the results are positive, the provider will go over the
results with the pregnant person and may refer the pregnant person and their partner to a genetic counselor for
further guidance. Screening and diagnostic tests conducted in the second trimester are summarized in Table 13.4.
608  13 · Prenatal Testing

     Testing                          Criteria
     Screening
     Ultrasound                           · Obstetric ultrasound can be performed at any time during the second trimester.
                                          · It is most often performed at 18-22 weeks' gestation to assess fetal anatomy

                                              for normality.
                                          · Other reasons for ultrasound are listed previously in this section.

     Umbilical Doppler                · This test can be performed starting at 22 weeks' gestation.
     studies                          · It is most often performed when FGR is present to detect the blood flow

                                         through the umbilical vessels.
                                      · Other reasons for Doppler studies are listed previously in this section.

     Second trimester                 · This screening is done between 15 and 20 weeks' gestation.
     marker screening                 · This screening measures the level of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), estriol (uE3),
     (integrated screen part
     2 or quad screen)                   human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), and inhibin-A in the pregnant person.
                                      · These tests screen for Down syndrome, trisomy 18, trisomy 13, other genetic

                                         disorders, and neural tube defects.

     Second trimester AFP             · This screening is performed at 15-22 weeks' gestation.
     screening                        · Screening is a blood test that screens for fetal neural tube defects.

     Diagnostic Tests                 · This diagnostic test can be performed after 14-16 weeks' gestation.
     Amniocentesis                    · It is most often performed to examine fetal cells in a sample of amniotic fluid to

                                         detect Down syndrome, trisomy 13, trisomy 18, and other genetic disorders.

     Percutaneous umbilical           · This diagnostic test can be performed starting at 18 weeks' gestation.
     blood sampling (PUBS)            · It is most often performed to diagnose fetal anemia, thrombocytopenia, other

                                         blood disorders, chromosomal abnormalities, infection, and isoimmunization.

     TABLE 13.4 Prenatal Screening and Diagnostic Tests in the Second Trimester (ACOG, 2019a)

     Antibody Titer

     In the second trimester, the pregnant person's antibody titer, a test for the presence of antibodies to Rh positive
     blood, is usually done at 26 to 28 weeks' gestation if they are Rh negative. It is unlikely for health problems to occur
     if it is the pregnant person's first pregnancy with an Rh-positive fetus because the pregnant person has not
     developed enough antibodies to cause harm. However, problems may occur in subsequent pregnancies if treatment
     is not given. Even if the pregnant person does not carry to full term due to miscarriage, ectopic pregnancy, or
     induced abortion, problems can occur in subsequent pregnancies without treatment. This problem is known as Rh
     incompatibility (ACOG, 2022a). At this time the patient's antibody screen will remain positive for life, and
     antepartum Rh(D) immune globulin (RhoGAM) will have no effect in preventing isoimmunization in future
     pregnancies.

     If blood from an Rh-positive fetus gets into the bloodstream of an Rh-negative pregnant person, the pregnant
     person's body will recognize the fetus's blood as a foreign substance and will destroy it by making anti-Rh
     antibodies. These antibodies may cross the placenta into the fetus's bloodstream and lead to serious health
     problems in the fetus, or even death of the fetus (ACOG, 2022a).

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.2 · Prenatal Testing during the Second Trimester                                                                                         609

To prevent isoimmunization problems from occurring due to Rh incompatibility during the third trimester, pregnant
persons who are Rh negative should receive antepartum Rho(D) immune globulin (RhoGAM) (ACOG, 2022a). A
single dose should be given between 26 and 28 weeks of pregnancy (Yoham & Casadesus, 2023). Antepartum Rh
immune globulin should also be given if there are any known or suspected exposures to Rh-positive red blood cells
(RBCs) (placental abruption, blunt abdominal trauma, or vaginal bleeding of unknown origin during pregnancy). Rh
immune globulin should be given within 72 hours of exposure and then every 12 weeks until delivery. Postpartum
administration is necessary only if the infant's blood is Rh positive.

The nurse is responsible for checking if the patient had their blood type screened to determine if antepartum Rh
immune globulin has been administered or is anticipated. The nurse will need to educate the pregnant person on
the risks and benefits of receiving the intramuscular (IM) injection, ensure consent to give the injection has been
obtained (per facility protocol), and then administer it as ordered by the health-care provider.

Fetoscopy

Inserting a thin fiber-optic tube, or fetoscope, into the uterus through a small incision made in the abdomen of the
pregnant person is called fetoscopy (Figure 13.8). Local anesthesia is used during the procedure to minimize
discomfort. The fetoscope has a small camera on the end, which allows for visualization of the placenta, amniotic
sac, and fetus. This is a diagnostic test that providers may recommend to treat congenital disorders. The fetoscope
is hollow, which allows the provider to insert surgical tools through it to repair certain fetal conditions or collect
tissue samples. Fetoscopy is performed after 12 weeks' gestation, depending on the reason it is being done (Ruano
& Vega, 2019).

FIGURE 13.8 Fetoscopy During a fetoscopy, a laparoscope is inserted into the uterus to see the fetus and placenta. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

A fetoscopy may be recommended for several reasons. Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome is a condition that can be
life-threatening and occurs when identical twins in the womb do not receive an equal share of blood. The use of a
fetoscope can help to visualize the placenta and blood vessels that are causing the condition. By using a laser
through the fetoscope, the blood vessels that cause uneven blood flow can be closed off (Ruano & Vega, 2019).

In amniotic band syndrome, bands of tissue from the amniotic sac can entangle the fetus, leading to restricted
blood flow or even amputation of limbs or organs. A fetoscopy procedure can be used to insert a laser device that
cuts and releases the bands of tissue surrounding the fetus (Ruano & Vega, 2019). Fetoscopy may also be done for
treatment of placental tumors, spina bifida, and other congenital conditions (Ruano & Vega, 2019).

The nurse has the responsibility to educate the pregnant person on what to expect before, during, and after the
procedure in addition to reinforcing the information provided to the pregnant person by the health-care provider on
what the risks and benefits of fetoscopy are. Risk factors include rupture of membranes, initiation of labor, or
infection. As with other invasive prenatal testing procedures, the nurse also ensures that consent for the fetoscopy
has been obtained and provides care to the pregnant person and fetus before, during, and after the procedure.
610  13 · Prenatal Testing

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Fetoscopy is an invasive procedure and places the pregnancy at risk for infection and preterm birth. It is often used
     when performing fetal surgery. This video shows images of a fetus (https://openstax.org/r/77fetusimage) using
     fetoscopy.

     Magnetic Resonance Imaging

     The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends performing a magnetic resonance
     imaging (MRI) exam when an ultrasound scan shows unclear results. Performing MRI for fetal screening may be
     recommended for the following reasons (Gatta et al, 2022):

         · Central nervous system (CNS) anomalies: If there are any concerns detected by ultrasound or any pathologies
             that need to be evaluated, an MRI can provide a panoramic view of the entire brain and subarachnoid space
             without any limitations imposed by the skull. This is especially useful for examining CNS anomalies.

         · Face and neck: If the fetus is in a position where the head and neck are not assessable by ultrasound, MRI can
             be useful in detecting any abnormalities of the head and neck. MRI can identify issues such as cleft lip and
             palate, micrognathia or retrognathia, craniosynostosis, cephaloceles, vascular anomalies, tumors,
             microphthalmia, thyroid anomalies, or oropharyngeal and neck masses.

         · Chest: An ultrasound is the main screening method for thoracic abnormalities like diaphragmatic hernia, cystic
             adenomatoid malformation, bronchopulmonary seizure, cardiac anomalies or malformations, or cysts or
             masses that can lead to pulmonary hypoplasia and fetal death. If the ultrasound results come back unclear, an
             MRI scan may be recommended.

         · Abdomen: Abnormalities in the abdomen can typically be detected after 18 weeks of pregnancy. These may
             consist of blockages in the esophagus or bowel, masses located within the abdomen, defects in the abdominal
             wall, bowel obstruction or perforation, peritonitis caused by meconium, as well as renal agenesis or ectopy,
             duplication of the collecting systems, urinary tract dilatation, ureteroceles, severe cases of vesicoureteral
             reflux, megaureter, bladder outlet obstruction, or cloacal anomalies.

     The nurse is responsible for educating the patient on what to expect during the MRI procedure. There are no risks to
     the pregnant person or unborn fetus of having an MRI when done in the second and third trimesters (ACOG, 2017b).
     Once the results of the MRI are available, the health-care provider will review them with the pregnant person if they
     come back abnormal. The nurse may inform the pregnant person of normal results per facility policy.

     13.3 Prenatal Testing during the Third Trimester

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the purpose, results, and nursing care when obstetric ultrasound is performed in the third
             trimester of pregnancy

         · Explain the purpose, results, and nursing care when fetal movement and fetal heart rate patterns are
             monitored in the third trimester of pregnancy

         · Explain the purpose, results, and nursing care when amniocentesis is performed in the third trimester of
             pregnancy

     By the third trimester, routine prenatal testing will have already been performed. If there are concerns or
     complications during the pregnancy, additional screening or tests may be recommended to check on the health and
     well-being of the fetus, diagnose infection, assess the lung development, and measure the amniotic fluid or the size
     of the fetus.

     The nurse can help prepare the pregnant person for any recommended screenings or tests by educating them about
     what the test is looking for and how it will be performed. These screenings can help determine if the fetus is
     continuing to grow and develop normally, if it is in the right position for delivery, or if there are any complications
     that the pregnant person and health-care provider need to prepare for.

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.3 · Prenatal Testing during the Third Trimester                                                                       611

Ultrasound

A third trimester ultrasound procedure is performed at 28 weeks or later during the pregnancy and can give
information about the health of the fetus in late pregnancy. When an ultrasound is done in the third trimester, it can
be useful in identifying fetal and maternal complications. A third trimester ultrasound may be recommended to
determine the fetal presentation, to assess for potential growth disorders, or to characterize the placenta and
amniotic fluid (Acevedo et al., 2023).

If the pregnant person is asymptomatic, a third trimester ultrasound may be recommended for the following
reasons:

    · checking fetal anatomy or fetal anomalies
    · checking fetal growth
    · verifying fetal presentation
    · verifying placental location
    · monitoring amniotic fluid levels, placental function, and fetal growth associated with diabetes, hypertension,

        or other maternal complications (Acevedo et al., 2023)

Additional reasons for a third trimester ultrasound include:

    · discrepancy between the uterine size and calculated gestational date
    · suspected pelvic mass
    · suspected fetal death
    · fetal anomaly
    · vaginal bleeding
    · abdominal or pelvic pain
    · decreased fetal movement
    · uterine abnormalities
    · amniotic fluid abnormalities
    · placental abruption
    · premature rupture of membranes
    · premature labor
    · placenta previa
    · placenta accreta (Acevedo et al., 2023)

Bleeding can occur in the third trimester because of problems with the pregnancy. Placenta previa is when the
placenta lies low in the uterus and partially or completely covers the cervix. This can cause vaginal bleeding, usually
without pain. Sometimes, this will resolve on its own by 32 to 35 weeks' gestation as the lower part of the uterus
stretches and thins out. An ultrasound exam can be done to check for this. If the placenta previa does not resolve, a
cesarean delivery will need to be scheduled (ACOG, 2021b).

Placenta accreta is when part or all of the placenta invades and is inseparable from the uterine wall. This can cause
bleeding in the third trimester and can cause severe bleeding with delivery. Placenta accreta can be found during
pregnancy with routine ultrasound exams. If it is not found until after the baby is born, this condition risks life-
threatening blood loss during delivery, which can result in a hysterectomy after delivery (ACOG, 2021b).

        REAL RN STORIES

Nurse: Kari, RN, BSN
Years in practice: 9
Clinical setting: Large medical center
Geographic location: Dallas, Texas

I worked in a large teaching hospital and saw two women die from unknown placenta accreta. It was horrible for the
families and for us, the staff. So, when another hospital in town started an accreta team, I knew I wanted to work
with that team. At my new job with the accreta team, I help educate the patient on what to expect during the C-
612  13 · Prenatal Testing

     section, schedule the procedure, and ensure that everyone on the team is there. It has been a really great
     experience for me to save lives instead of being devastated over losing a mom.

     Placental abruption is when the placenta detaches from the wall of the uterus partially or completely before or
     during birth. This can cause vaginal bleeding, severe abdominal pain, back pain, and abdominal rigidity and is a
     serious complication if it is not found early because it prevents the fetus from getting enough oxygen and can result
     in large blood loss in the pregnant person. If the health-care provider suspects placental abruption, an ultrasound or
     MRI scan may be ordered to confirm the diagnosis (ACOG, 2021c).

     If ultrasound is recommended in the third trimester, the nurse can help support the pregnant person by educating
     them on why the ultrasound is recommended. The nurse can help prepare the pregnant person by explaining what
     to expect during the exam and when to expect to hear back regarding the results of the exam.

     Biophysical Profile
     A biophysical profile may be recommended if other prenatal screenings came back nonreassuring, like a nonreactive
     stress test or complaints of decreased fetal movement (Sapoval, 2023). A biophysical profile (BPP) is a specialized
     noninvasive test that checks the fetus's growth and well-being. This test uses a scoring system to evaluate fetal
     well-being in the following areas:

       1. fetal heart rate pattern per NST
       2. fetal breathing movements
       3. fetal body movements
       4. fetal muscle tone
       5. amount of amniotic fluid

     Each of the five areas is given a score of zero or two for 10 total possible points (ACOG, 2019a) (Table 13.5).

     Component                        Normal (2 points)               Abnormal (0 points)

     Fetal heart  Reactive nonstress test                             Nonreactive nonstress test
     rate

     Fetal        One or more episodes of fetal breathing lasting     No episodes of fetal breathing movements
     breathing    at least 30 seconds for 30 minutes                  lasting at least 30 seconds during a
     movements                                                        30-minute period of observation

     Fetal body   Three or more separate body or limb movements       Fewer than three body or limb movements in
     movements    within 30 minutes                                   30 minutes

     Fetal        One or more episodes of active extension and        No episodes of active extension and flexion
     muscle       flexion of an arm or leg or the opening and         of an arm or leg or the opening and closing of
     tone         closing of a hand in a 30-minute period             a hand in a 30-minute period

     Amniotic     A single deepest vertical pocket of amniotic fluid  A single deepest vertical pocket of amniotic
     fluid        measures greater than 2 cm is present.              fluid measures 2 cm or less

     TABLE 13.5 Biophysical Profile Scoring

     A high-risk obstetric and fetal condition may also require a BPP as part of antepartum testing for a variety of fetal
     conditions found in Table 13.6. This study is recommended to start at 32 weeks' gestation for most fetal and
     maternal conditions but can be done earlier for multiple or severe conditions (Sapoval, 2023).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                      13.3 · Prenatal Testing during the Third Trimester                                                   613

Category              Conditions

Maternal preexisting      · pregestational diabetes mellitus
conditions                · hypertension
                          · systemic lupus erythematosus
                          · chronic renal disease
                          · antiphospholipid syndrome
                          · hyperthyroidism poorly controlled
                          · hemoglobinopathies: sickle cell, sickle cell-hemoglobin C, or sickle

                              cell-thalassemia disease
                          · cyanotic heart disease

Pregnancy-related     · gestational hypertension
conditions            · preeclampsia
                      · decreased fetal movement
                      · gestational diabetes mellitus, poorly controlled or medically treated
                      · oligohydramnios
                      · fetal growth restriction
                      · late-term or postterm pregnancy
                      · isoimmunization
                      · previous fetal death
                      · monochorionic multiple gestations with significant growth discrepancy

TABLE 13.6 Conditions That May Require Biophysical Profile

A BPP is an indicator of fetal well-being, and a score of 8 or 10 is considered normal and indicates a decreased risk
of fetal asphyxia within 1 week. A score of 6 is considered abnormal and should be repeated within 24 hours. A
score of 2 or 4 is not reassuring, and the provider may recommend inducing labor or scheduling a cesarean delivery
for the pregnant person. A score of zero indicates impending fetal asphyxia, and an emergent cesarean delivery at a
hospital with a neonatal intensive care unit is recommended (Sapoval, 2023). A BPP can also diagnose
oligohydramnios or polyhydramnios. If oligohydramnios is diagnosed, the study should be repeated within 24 hours,
or the provider may recommend the pregnant person be induced if at term.

The nurse's role involves educating the pregnant person about the BPP. The nurse can help prepare the pregnant
person by explaining why the test is recommended and what to expect during the screening. The nurse will perform
the NST and reinforce the results and plan of care developed by the health-care provider.

Amniotic Fluid Index (AFI)
The amniotic fluid index (AFI) is a standardized way to assess the sufficiency of the amniotic fluid quantity in
pregnancy and is obtained via ultrasound. This test can be done on pregnant persons who are at 24 weeks'
gestation or greater with a singleton pregnancy. This test is also part of the biophysical profile and is an indicator of
fetal well-being. A normal AFI is 5 cm to 25 cm. A normal pocket of amniotic fluid is greater than 2 cm (Lord et al.,
2023).

An AFI test may be recommended if there are concerns of polyhydramnios, which is too much amniotic fluid, or
oligohydramnios, which is not enough amniotic fluid (Lord et al., 2023). Oligohydramnios can occur if the pregnant
person's amniotic membrane has ruptured and amniotic fluid is leaking. It can also occur due to kidney problems in
the fetus. If the fetus receives inadequate nutrients and oxygen from the placenta, blood will be shunted away from
the fetal kidneys. This decreases the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and results in decreased urinary output. This
causes a decrease in amniotic fluid due to the decreased urine production by the fetal kidneys (Lord et al., 2023).
Persistently low levels of amniotic fluid may be associated with a birth defect of the fetus.

Polyhydramnios may have no definite cause. The normal fetus constantly swallows amniotic fluid and urinates to
create more. If the fetus is not able to swallow normal amounts of amniotic fluid, it can lead to polyhydramnios. This
could indicate gastrointestinal malformations, fetal neurologic problems like anencephaly, or mechanical
614  13 · Prenatal Testing

     obstruction of the esophagus. Increased amniotic fluid production can also result from polyuria, which can occur
     with uncontrolled maternal diabetes. This may be associated with fetal macrosomia (Lord et al., 2023).

     If an AFI screening is ordered, the nurse can help prepare the pregnant person by explaining why the test is being
     recommended, what to expect during the test, when the results will be available, and what the results mean.

     Fetal Movement and Heart Rate Monitoring in the Third Trimester

     By the third trimester, the pregnant person should be feeling the fetus move regularly. If a longer than normal period
     of time passes without the fetus moving, the provider may recommend the pregnant person count the fetus's
     movements, known as kick counts. The provider may also recommend monitoring the fetus's heart rate to collect
     further assessment data.

     Fetal Movement Count (FMC)
     The pregnant person should feel at least 10 fetal movements within 2 hours and will likely feel more than that. If the
     pregnant person notices that they are feeling fewer fetal movements than normal, they should talk to their health-
     care provider about it. The health-care provider may recommend keeping track of the fetus's movements by doing a
     fetal movement count or "kick count," a test that can be performed at home by the pregnant person (ACOG,
     2019a). Table 13.7 provides instructions on how to perform fetal movement counts.

     Step                             Instruction

     1. Choose an active time.        If you know when the baby moves around more, plan to count its movements during
                                      that time. Otherwise, try counting kicks after a meal.

     2. Relax.                        Choose a spot that is free from distractions so that you can relax and focus on your
                                      baby's movements.

     3. Lie on your left side.        It may be easier to feel the baby's movements while lying on your left side.

     4. Set a timer.                  Take note of the time you start counting kicks or set a timer to help you keep track
                                      of how long you've been counting.

     5. Start counting.               Note how many movements you feel within 1 hour or how long it takes to feel 10
                                      movements. If you feel no movements after 1 hour, try getting up and moving
                                      around, eating a snack, or drinking a sugary drink. Your baby may be sleeping, and
                                      this can help wake them up. Then try counting for another hour.

     6. Contact your health-          If you do not feel 10 movements within 2 hours, contact your health-care provider
     care provider.                   right away.

     TABLE 13.7 Instructions on Performing Fetal Movement Counts

             LINK TO LEARNING

     This video explains the importance of fetal movement counts (https://openstax.org/r/77fetalmvmtcnts) and how to
     perform them.

     Nurses can help educate pregnant persons on how to perform fetal movement counts. The best time to perform
     FMC is when the fetus is most active. If the fetus does not have a predictable movement pattern, completing the
     FMC after eating dinner is a good time. To perform this test, the nurse should instruct the pregnant person to lie
     down on their side or relax in a comfortable chair. Take note of the time. Pay attention only to the movements of the
     fetus. Count any movement felt, except for hiccups. Any twist, kick, or turn counts as one movement. After 10
     movements are felt, check the time and record how many minutes it took to feel 10 movements (Kaiser
     Permanente, n.d).

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.3 · Prenatal Testing during the Third Trimester                                                                                        615

If the fetus does not kick or move within 1 hour, the pregnant person should be instructed to eat or drink something
like fruit or juice, lie on their left side, or walk around for 5 minutes. If the fetus has not moved 10 times by the end
of the 2 hours or has a sudden decrease in normal activity, the pregnant person should be instructed to notify their
health-care provider right away (Srisuro, 2022).

Vibroacoustic Stimulation
The noninvasive technique that uses vibratory and sound stimulation to determine fetal well-being is called
vibroacoustic stimulation (VAS) (Figure 13.9). VAS is used when an NST is nonreactive to stimulate FHR
accelerations (ACOG, 2021c). During this test, the vibroacoustic stimulator is placed on the pregnant person's
abdomen near the location of the fetal head. The stimulator produces a sound at a predetermined level for 1 to 3
seconds. The expected response by the fetus is the startle reflex, causing an acceleration of the fetal heart rate. The
acceleration is linked with fetal well-being. The absence of the startle reflex in the fetus is nonreassuring and
requires further testing, such as a contraction stress test or BPP. The vibroacoustic stimulation test allows providers
to determine if the fetus may require delivery (East et al., 2013).

FIGURE 13.9 Vibroacoustic stimulation device A vibroacoustic stimulator is placed on the enlarged uterus. The fetus is expected to react
to the sound emitted from the stimulator by moving. Fetal movement is expected to cause an acceleration of the fetal heart rate.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

When a vibroacoustic stimulation test is ordered, the nurse will need to educate the pregnant person on what the
test is, why it is being ordered, and what to expect during the test. After the test is performed, the nurse will inform
the provider of the results, then explain the results to the pregnant person and inform the pregnant person if
additional interventions have been prescribed by the health-care provider.

Fetal Nonstress Test
A nonstress test (NST) is a noninvasive test for fetal well-being that provides a graphic of the fetal heart pattern in
relation to the movement of the fetus (Figure 13.10). The external fetal and uterine contraction monitor is used to
perform an NST. This test places no stress on the fetus. A nonstress test can be performed starting at 28 weeks'
gestation (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2021a).
616  13 · Prenatal Testing

     FIGURE 13.10 Reactive NST The FHR accelerations are linked with the fetal movements in the uterine contraction tracing. In this
     illustration, the FHR increased at least 15 beats per minute (bpm) above the baseline of 130 two or more times in this 10-minute tracing.
     (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     A health-care provider may recommend an NST for one of the following reasons:

         · There is decreased fetal movement.
         · Pregnant person is past the estimated due date.
         · Pregnant person has a chronic medical condition such as high blood pressure, diabetes, heart disease, or a

             clotting disorder.
         · Pregnant person has a pregnancy-related complication such as gestational diabetes, hypertension in

             pregnancy, or placental abnormality.
         · Pregnant person had a complication in a previous pregnancy.
         · Pregnant person is having multiples.

     If the fetal heart rate increases by at least 15 bpm above the baseline for 15 seconds for a fetus at 32 weeks or
     greater, or 10 bpm for 10 seconds in the fetus less than 32 weeks, two or more times during a 20-minute testing
     period, it is considered a reactive NST and is a reassuring result. If there are insufficient accelerations of the fetal
     heart rate within the 20- to 40-minute window or the accelerations do not meet the required criteria, the NST is
     nonreactive. However, a nonreactive result does not necessarily indicate a health problem. The fetus may have been
     sleeping and not easily awakened. Certain medications taken during pregnancy may also cause a nonreactive result.
     The health-care provider will review the results and determine if additional testing is needed to find out if there is a
     cause for concern (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2021a).

     The nurse can help prepare the pregnant person for this test by explaining why the test is recommended and what
     happens during the test. The test may be done in the provider's office or at the hospital. The pregnant person will lie
     on a reclining chair or an exam table when the test is performed in the office or clinic. The nurse will attach two
     devices around the pregnant person's abdomen. One will measure the fetal heart rate, and the other will record the

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.3 · Prenatal Testing during the Third Trimester                                                                      617

pregnant person's uterine activity. (See Chapter 16 Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring for more
information on external fetal monitoring.) The pregnant person will be instructed to press a button on a cable
attached to the fetal monitor each time they feel the fetus move. If the test is reactive, the nurse will inform the
health-care provider and provide the pregnant person with further education and instructions as prescribed.

If the fetus isn't active or moving during the test, it may indicate the fetus is sleeping. The nurse will ask the
pregnant person to have a snack or sugary drink to wake the fetus. After 40 minutes, if the test remains nonreactive,
the nurse will notify the health-care provider and a plan for further testing, often a BPP, is relayed to the pregnant
person by the nurse.

Contraction Stress Test
A contraction stress test (CST) may be recommended if the NST is nonreactive, or unclear, when ultrasound for a
BPP is not available. The CST is not widely used anymore due to the availability of a BPP, which is less invasive. A
contraction stress test evaluates the response of the fetal heart rate to uterine contractions. During contractions,
there is a decrease in the oxygenation of the fetus. If the fetus lacks a reserve of oxygen (demonstrating
uteroplacental insufficiency), then a nonreassuring FHR pattern is noted during contractions (ACOG, 2021c).

A contraction stress test allows the provider to see how the fetal heart rate reacts when the uterus contracts. During
this test, the external fetal and contraction monitor is applied. (See Chapter 16 Electronic Fetal and Uterine
Contraction Monitoring for more information on external fetal monitoring.) The health-care provider will order
oxytocin (Pitocin) or have the pregnant person perform nipple stimulation to make their uterus contract. The
expected uterine contraction pattern for a CST is at least three contractions lasting for a minimum of 40 seconds
each within a 10-minute period. If the patient is already experiencing sufficient spontaneous contractions, there is
no need for uterine stimulation. However, if there are fewer than three contractions of 40 seconds each within 10
minutes, nipple stimulation or intravenous oxytocin will be used to induce contractions. A spontaneous CST can be
considered if the necessary number and strength of contractions are achieved within the 10-minute time frame
(ACOG, 2019a).

The CST test results are divided into several categories:

    · Negative: This means there are no late or significant variable decelerations (Figure 13.11).
    · Positive: Late decelerations occur after 50 percent or more of contractions, even if the contraction frequency

        is less than three in 10 minutes (Figure 13.12).
    · Equivocal-suspicious: The test shows intermittent late decelerations or significant variable decelerations.
    · Equivocal: This means there are FHR decelerations present during contractions that occur more frequently

        than every 2 minutes or last longer than 90 seconds.
    · Unsatisfactory: The tracing shows fewer than three contractions in 10 minutes or is otherwise uninterpretable.

        (ACOG, 2019a). (See Chapter 16 Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring for description of late
        decelerations of the fetal heart rate.)
618  13 · Prenatal Testing

     FIGURE 13.11 Negative CST In this illustration, the FHR baseline is 130 and is at the top of the graph. Contractions are recorded on the
     bottom. This strip shows that with each contraction, or peak, at the bottom, the heart rate remains stable, which makes it a negative result.
     (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.3 · Prenatal Testing during the Third Trimester                                                                                             619

FIGURE 13.12 Positive CST In this illustration, the FHR baseline is 130. The fetal heart rate is at the top and the contractions are on the
bottom. This strip shows a dip in the fetal heart rate just after a contraction occurs, known as a late deceleration. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Fetal surveillance with a CST is done to identify the fetus's risk of hypoxic injury or death so that appropriate
intervention can be done to prevent an adverse outcome if possible. It can also identify normally oxygenated fetuses
to allow pregnancy to continue safely and avoid unnecessary intervention (ACOG, 2021d).

The nurse can help prepare the pregnant person for a CST by explaining why the test is recommended, answering
any questions, and describing what will happen during the test. Prior to the CST, the nurse will need to get a baseline
tracing, and the nurse will monitor the tracing afterwards while a plan of care is being determined. The provider will
review the results directly after the test is completed and discuss with the pregnant person if continuing the
pregnancy, further testing, or delivery is the best plan.

Amniocentesis in the Third Trimester

In the third trimester, amniocentesis might be recommended to check fetal well-being or diagnose fetal health
problems. The primary reason an amniocentesis would be recommended in the third trimester is to assess the
maturity of the fetal lungs (ACOG, 2021a). This is important for the provider to know if they suspect the fetus may
need to be delivered prematurely. By determining the lung maturity, the provider can make a more informed
decision regarding the timing of delivery. The nurse can help prepare the pregnant person for amniocentesis by
educating them on what to expect during and after the procedure, ensuring the health-care provider has discussed
the risks and benefits, and verifying that informed consent has been obtained. Risks of amniocentesis in the third
trimester include (Ramirez-Montiel et al., 2017):

    · preterm labor and birth
    · leaking of amniotic fluid and slight bleeding
    · transmission of bloodborne infections such as hepatitis B, hepatitis C, or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
620  13 · Prenatal Testing

        from the pregnant person to the fetus
     · injury to the fetus
     · fetal loss

     UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Prenatal Care: Part 3

     See 12.1: Prenatal Care: Part 2 for a review of the patient data.

                            Flow Chart         30 Weeks' Gestation
                                               BP: 126/72
                                               Fundal height: 31 cm
                                               FHR: 144

                            Provider's orders  30 Weeks' Gestation
                                               Instruct on weekly nonstress testing.
                                               Instruct on possible need for biophysical profile

     1. Brianne is now at 30 weeks' gestation. The nurse discusses with Brianne and Trey the need for increased
         prenatal testing for fetal well-being for the remainder of the pregnancy. Brianne expresses the need to
         learn more about what prenatal tests will be performed. The nurse discusses the four prenatal tests
         Brianne will most likely have performed during the remainder of her pregnancy.

         Complete the table by choosing the nursing education point the nurse would include for each prenatal
         test. Choose one answer for each row.

     Prenatal               Education Point 1 Education Point 2              Education Point 3
     Test

     Fetal                   performed          fetus should move 10 times    requires daily reporting to
     movement               daily              within 1 hour                 the HCP
     count
                             performed          amniotic fluid should         fetal weight should be
     Ultrasound             daily              measure between 5and 25 cm    below the 10th percentile

     Nonstress               performed          reactive indicates need for   nonreactive indicates need
     test                   monthly            further testing               for further testing

     Biophysical             performed          ordered when the NST is       ordered when the NST is
     profile                every other week   reactive                      nonreactive

     2. The nurse has completed the prenatal testing education with Brianne. Indicate if the patient teaching is
         effective or ineffective for the nonstress test (NST) based on the statements made by Brianne.

     Patient Statement                                                       Effective Ineffective

     I will need to sign a consent for the NST every time it is obtained.

     I can lie on my side during the NST.

     Access for free at openstax.org
13.3 · Prenatal Testing during the Third Trimester                         621

The NST is obtained by using an external fetal monitor.

Each time I feel the baby move during the NST, I will press the marker
button.

The baby's heart rate needs to stay within the baseline for the NST to be
reactive.
622 13 · Summary

Summary

13.1 Prenatal Testing during the First Trimester

Many prenatal tests are recommended during the first trimester of pregnancy. Nurses are responsible for obtaining a
comprehensive obstetric and menstrual history and educating pregnant persons on the routine, screening, and
diagnostic tests available and the reasons they are performed and recommended. The nurse may also assist with
some of the procedures and can help prepare the pregnant person by explaining what to expect during the
procedure. It is important for nurses to educate the pregnant person on the screenings recommended and inform
them that the screenings predict the risk of the fetus having a genetic, structural, or neural tube defect. Additional
diagnostic testing is needed if the screenings come back abnormal.

Nurses also use therapeutic communication with pregnant persons and their support persons. It is important for the
nurse to support the pregnant person in any decisions they make concerning their pregnancy. Part of this support
includes referrals to specialists in maternal-fetal medicine, genetics, and infectious disease.

13.2 Prenatal Testing during the Second Trimester

Prenatal testing in the second trimester includes screening and diagnostic tests. Some of the testing is performed
after an abnormal first trimester screening result. Some of the prenatal testing allows for interventions to take place
during the procedure. Before the second trimester screening or diagnostic testing, the nurse will collect any
important information that may be helpful to the health-care provider when interpreting results, such as gravida,
para, living children, gestation in weeks, and any maternal health problems.

The nurse reinforces education about the risks and benefits of prenatal testing, the test results, and
recommendations made by the health-care provider. The nurse has a very important role in educating the pregnant
person on the screenings and procedures that are recommended, answering any questions, preparing the pregnant
person for what to expect during the procedures, and educating the pregnant person on what the results mean and
any additional recommendations. The nurse should provide the pregnant person and their partner with clear
explanations of what the tests assess, the purpose of the tests, and the frequency of any tests recommended. It will
be important for the pregnant person to know how long the test will take and what happens during the test to help
reduce any anxiety. The pregnant person may need additional support depending on the results of the test
performed, and additional testing or referrals may be appropriate. Abnormal results can often cause anxiety in the
pregnant person.

13.3 Prenatal Testing during the Third Trimester

Routine prenatal screening is usually complete prior to the third trimester. However, additional screenings and tests
may be recommended. If results from routine screening performed in the second trimester are inconclusive or
positive, additional testing may be needed in the third trimester. Additionally, if any complications occur in the third
trimester, additional fetal surveillance may be needed to check on the well-being of the fetus.

The nurse has an important role in educating and supporting the pregnant person on all the recommended
screening and diagnostic tests performed in the third trimester. These nursing actions assist the pregnant person in
their decisions on what prenatal testing is right for them and their fetus.

Key Terms

amniotic fluid index (AFI) standardized way to assess the sufficiency of the amniotic fluid quantity in pregnancy
antibody titer simple blood test that determines the presence of antibodies to Rh-positive blood in a person with

    Rh-negative blood
biophysical profile (BPP) scoring system to evaluate fetal well-being in the following areas: fetal heart rate, fetal

    breathing movements, fetal body movements, fetal muscle tone, and amount of amniotic fluid
cell-free DNA (cfDNA) screening blood test that can be done as early as 10 weeks' gestation and up until delivery

    that screens for certain conditions caused by an abnormal number of chromosomes
chorionic villus sampling (CVS) prenatal diagnostic test conducted between the 10th and 13th week of

    pregnancy to diagnose fetal chromosomal, metabolic, or DNA abnormalities
contraction stress test (CST) allows the provider to see how the fetal heart rate reacts when the uterus contracts

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         13 · Assessments 623

fetal movement count (also called "kick count") test that keeps track of the fetus's movements and that can be
    performed at home by the pregnant person

fetoscopy procedure that involves inserting a thin fiber-optic tube, or fetoscope, into the uterus through a small
    incision made in the abdomen of the pregnant person

integrated screen part 2 (also called quad screen) blood test taken between 15 and 20 weeks' gestation to
    screen for neural tube defects such as spina bifida and chromosomal disorders such as Down syndrome and
    trisomy 18

multiple marker screen blood test for pregnant persons that screens for chromosomal disorders and neural tube
    defects

nonstress test (NST) noninvasive test for fetal well-being that provides a graphic of the fetal heart pattern in
    relation to the movement of the fetus

nuchal translucency screening ultrasound that measures the thickness of space at the back of the fetus's neck,
    known as the nuchal fold thickness

percutaneous umbilical blood sampling (PUBS) diagnostic test that looks for specific genetic or blood disorders
    in the fetus

screening test used to identify whether a fetus is more or less likely to have certain birth defects, many which are
    genetic disorders

ultrasound safe and painless diagnostic procedure using high-frequency sound waves that allows health-care
    providers to see inside the uterus and examine the developing fetus without invasive measures

umbilical Doppler study used to check blood flow in the umbilical artery, a blood vessel located in the umbilical
    cord

vibroacoustic stimulation (VAS) noninvasive technique that uses vibratory and sound stimulation to determine
    fetal well-being in the antepartum period

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. A 37-year-old patient is being seen for her first OB appointment after having a positive pregnancy test at
        home. She thinks she is about 6 weeks pregnant. She and her husband have been trying to conceive for 7
        years, and she has a history of three spontaneous abortions. What antepartum testing do you anticipate the
        provider ordering at today's visit?
           a. a vaginal ultrasound to confirm gestation age, due date, and pregnancy viability
           b. maternal assay blood tests to screen for genetic and chromosomal disorders
           c. a nuchal translucency ultrasound
           d. an integrated screen blood test

    2. What is the purpose of maternal assays and multiple marker screenings performed in the first trimester of
        pregnancy?
           a. to determine the gender of the fetus
           b. to assess the risk of chromosomal abnormalities in the fetus
           c. to monitor the growth and development of the placenta
           d. to detect any potential maternal infections

    3. What is the purpose of cell-free DNA screening done in the first trimester?
           a. to determining the gender of the fetus
           b. to check for multiple fetuses
           c. to assess the risk of chromosomal abnormalities in the fetus
           d. to measure the growth and development of the fetus

    4. What is the purpose of carrier screening in the first trimester?
           a. to check the positioning of the fetus
           b. to assess for chromosomal abnormalities in the fetus
           c. to measure the heart rate of the fetus
624 13 · Assessments

           d. to identify potential genetic disorders that parents may carry

    5. What is the purpose of chorionic villus sampling (CVS) in the first trimester?
           a. to measure the amount of amniotic fluid
           b. to confirm pregnancy
           c. to assess the risk of chromosomal abnormalities in the fetus
           d. to assess for potential maternal infection

    6. What routine lab tests should a pregnant person have in the first trimester? Select all that apply.
           a. complete blood count (CBC)
           b. blood type and Rh factor
           c. urinalysis
           d. thyroid function tests
           e. genetic screening tests
            f. liver function tests

    7. A pregnant woman in her first trimester is considering prenatal testing. The nurse is providing patient
        education regarding prenatal testing in the first trimester. What statement accurately reflects the nurse's
        education?
           a. "Prenatal testing in the first trimester primarily focuses on determining the gender of the fetus."
           b. "Prenatal testing in the first trimester helps assess the risk of abnormalities in the fetus."
           c. "Prenatal testing in the first trimester monitors the growth and development of the placenta."
           d. "Prenatal testing in the first trimester is primarily performed to detect potential maternal infections."

    8. A 34-year-old patient who is 16 weeks pregnant had a multiple markers screening done. The results came
        back with an increased risk for trisomy 21. You call the patient to go over the results. How should you respond
        when the patient asks you if the baby is going to have Down syndrome?
           a. "Yes, would you like to continue or terminate your pregnancy?"
           b. "This screening predicts only the risk of your baby having Down syndrome and cannot diagnose it.
                Additional testing is needed to determine this."
           c. "You will need to discuss this with your provider at your next appointment."
           d. "Yes, this test shows your baby has Down syndrome. I'd be happy to send you resources about this
                condition so that you can be prepared for when your baby is born."

    9. A 27-year-old patient presents with injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident. She was wearing her
        seatbelt and has multiple bruises and scrapes along her abdomen. She complains of pain 3/10 in her
        abdomen. She is G1P0 and is at 14 weeks' gestation. A bedside ultrasound scan confirms that the fetus is
        stable and not in any distress. The patient is Rh negative, and her husband is Rh positive. What do you
        anticipate being the next step?
           a. Obtain a urinalysis.
           b. Administer Rh(D) immune globulin (RhoGAM).
           c. Confirm with the provider that she can be discharged home.
           d. Schedule a follow-up ultrasound.

  10. Why might a provider recommend percutaneous umbilical blood sampling? Select all that apply.
           a. an increased risk of Down syndrome shown on a previous scan
           b. to detect Down syndrome in the fetus, as this test provides the most accurate screening
           c. to check for genetic and chromosomal abnormalities the fetus is at high risk for
           d. to verify the blood type of the fetus
           e. to check for an ectopic pregnancy

  11. A student nurse is learning about prenatal testing for fetal genetic disorders and neural tube defects. What
        prenatal tests are screening tests in the second trimester? Select all that apply.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         13 · Assessments 625

           a. amniocentesis
           b. multiple marker
           c. cell-free DNA
           d. chorionic villus sampling (CVS)
           e. alpha-fetoprotein

  12. During a pregnant woman's second trimester anatomy scan, the fetus was in breech position. The patient is
        now 34 weeks pregnant and asks how she can tell if the baby is in the right position. What test might be
        ordered to determine this?
           a. a biophysical profile
           b. an ultrasound
           c. a fetoscopy
           d. a nonstress test

  13. The nurse is reviewing the schedule for the OB/GYN she works for. In reviewing a patient's chart, the nurse
        notes the patient is 32 weeks pregnant, has hypertension, and had a previous fetal death. What test does the
        nurse anticipate the provider will order?
           a. a contraction stress test
           b. amniotic fluid index
           c. nonstress test
           d. fetal movement count

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. To whom should prenatal screening be recommended?

    2. What prenatal diagnostic tests are performed in the first trimester?

    3. What education would you give your patient who was considering prenatal screening and diagnostic testing?

    4. What is the main role of the nurse in the second trimester screenings?

    5. You are caring for a pregnant person who is at 26 weeks' gestation. In reviewing the chart, you notice that the
        pregnant person completed the antibody titer and is Rh negative. Knowing this, what do you anticipate being
        ordered?

    6. What second trimester screenings may be recommended and why?

    7. The OB/GYN recommends that a patient who is 32 weeks pregnant perform fetal movement counts at home.
        The provider asks you, the nurse, to give the patient instructions on how to do this. How would you teach the
        patient to perform FMC?

    8. What third trimester prenatal screenings might be recommended and why?

Reflection Questions

    1. How do first trimester prenatal screenings, such as maternal assays and cell-free DNA screening, contribute
        to informed decision making and personalized care during pregnancy?

    2. Why are routine lab tests recommended in the first trimester of pregnancy, and what information can they
        give to health-care providers?

    3. What can the nurse do to be supportive to the patient who is trying to decide what prenatal testing is needed?

    4. How does the nurse support the pregnant person when the fetus is diagnosed with a lethal anomaly?

Critical-Thinking Questions about Case Studies

    1. Refer to Prenatal Care: Part 3.
        What possible psychosocial issues could Brianne and Trey experience now that their fetus needs additional
626 13 · References

        surveillance?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. Explain the purpose of cell-free DNA screening, including when it is typically conducted and what conditions
        it screens for in the first trimester.

    2. What is the purpose of carrier screening, and what genetic disorders are commonly screened for during
        pregnancy?

    3. List three routine lab tests performed in the first trimester and explain why they are important for assessing
        maternal and fetal health.

    4. Discuss two essential aspects of patient education when assisting with prenatal testing in the first trimester
        and identify a nursing action related to informed consent.

    5. When is the integrated screen part 2 (quad screening) conducted, and what does it screen for?
    6. What diagnostic tests may be recommended if abnormalities are detected during the second trimester

        ultrasound?
    7. Why are second trimester antibody titers checked, and what complication do they aim to prevent?
    8. Why is monitoring fetal movements important, and how can a nurse assist a pregnant person in performing a

        kick count?
    9. What does a BPP assess, and how can a nurse assist a pregnant person undergoing the procedure?
  10. Why might a health-care provider recommend an NST, and how can a nurse prepare and assist a pregnant

        person during the test?

References

Acevedo, H., Rahman, M., & Moreno, M. (2023, April 9). Sonography 3rd trimester and placenta assessment,
   protocols, and interpretation. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK572062/

Adekanmi, A. J., Roberts, A., Morhason-Bello, I. O., & Adeyinka, A. O. (2022, February 28). Utilization of uterine and
    umbilical artery Doppler in the second and third trimesters to predict adverse pregnancy outcomes: A Nigerian
   experience. Women's Health Reports (New Rochelle, N.Y.), 3(1), 256-266. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
    articles/PMC8896215

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017a, June). Ultrasound exams. https://www.acog.org/
    womens-health/faqs/ultrasound-exams

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017b). Committee Opinion No. 723: Guidelines for
   diagnostic imaging during pregnancy and lactation. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-
    opinion/articles/2017/10/guidelines-for-diagnostic-imaging-during-pregnancy-and-lactation

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019a, May). Special tests for monitoring fetal well-being.
    https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/special-tests-for-monitoring-fetal-well-being

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019b). Prenatal genetic testing chart.
    https://www.acog.org/womens-health/infographics/prenatal-genetic-testing-chart

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020a, December). Carrier screening. https://www.acog.org/
    womens-health/faqs/carrier-screening

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020b). Non-invasive prenatal testing. https://www.acog.org/
    advocacy/policy-priorities/non-invasive-prenatal-testing

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020c). Prenatal genetic screening tests.
    https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/prenatal-genetic-screening-tests

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021a, March). Amniocentesis. https://www.acog.org/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            13 · References 627

    womens-health/faqs/amniocentesis

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021b, May). Bleeding during pregnancy.
    https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/bleeding-during-pregnancy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021c, June). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 229: Antepartum
   fetal surveillance.Obstetrics & Gynecology, 137 (6), e116 e127. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34011889/

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021d, June). Committee Opinion No. 828: Indications for
   outpatient antenatal fetal surveillance. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-opinion/
    articles/2021/06/indications-for-outpatient-antenatal-fetal-surveillance

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021e, June). Viral hepatitis in pregnancy.
    https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/hepatitis-b-and-hepatitis-c-in-pregnancy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022a, June). The Rh factor: How it can affect your
   pregnancy. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/the-rh-factor-how-it-can-affect-your-pregnancy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022b, July). Obstetric Care Consensus No. 11: Pregnancy at
   age 35 years or older. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/obstetric-care-consensus/articles/2022/
    08/pregnancy-at-age-35-years-or-older

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023). Current ACOG Guidance: NIPT summary of
   recommendations. https://www.acog.org/advocacy/policy-priorities/non-invasive-prenatal-testing/current-acog-
    guidance

Burd, I., Zieve, D., & Ogilvie, I. (2016, May 16). Percutaneous umbilical cord blood sampling, series--Normal
   anatomy. MedlinePlus. https://medlineplus.gov/ency/presentations/100196_1.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022, February 16). Viral hepatitis: Perinatal transmission. Centers for
    Disease Control and Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hbv/perinatalxmtn.htm

Chen, Y., Wu, B., Chen, Y., Ning, W., & Zhang, H. (2022). A risk model for predicting fetuses with trisomy 21 using
   alpha-fetoprotein variants L2 combined with maternal serum biomarkers in early pregnancy. Reproductive
   Sciences, 29(4), 1287-1295. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43032-021-00762-5

Correa-de-Araujo, R., & Yoon, S. S. S. (2021, February). Clinical outcomes in high-risk pregnancies due to advanced
   maternal age. Journal of Women's Health, 30(2), 160-167. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
    PMC8020515/

East, C. E., Smyth, R. M. D., Leader, L. R., Henshall, N. E., Colditz, P. B., Lau, R., & Tan, K. H. (2013, January 31).
    Vibroacoustic stimulation for fetal assessment in labour in the presence of a nonreassuring fetal heart rate trace.
   Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7212002/

Fuentes, A. (Ed.). (2018, August). Prenatal test: Multiple marker test [for parents]. Nemours. KidsHealth.
    https://kidshealth.org/en/parents/prenatal-multiple-marker.html

Gatta, G., Grezia, G., Cuccurullo, V., Sardu, C., Iovino, F., Comune, R., Ruggeiro, A., Chirico, M., Forgia, D., Fanizzi, A.,
    Massafra, R., Belfiore, M., Falco, G., Reginelli, A., Brunese, L., Grassi, R., Cappabianca, S., & Viola, L. (2022,
   January). MRI in pregnancy and precision medicine: A review from literature. Journal of Personalized Medicine,
   12(1), 9. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8778056/

Gordon, S., Umandap, C., & Langaker, M. (2023, January 16). Prenatal genetic screening. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557702/

Jabaz, D., & Abed, M. (2023, May 22). Sonography 2nd trimester assessment, protocols, and interpretation.
    StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK570574/

Jones, T. M., & Montero, F. J. (2022, December 11). Chorionic villus sampling. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK563301/

Kaiser Permanente. (n.d.). Counting kicks. https://healthy.kaiserpermanente.org/health-wellness/maternity/third-
628 13 · References

    trimester/count-the-kicks

Lord, M. Marino, S., & Kole, M. (2023, March). Amniotic fluid index. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK441881/

Maulik, D. (2022, May). Doppler ultrasound of the umbilical artery for fetal surveillance in singleton pregnancies.
    UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/doppler-ultrasound-of-the-umbilical-artery-for-fetal-
    surveillance-in-singleton-pregnancies

Mount Sinai Health System. (2022). Nuchal translucency test. https://www.mountsinai.org/health-library/tests/
    nuchal-translucency-test

Murphy, A. (2023, March). Umbilical arterial Doppler assessment. Radiopaedia. https://radiopaedia.org/articles/
    umbilical-arterial-doppler-assessment?lang=us

Murugan, V. A., Murphy, B. O., Dupuis, C., Goldstein, A., & Kim, Y. H. (2020). Role of ultrasound in the evaluation of
   first-trimester pregnancies in the acute setting. Ultrasonography (Seoul, Korea), 39(2), 178-189. https://doi.org/
    10.14366/usg.19043

Nguyen, T. P. (Ed.). (2022, July). Prenatal tests: Second trimester [for parents]. Nemours. KidsHealth.
    https://kidshealth.org/en/parents/tests-second-trimester.html

Palka, C., Guanciali-Franchi, P., Morizio, E., Afonsi, M., Papponetti, M., Sabbatinelli, G., Palka, G., Calabrese, G., &
   Benn, P. (2019, May 18). Non-invasive prenatal screening: A 20-year experience in Italy. European Journal of
   Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology: X, 3, 100050. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
    article/pii/S2590161319300857

Ramirez-Montiel, M. L., Casillas-Barrera, M., Morales-Morales, M. P., Ortiz, M. I., Lopez de Lara-Diaz de Leon, O.,
    Carrasco-Blancas, E. R., & Morales, L. R. (2017). Complications associated with amniocentesis in the third
   trimester of pregnancy. Journal of Clinical Gynecology and Obstetrics, 6(2), 34-36. https://www.jcgo.org/
    index.php/JCGO/article/view/452

Raymond, Y. C., Fernando, S., Menezes, M., Meagher, S., Mol, B. W., McLennan, A., Scott, F., Mizia, K., Carey, K.,
    Fleming, G., & Rolnik, D. L. (2022). Cell-free DNA screening for rare autosomal trisomies and segmental
   chromosome imbalances. Prenatal Diagnosis, 42(11), 1349-1357. https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.6233

Ruano, R., & Vega, B. (2019). Fetal surgery: How recent technological advancements are extending its applications.
   Expert Review of Medical Devices, 16(8), 643-645. https://doi.org/10.1080/17434440.2019.1641404

Sapoval, J., Singh, V., Carter, R. E. (2023, January 16). Ultrasound biophysical profile. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK539866/

Shiefa, S., Amargandhi, M., Bhupendra, J., Moulali, S., & Kristine, T. (2013, January). First trimester maternal serum
    screening using biochemical markers papp-A and free -hcg for Down syndrome, Patau syndrome and Edward
   syndrome. Indian Journal of Clinical Biochemistry , 28(1), 3-12. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
    PMC3547446/

Srisuro A. (2022, April). The top 6 pregnancy questions I hear from first-time moms. ACOG. https://www.acog.org/
    womens-health/experts-and-stories/the-latest/the-top-6-pregnancy-questions-i-hear-from-first-time-moms

U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2021a, August). Nonstress test. https://medlineplus.gov/lab-tests/nonstress-
    test/

U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2021b). Prenatal cell-free DNA screening. MedlinePlus. https://medlineplus.gov/
    lab-tests/prenatal-cell-free-dna-screening/

U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2022a, April 19). Monitoring your baby before labor. MedlinePlus.
    https://medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/000485.htm

U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2022b, May 16). Amniocentesis (amniotic fluid test). MedlinePlus.
    https://medlineplus.gov/lab-tests/amniocentesis-amniotic-fluid-test/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            13 · References 629

U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2022c, July 22). Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) test. https://medlineplus.gov/lab-tests/
    alpha-fetoprotein-afp-test/

U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2022d, November 8). Down syndrome tests. MedlinePlus.
    https://medlineplus.gov/lab-tests/down-syndrome-tests/

William, W. A., Nelson, G., & Grogan, S. P. (2023, July 31). Sonography 1st trimester assessment, protocols, and
   interpretation. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK573070/

Yoham, A., & Casadesus, D. (2023, May 22). Rho(D) Immune Globulin. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557884/
630 13 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 14

Childbirth Education Options

FIGURE 14.1 Childbirth Education Class Childbirth education uses a certified educator to teach birthing people and their support person.
(credit: "Bundles for Babies prepare new parents for baby" by Laura Motes/Air Force Test Center, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
14.1 Lamaze International Childbirth Education
14.2 Bradley Method
14.3 Hypnobirthing: The Mongan Method
14.4 Alexander Technique
14.5 Birth Plans
INTRODUCTION After choosing a provider and birth setting, birthing persons are encouraged to attend childbirth
education. Many times, prenatal care visits are not long enough to delve into the deeper levels of education that are
beneficial for birthing people to have prior to the day they give birth. Childbirth education programs can provide that
education, and nurses can be a part of the education process by leading classes or giving instruction during patient
interactions. Some childbirth education methods require specific training, and nurses can obtain certifications for
these methods. Nurses should also become familiar with classes available locally. This chapter will explore several
options for childbirth education.
632  14 · Childbirth Education Options

     14.1 Lamaze International Childbirth Education

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Discuss the history of Lamaze International childbirth education
         · Verbalize the six evidence-based healthy birth practices that encompass the Lamaze International

             childbirth education practices
         · Summarize the importance of shared decision making within the Lamaze International childbirth

             education program
         · Summarize the importance of understanding the process of physiologic birth when educating birthing

             persons and their partners
         · Discuss the education that is provided to birthing persons and their families regarding the postpartum

             period

     Becoming educated in the process of pregnancy, labor, birth, and postpartum and newborn care is called childbirth
     education. It is a significant nursing intervention that can improve birth outcomes and the birth experience for the
     entire family. Lamaze is an educational platform that families have used to improve their confidence by preparing for
     birth. Lamaze is taught in many different birth settings.

     History of Lamaze Childbirth Education

     The Lamaze method was introduced in 1951 in France by Dr. Fernand Lamaze, who developed a technique for
     childbirth that consisted of relaxation, childbirth education classes, continuous emotional support, breathing
     techniques, and specially trained nurses who helped birthing people manage the intensity of birth (Lamaze
     International, n.d.). In the late 1950s, the Lamaze technique started to be used in the United States. Over time,
     Lamaze teachings shifted from childbirth education only to an evidence-based practice that supports physiologic
     birth and prepares birthing people to have confidence in their ability to birth and parent.

     Evidence-Based Lamaze Childbirth Education

     Research shows that labor care provided by a Lamaze-informed nurse increases rates of vaginal birth, shortens
     lengths of labor, and reduces pain and postpartum bleeding in first-time birthing patients (Wu et al., 2021).
     Moreover, birthing people have increased knowledge of pregnancy, nutrition needs, and exercise needs after
     completing Lamaze education (Mahalakshmi et al., 2018). Research has identified no risks associated with Lamaze
     childbirth education. These significant benefits should be discussed with hospitals and health-care providers and
     should be offered to families in their pregnancy care. The drawbacks to this method for patients include lack of
     access to the education, cost of the education, and inability to attend the necessary 8 weeks of sessions to
     complete the education. These factors can be a significant barrier to improved outcomes, especially in populations
     at higher risk who may want these resources but be unable to obtain them.

     The WHO recommends four care practices, which were built into the Lamaze philosophy:

         · Let labor begin on its own.
         · Continuous labor support should be provided.
         · Persons should avoid giving birth lying on their back.
         · Birthing person/newborn couplets should stay together.

     Two additional practices, position changes and avoidance of interventions, were added later. These
     recommendations are echoed in many other childbirth-education models as foundational practices that improve the
     experience and outcomes of birthing people (Lothian & Devries, 2017).

     Let Labor Begin on Its Own
     Spontaneous labor occurs by multiple avenues that are explored in Chapter 15 Process of Labor and Birth.
     Supporting the process is crucial to reducing interventions. Labor often begins in dark, calm, comfortable
     environments. If the environment is disrupted, this can stall or disrupt the process. Lamaze teaching includes a
     preference for the baby to come on their own when ready, to have early labor undisturbed in a comfortable or
     familiar environment, and to avoid the risks of induction of labor except for medical indications (Lothian & Devries,
     2017).

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.1 · Lamaze International Childbirth Education                                                                       633

        CULTURAL CONTEXT

Traditions and Culture Surrounding Birth

Birthing traditions are oftentimes associated with culture or religion. For example, in Cambodia and Lebanon, female
relatives are in the room for birth; husbands are not in the room. However, fathers in India are more likely to be
present during the birth. In Iran, pregnant persons many times attend Lamaze classes. Nurses must ask patients
their preferences and respect their cultural values.

(Boules, n.d.)

Position Changes
The weeks leading to birth can prepare the body for labor. Lamaze teachings recommend that as labor nears,
pregnant people should avoid semireclined positions like propped positioning in bed and reclined chairs to avoid
undesirable fetal positions. Frequent position changes during labor, especially a balance of upright and restful
positions, can encourage labor progression and prevent fatigue (see 17.1 Nonpharmacological Pain Management).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG; 2019) suggests frequent position changes during
labor to increase comfort and assist in fetal positioning. Research has shown that labor can be shortened by more
than an hour for persons laboring in an upright position (Ondeck, 2019). Freedom of movement is one of the core
principles of a healthy birth (Lothian & Devries, 2017).

Continuous Labor Support
People typically deal better with stress when surrounded by people who love and respect them. Labor support goes
much further than reviewing monitor strips and changing intravenous (IV) fluids. Labor support includes respecting
the person's space and providing reassurance that they are capable of birth. Quality labor support can be provided
by a labor nurse offering heat or ice for comfort, assisting with position changes, providing words of encouragement,
or holding space without discomfort in the silence, when words may be disruptive (Lothian & Devries, 2017). A loved
one or doula can also provide excellent labor support, especially when nurses have additional responsibilities and
are caring for more than one patient.

Avoid Unnecessary Interventions
Lamaze teaching cautions against the use of continuous fetal monitoring, restricted eating or drinking, intravenous
fluids, epidural anesthesia, artificial rupture of membranes, induction or augmentation with oxytocin (Pitocin), or
episiotomy (Lothian & Devries, 2017). These interventions are not done unless they are medically necessary. ACOG
(2019) suggests individualized labor management according to pregnancy risk factors. Lamaze stresses the
importance of shared decision making between the couple and health-care provider. ACOG also notes that
intermittent auscultation, noncoached pushing, not artificially rupturing the membranes, and family-centered care
are safe for low-risk persons and help limit interventions in labor.

Push in Your Own Position
When allowed to choose, most laboring persons prefer to push in the upright position (Huang et al., 2019). This
position allows gravity to assist in the descent of the fetus. The majority of laboring persons in hospitals in the
United States are placed in a supine position, which does not encourage spontaneous pushing efforts. Lamaze
teaching recommends pushing how and where it feels right to the birthing person because their body and instincts
know the exact movements that are necessary for the fetus to navigate the pelvis (Lothian & Devries, 2017).

Couplets Should Stay Together
Birthing people and their newborns should remain together, as shown in Figure 14.2. This idea is a constant theme
throughout most childbirth-education programs and even part of the Baby-Friendly Initiative (BFI) in the United
States. The BFI was developed by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) as a global program to implement the "Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding" (Baby-Friendly USA,
2024). Lamaze teachings include couplets staying together to improve their bond, assist with breast-feeding, and
assist with newborn transition to extrauterine life (Lothian & Devries, 2017).
634  14 · Childbirth Education Options

     FIGURE 14.2 Baby Skin-to-Skin with Birthing Person Lamaze supports keeping the baby skin-to-skin after birth on the person's
     abdomen or chest. (credit: "Skin to Skin" by Sarah Evans/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

     Shared Decision Making

     Shared decision making improves patient autonomy, satisfaction, and safety and reduces health-care costs
     (Vanderlaan & Givens, n.d.). Because evidence supports shared decision making, Lamaze International has added
     this to its advocacy resources and recommendations for health-care providers (Vanderlaan & Givens, n.d.). Research
     shows that the most confounding factor for use of shared decision making is the short duration of a prenatal visit
     (Vanderlaan & Givens, n.d.). Childbirth education like Lamaze can fill the gap and provide time for questions and
     answers so that patients have the knowledge to make informed decisions and develop a written birth plan to share
     with their health-care provider and birthing facility.

     Rights of Childbearing Persons
     Knowing the rights of birthing people is crucial for nurses. Not all people are provided the same rights for birth as
     others. For example, Black people have been denied equal rights in birth through overt decisions and systemic
     racism. Lamaze points out that it is not the job of the Black person to fight for equal rights in the health-care system
     during labor. Instead, it is the responsibility of the nurse and health-care provider to provide care that is equal and
     nonbiased (Terreri, 2020). The nurse advocates for the birthing person and family, and if that advocacy is not deeply
     engrained in the nurse, it may not be possible for them to provide safe, equitable, and quality care. Lamaze
     education includes an extensive list of patient rights with which all obstetric nurses should become familiar (Terreri,
     2020).

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Take a few moments to review the Universal Rights in Giving Birth (https://openstax.org/r/77birthrights) by Lamaze
     International.

     Communication and Negotiation Skills
     Lamaze teachings include educating the pregnant person or couple on how to communicate a preference for
     nonintervention of the health-care provider into the labor progress and birthing process when a low-risk labor and

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.1 · Lamaze International Childbirth Education                                                                          635

birth are expected. The strategies taught include alertness, informed basis for decision making, confidence in the
knowledge gained, and communication through requests for explanations and more information as well as available
alternatives. This allows the patient and family time to weigh the risks and benefits of each option (Lothian &
DeVries, 2017).

When and How to Connect with the Health-Care Provider
As previously discussed, the biggest risk for having a cesarean birth is the birth setting. Lamaze teaches families to
find the environment in which the patient is most comfortable. Patients should research the type of health-care
provider that mirrors their philosophy of birth, whether that is an OB, a midwife, or a family practitioner. Lamaze also
teaches patients to trust their instincts and change providers if they no longer feel comfortable or sense their
provider is no longer using shared decision making (Grauer, n.d.).

Physiologic Birth Process

When a birth occurs vaginally and without medical intervention, it is considered a physiologic birth (International
Childbirth Education Association [ICEA], 2015). Factors that increase the success of physiologic birth are the
pregnant person's health and childbirth education (ICEA, 2015). Factors that interrupt physiologic labor are artificial
rupture of membranes prior to active labor, induction of labor, augmentation of labor, and epidural anesthesia.
Lamaze education identifies the normal processes of birth and the few alterations from normal that indicate the
need for intervention. These teachings also include lists of basic care, screening options, and interventions
categorized by their balance of risks to benefits, including effectiveness (Lothian & DeVries, 2017). Lamaze supports
the American College of Nurse Midwives, Midwives Alliance of North American, and the National Association of
Certified Professional Midwives' joint statement, titled "Supporting Health and Normal Physiologic Childbirth: A
Consensus Statement by ACNM, MANA, and NACPM" (Muza, 2012). The principles taught in Lamaze give patients
the opportunity to make informed choices that allow for physiologic birth to occur.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Read this article that discusses the consensus statement by ACNM, MANA, and NACPM (https://openstax.org/r/
77physiolgcbrth) supporting normal physiologic childbirth.

Birth Is Normal
Lamaze teachings include the following six healthy practices for birthing persons that promote normal birth:

  1. Let labor begin on its own.
  2. Walk, move around, and change position throughout labor.
  3. Bring a loved one, friend, or doula for continuous support.
  4. Avoid interventions that are not medically necessary.
  5. Avoid giving birth on your back and follow your body's urges to push.
  6. Keep birthing person and baby together; it is best for both and for chest-feeding.

       (What is a safe and healthy birth? n.d.)

The Lamaze teachings also include references from the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews as evidence that
birth is normal (Lothian & DeVries, 2017). Lamaze International attempted to define "normal birth" and found that
36 percent of polled persons assigned female at birth felt that "normal birth" meant they had had a vaginal birth; 63
percent of Lamaze instructors defined it as any birth without interventions (Prusky, 2010). No consensus exists of
what constitutes a "normal birth," but Lamaze teaches that avoiding unnecessary interventions and following
evidence-based practice will lead to a successful, satisfying birth experience.

Physical and Emotional Responses to Birth
Preparing for birth includes exploring expectations about and tools needed to navigate the intensity of labor. Lamaze
teachings include how to view birth as a task instead of a trial, as pain with a purpose; how to create a comfortable
environment, reduce pain perception, find a rhythm in the ebb and flow of labor; and how to acknowledge the
realities of labor pain (Lothian & DeVries, 2017). Patients taking Lamaze classes learn that labor is normal and that
preparing emotionally with their partner is an important part of birth preparation. They are also taught exercises to
636  14 · Childbirth Education Options

     prepare their body for birth; these are summarized in (Table 14.1).

     Trimester                          Exercise*

     Every trimester                    Walking
                                        Swimming
                                        Yoga
                                        Kegels

     First trimester                    Can continue to perform the same workouts as prior to pregnancy
                                        Taking a break when needed
                                        Staying hydrated

     Second and third trimesters        Focus on low-impact exercises
                                        Yoga
                                        Strengthening muscles for labor
                                        Taking breaks when needed
                                        Avoid lying on back during exercises

     *The pregnant person should always check with their provider before starting an exercise routine.

     TABLE 14.1 Exercises for Each Trimester (Lamaze International, 2017)

     Last Weeks of Pregnancy
     Preparing for labor takes months, even though the process itself may take only hours or days. The weeks leading up
     to birth can be physically and emotionally taxing. Lamaze teachings review the meanings behind these late-
     pregnancy discomforts and how to ease through them to prepare for a positive birth (Lothian & DeVries, 2017).
     Lamaze teaches that many pregnant persons will have backaches, insomnia, hip pain, and discomforts of pregnancy
     in the third trimester. Their recommendations consist of the following:

     1. Remember the person will not be pregnant forever.
     2. Take time to sit and feel the baby inside.
     3. Take naps and rest.
     4. Take a bath.
     5. Stretch, do yoga.

          (Terreri, 2020)

     Postpartum Life and Parenting
     The transition into parenthood or the addition of a new child to a previously smaller family unit is an adjustment.
     Lamaze teachings include information on the transition to extrauterine life for the newborn, bonding with the
     birthing parent, overview of newborn procedures and feeding, adjusting to life with a newborn, and postpartum
     recovery. Distinguishing between expected physical and emotional changes and those that can be warning signs of
     pathologic processes is crucial for birthing people and their nurses to understand. Lamaze teachings help identify
     when to seek for help when trouble arises (Lothian & DeVries, 2017).

             REAL RN STORIES

     Nurse: Courtney W., MS, APRN, CNM
     Years in practice: 6
     Clinical setting: Labor and birth unit
     Geographic location: Dallas, Texas

     As a new nurse, I was fascinated by people who were able to give birth without an epidural, in part because it
     happened so infrequently on the unit where I worked. Most of those who did not have the epidural experienced
     quickly progressing labors without time to administer the anesthetic before birth, and they were clearly suffering.

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.2 · Bradley Method                                                                                                     637

This all changed when I witnessed my first patient with a planned and well-prepared-for unmedicated birth. She
was calm and focused. She listened to her body. She had a doula who supported her and her partner. They worked
together beautifully. This person changed my life and opened my eyes to how much the obstetric model of care
contributed to the cascade of interventions. I went on to study childbirth education, doula support in labor, and
finally went to graduate school to become a midwife after seeing the difference quality prenatal care with education
can have on birth outcomes and experiences.

14.2 Bradley Method

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Discuss the history of the Bradley Method
    · Verbalize the importance of prenatal nutrition and exercise as part of the Bradley Method
    · Summarize the importance of continuous labor support in the Bradley Method
    · Compare and contrast the first and second stage of labor teaching that is provided to the birthing person

        and the labor support person in the Bradley Method

The Bradley Method is a classic form of childbirth education that has inspired countless families to consider
unmedicated, low-intervention birth. Understanding the concepts of this approach to birth can help nurses be more
prepared to support families choosing unmedicated birth or with a preference for low intervention in pregnancy,
labor, and birth. As nurses support families who use this form of childbirth education, it will be important to include
the patient's support person because they have trained for the role extensively.

History

Dr. Robert A. Bradley developed the Bradley Method in 1947 and published his first book on the subject in 1965. Dr.
Bradley grew up on a farm where birth was a normal event, and he became an obstetrician in the era of twilight
births. At this time, laboring people would thrash in restraints from medication while forceps were used to deliver
their newborns, a practice very different from how Bradley knew birth. His book Husband-Coached Childbirth taught
people to support healthy pregnancies and birth without intervention or medication and taught partners to coach
and support birthing persons (Bradley, 2008). The Bradley Method also teaches about the common discomforts of
pregnancy and offers suggestions to help manage them. Birth support people, referred to as coaches in the Bradley
Method, are taught how to better support the birthing person during pregnancy, labor, birth, and postpartum.

Benefits of the Bradley Method
The Bradley Method routinely covers more topics than other childbirth education options and is focused on
preparing the couple for an unmedicated birth (Sioma-Markowska et al., 2016). This method provides education on
pregnancy, labor, postpartum, and breast-feeding. A benefit of this method is the involvement of the partner in the
supportive role. Paternal engagement in childbirth education is associated with more paternal involvement in the
pregnancy, birth, and the postpartum period (Sioma-Markowska et al., 2016).

Shortcomings of the Bradley Method
A disadvantage of the Bradley Method is that it requires a 12-week commitment during pregnancy by the birthing
person and their coach. Classes can sometimes be expensive. If a couple lives in a rural area, it could be difficult for
them to find a certified Bradley instructor. This method is committed to providing factual, transparent information.
At times this can cause fear and anxiety as couples learn about the risks of medication and interventions (Gurevich
& Odunsi, 2021).

Bradley Method: Prenatal Nutrition and Exercise

Dr. Bradley noted that the healthier a pregnant person was, the more likely they were to have an uncomplicated
birth. Because of this, the Bradley method incorporates diet and exercise recommendations into the teachings. This
method teaches the importance of consuming protein and good fats during pregnancy, recommending intake of 100
g of protein a day. The intake of 100 g of protein requires the pregnant person to consume 4 cups of milk, 3 ounces
of fish, 3 ounces of chicken or beef, and 4 eggs daily (BradleyBirth.com, n.d.).
638  14 · Childbirth Education Options

     Exercise during Pregnancy
     The Bradley Method includes a strong emphasis on body movement and health in pregnancy, as illustrated in Figure
     14.3. The recommendations include sitting on flat surfaces with legs folded to release the pelvic floor, as well as
     frequent squatting and pelvic rocking. All these exercises should be done early and often, then balanced by rest and
     relaxation of the muscles (Bradley, 2008).

     FIGURE 14.3 Exercise during Pregnancy The Bradley Method encourages pregnant persons to exercise and stay healthy with a high-
     protein diet. (credit: "Incirlik keeps moms in shape with Pregnancy PT" by Senior Airman Anthony Sanchelli/Incirlik Air Base, Public
     Domain)

     Foods Needed During Pregnancy
     Dr. Bradley highly regarded the teachings of Dr. Brewer for pregnancy nutrition. Dr. Brewer suggested that a high-
     protein diet is the best diet for pregnancy, and this provides the basis for the nutritional teachings of the Bradley
     Method. Rigorous research did not support Brewer's claim that this diet reduced preeclampsia (Zhu et al., 2022).
     However, research does show that high protein intake, high fruit and vegetable intake, and the Mediterranean diet
     can lower rates of preeclampsia (Makarem et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2022).

     Bradley Method: Continuous Labor Support

     The Bradley Method recommends continuous labor support to improve the outcome and experience for the birthing
     person. Moving support people, especially partners, from the waiting room to the birthing room is, in large part,
     credited to the Bradley Method.

     Support from the Nurse
     Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses (AWHONN) staffing standards recommend a ratio of
     one to two patients per nurse and a 1:1 ratio with intermittent auscultation and advanced dilation in unmedicated
     labors (AWHONN, 2022). This staffing ratio can be very difficult to obtain, and many facilities fail to uphold these
     standards. The Bradley Method prepares the support person to provide continuous support, especially in the
     hospital, where continuous support from the nurse is often impossible.

     Partners versus Other People as Supporters
     Research shows that continuous labor support is associated with shorter labors, lower cortisol levels, and higher
     incidences of vaginal birth (Stjernholm et al., 2021). Partners can be great support persons because they are
     invested in the birth and know the laboring person intimately. At times, partners are not equipped for or capable of
     being the "coach," and another support person can fill that role.

     Doula as Continuous Labor Support
     Doulas are trained and certified to attend births to support the laboring person. Some hospitals and birth centers
     employ doulas in addition to the nursing staff to care for their laboring patients. Independent doulas charge a fee

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.3 · Hypnobirthing: The Mongan Method                                                                                               639

that is typically dependent on the experience of the doula, meaning a very experienced doula would charge a higher
fee. Cost can be a barrier to some families.

FIGURE 14.4 Doula Support The doula supports the laboring person as they are on their knees and using a birthing ball to support the
upper body. (credit: Jefferson Rudy and Agência Senado/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Bradley Method: What to Expect in the First Stage of Labor

Dr. Bradley wrote about the primal aspects of labor and how this mimics nature, where animals seek dark, quiet,
secluded, safe areas to birth their young. His method recommends laboring in a dark, quiet, home-like environment
with partner support, solitude, physical comfort, physical relaxation, controlled breathing, and rested/closed eyes
(Bradley, 2008). To progress through labor, Bradley suggested that laboring persons include the techniques of
movement between contractions, abdominal breathing, relaxation specifically of the jaw/throat, and the relaxation
of all muscles not involved in birth that can be tense when under stress or strain (Bradley, revised 2008).

Bradley Method: Second Stage of Labor

Instinctual movements are also consistent with Bradley recommendations in the second stage. These include
allowing for the spontaneous urge to push, squatting positions, and upright chair positions. Bradley also likens the
act of pushing to that of moving the bowels when constipation is present. Bradley recommends treating the
sensation of the fetal head as pressure instead of pain (Bradley, 2008).

14.3 Hypnobirthing: The Mongan Method

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Discuss the history of HypnoBirthing: Mongan Method of childbirth education
    · Summarize the evidence that supports the Mongan Method of childbirth education, including the benefits

        for the birthing person
    · Verbalize the positive expectations that birthing persons will have from learning the Mongan Method
    · Summarize the visualization and deepening process that occurs and how it benefits the birthing person

        during labor and birth
    · Generalize the normal physical and emotional changes that the birthing person will experience during

        childbirth

HypnoBirthing is a vastly different form of preparation for childbirth than most other courses. This method focuses
less on the details of how a baby is born and more on how to process the sensations of birth in a way that provides
pain control for the birthing person using only their mind. By practicing self-hypnosis daily, birthing people can
640  14 · Childbirth Education Options

     change the way they experience birth.

     History of the Mongan Method

     Marie F. Mongan (1933-2019), an award-winning hypnotherapist, was fascinated with birth from an early age but
     unhappy with how most people's births occurred, including her own births with forced anesthesia. She created a
     method of childbirth education to honor birth and ease the process. Over time, more people began to see the
     benefits of this kind of birthing, and Mongan started to teach classes. She perfected the method and created
     HypnoBirthing (Mongan, 2015).

             LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

     What Do Millennial Patients Choose for Childbirth Education?

     According to a study of 100 patients aged 21 to 38 years, websites and mobile apps providing education regarding
     pregnancy and birth were accessed more often than in-person childbirth education classes (Campbell, 2020). The
     most common online education was Baby Center owned by Johnson & Johnson that has over 45 million participants
     per month worldwide. Only 24% of study participants attended live childbirth classes. When questioned why they
     did not participate in live classes, 42.7% stated no interest in live classes, 29.3% stated not enough time for
     classes, 10.7% could not find a live class, 8% stated financial insecurity as a barrier, and 9% had differing answers.
     Nurses and healthcare providers must consider new ways to engage and educate the Millennial generation.

     Evidence Base for the Mongan Method

     HypnoBirthing uses visualization, affirmations, and breathing exercises to create a deep relaxation state in labor.
     The technique proposes that laboring persons can train themselves to get into a deep state of relaxation upon
     command. The technique also uses words like "surges" or "waves" instead of "pain" or "contractions" to include as
     chants (Isidro-Cloudas & Hargrove, 2023). HypnoBirthing borrowed the philosophy of Dr. Dick-Read, the author of
     Childbirth Without Fear, which proposes the idea that fear causes muscles to tense, causing more pain. Dr. Dick-
     Read believed that tension in muscles took blood away from the uterus and that relaxation, as illustrated in Figure
     14.5, would reverse that effect. HypnoBirthing teaches that if relaxation occurs, labor will progress naturally (Isidro-
     Cloudas & Hargrove, 2023).

     FIGURE 14.5 HypnoBirthing HypnoBirthing provides audio files to help practice self-hypnosis and relaxation. (credit: "Beautiful Sound
     Beauty Entertainment Edited 2020" by Mic JohnsonLP/www.songsimian.com, CC BY 2.0)

     Benefits of the Mongan Method
     Birthing people who successfully utilize the Mongan Method often report little discomfort during their births, ranging
     from reports of pain-free births all the way to births described as powerful work without suffering. The benefits of
     this method include learning controlled breathing, using meditation to become deeply relaxed, and feeling
     empowered by the affirmations (Isidro-Cloudas & Hargrove, 2023). Research shows that HypnoBirthing increases a
     person's confidence and trust in their own body, provides them a sense of control, and allows people to feel good

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.3 · Hypnobirthing: The Mongan Method                                                                                641

about their childbirth regardless of the outcome (Uldal et al., 2023).

Shortcomings of the Mongan Method
Just as hypnosis does not always provide the desired effect, HypnoBirthing may not provide all the expected
benefits. Not everyone will be successful in self-hypnosis. Another drawback is HypnoBirthing's encouragement to
limit childbirth information beyond the method, believing that this additional information can be fear-inducing.
Because of this, people who do not respond well to the Mongan Method in labor may have few other tools or
information to use as an alternative.

Mongan Method: Build a Positive Expectancy

The Mongan Method seeks to eradicate fear of childbirth and replace it with peaceful confidence. Focusing on the
fact that most pregnancies have low risk factors and positive outcomes is the first step to believing that birth can
happen without suffering or interference. The preparatory work done through the Mongan Method helps to equip the
birthing person with tools to breathe, relax, and birth as the body was designed to do. The method teaches that birth
is not an awful experience; it is an experience people should use to help them grow as a person (Uldal et al., 2023).

Fear-Tension-Pain Syndrome
Mongan believed the fear-tension-pain theory was the reason birth within the medical model often leads to
interventions, painful birth experiences, and the use of pain medications to treat that sensation. This crucial
underlying concept is the reason Mongan recommends release of fear and protection of comfort in labor (Mongan,
2015).

Release Fears Regarding Birth
Mongan believed that by creating a safe, dark, quiet, familiar environment where the birthing person feels
respected, fears will be eliminated. Prior to birth, Mongan also recommends identifying and releasing any fear of
birth, negative emotions, and past negative experiences to prevent those from interfering in the birth. The way to
release these fears is through the HypnoBirthing fear-releasing hypnosis sessions incorporated into the teachings.
Hypnosis is especially helpful for people who have experienced birth trauma or abuse in the past because this
practice can significantly decrease the fear and tension in labor by releasing fear (Mongan, 2015).

Mongan Method: Advanced Visualization and Deepening

The Mongan Method teaches that relaxation, deep breathing, visualization, and deepening, which is relaxation to
the point where the birthing person is limp, can produce an almost anesthetized state. This state is achieved through
routine practice of self-hypnosis, relaxation, abdominal breathing techniques, visualization exercises, and
affirmations. These specific exercises are included in the HypnoBirthing courses and texts for pregnant people to
practice daily (Mongan, 2015).

Learning Self-Hypnosis/Deepening
HypnoBirthing involves learning to enter a state of hypnosis. To do this, consistent daily practice using hypnosis
techniques is necessary. The Mongan Method recommends learning and utilizing several techniques to find the state
where a peaceful birth full of endorphins is possible. Some techniques used are an "On, Off" switch, the glove
technique where you "put on" the endorphins like a glove, and the use of a "meter" to measure the depth of the
hypnotic state by counting down (Mongan, 2015). While techniques like these are not exclusive to HypnoBirthing,
they have been adopted by the Mongan Method.

Affirmations
Affirmation statements for birth are a part of the fear-releasing process. Reprogramming the brain to remember that
birth is physiologic, safe, and normal takes practice and confidence. Repetition of certain suggested phrases or ones
created by the birthing person can be a significant way to improve their confidence in birth.

Relaxation, Breathing, Hypnosis
The combination of relaxation, breathing, and hypnosis techniques leads to release of the fear-tension-pain cycle.
All the tools work together to encourage the normal process of the autonomic nervous system and prevent the
"fight-or-flight" parasympathetic nervous system reaction. This combination allows for a more peaceful birth
(Mongan, 2015).
642  14 · Childbirth Education Options

     Avoidance of Hard Pushing
     To stay within a restful state, ease the second stage of labor, and allow for birth to progress easily, forced pushing
     efforts are discouraged in the Mongan Method. Instead, HypnoBirthing encourages birthing people to breathe their
     baby out through controlled, slow, abdominal breathing that allows the uterine muscle to expel the fetus with little
     additional effort (Mongan, 2015).

     Mongan Method: Overview of Childbirth

     HypnoBirthing is more of a philosophy than a specific childbirth method. This philosophy includes the ideas that
     interventions should be used only when medically indicated, that birth should be respected and unimpaired, and
     that any interruption in the birthing process can cause birth to deviate from normal. This philosophy teaches that
     labor can decelerate or accelerate and should not be managed. This philosophy also believes that birth is rooted in
     sexuality and as such belongs to those who created the pregnancy itself (Mongan, 2015).

     Normal Physical and Emotional Changes
     Nutrition and exercise are discussed as methods to prepare the body for birth. Emotional changes during pregnancy
     are normal, and birthing persons should release fear and prepare to bond with the newborn. This method suggests
     that all the physical and emotional changes of pregnancy are normal (Mongan, 2015).

     What to Expect in the Birth Experience
     HypnoBirthing teaches the thinning and opening phase followed by the birthing phase. The birthing person can
     listen to hypnosis sessions with reminders to do nothing except remain loose and limp during the labor so that the
     normal progression can occur. This surrender into the physiology of birth, using breathing, relaxation, visualization,
     and deepening techniques, increases the endorphins that accompany the sensations of birth. The room should be
     quiet, dark, and comfortable. The birthing person will be in a state of self-hypnosis and should not be disturbed. The
     nurse or health-care providers should not talk about "pain" and instead talk about "sensations" or "surges"
     (Mongan, 2015).

     14.4 Alexander Technique

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Discuss the history of the Alexander Technique for childbirth, including how to find an instructor
         · Summarize the benefits to the birthing person during labor and birth when using the Alexander Technique
         · Evaluate the education provided to the birthing person regarding self-awareness and releasing muscle

             tension
         · Discuss how the Alexander Technique is taught to the birthing person
         · Summarize the positions the birthing person is taught to utilize for comfort using the Alexander

             Technique

     The Alexander Technique is a form of muscle relaxation and positioning to use during pregnancy, labor, and birth.
     The technique teaches common causes of pain in pregnancy and body mechanics that can help prevent pain and
     injury to the body during pregnancy. The goal for use in pregnancy is progressive muscle relaxation for the
     improvement of mindful movement to optimize the body position and health for childbirth.

     History of Alexander Technique

     F. Matthias Alexander, born in 1869, was an actor who experienced complications from overuse of his voice that
     impacted his performance. He stumbled upon the solution to his voice problems by learning to release excess
     tension in his neck and body, which greatly improved his ability to speak, act, and move his body. Over time, he
     further developed the technique and began training other people to be teachers of the Alexander Technique (Who
     was F. Matthias Alexander?, n.d.).

     Research Supporting Alexander Technique

     Evidence of the efficacy of the Alexander Technique is readily available for all types of chronic pain, health
     conditions, and discomforts. This method is taught to athletes, dancers, and musicians to improve speed, breathing,
     and vocal production. There is less evidence specific to pregnancy, but some research can be generalized to overall

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.4 · Alexander Technique                                                                                                  643

health and well-being that is relevant to pregnancy as well. Some studies support the Alexander Technique's use in
pregnancy and the postpartum period for improved satisfaction during these formative times of a person's life
(Banoofatemeh et al., 2017; Hanefeld et al., 2021). The technique uses freedom of movement, flexibility, balance,
and coordination to allow the pregnant body to birth as it was designed to do.

Benefits of Alexander Technique
Benefits of the Alexander Technique include greater comfort during pregnancy, labor, and birth, as well as improved
general well-being leading directly to psychologic well-being due to mind-body integration (Kinsey et al., 2021).
These benefits continue for the lifespan as long as the person continues to practice the learned techniques. This
technique is especially useful in the early postpartum period, the breast-feeding period, and the first year
postpartum when people are most at risk for postpartum mood disorders. The technique teaches that if a person
supports their body with these techniques, they can "get out of their own way" and allow the body to birth (Likar &
Clare-Newman, n.d., p.1). The technique also discusses breast-feeding and caring for the newborn using proper
body technique to avoid strain or injury. Other benefits include improved posture, improved balance and mobility,
better stress management, better breathing, and pain relief (Likar & Clare-Newman, n.d.).

Shortcomings of Alexander Technique
The Alexander Technique works best when started early and practiced often with the support of a well-trained
instructor. To find an instructor, the birthing person can visit the Alexander Technique website and select their
location to find the nearest local practitioner. The drawback to this method is that it can be hard to find an instructor.
Some articles and videos are available online for the pregnant person to begin working through techniques to see if
this method is helpful for them.

Alexander Technique: Self Awareness and Releasing Muscle Tension

The Alexander Technique for pregnancy includes the concepts of inhibiting and directing. The conscious act of
preventing oneself from rushing into an action without thoughtful consideration of the body is inhibiting.
Consciously organizing one's body prior to and during an action so that the head leads the body's movement is
directing. People who practice the Alexander method make measured adjustments to the balance of the head in
relation to the rest of the body to reduce tension and resistance within the body to maintain healthy postures
(Hanefeld et al., 2021).

Awareness of Posture
Students of this modality learn to undo the tension in their muscles so that their body movements are freer and
more relaxed, as in Figure 14.6. Avoidance of compressing the head down to the chest is one of the postural
recommendations. Encouraging body awareness and adjusting alignment help practitioners to feel loose, open, and
free for movement (Hanefeld et al., 2021).
644  14 · Childbirth Education Options

     FIGURE 14.6 Sitting Posture Sitting posture stretches the pelvic floor, allowing it to relax. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
     under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Deep Breathing
     Deep breath work is one component recommended to prepare for pregnancy and birth due to changes in the chest
     wall and lung function during pregnancy. The Alexander Technique teaches practiced breathing called "whispered
     ah" (Duffee, 2021). This technique states there is a connection between jaw tension and the cervix; therefore, a low
     breath sound allows the person to relax the mouth and throat muscles, thereby allowing the cervix to relax (Duffee,
     2021).

     Alexander Technique: Learning the Technique

     A few books and online resources exist, but most Alexander Technique educators recommend private classes to
     customize the teaching to the specific person. The private lessons usually last between 30 and 60 minutes, with the
     instructor introducing practices that will open awareness of how the nervous, muscular, and skeletal systems
     function (American Society for the Alexander Technique, n.d.-b). The instructor uses verbal and manual guidance to
     assist the person in moving with more ease and flexibility. As the student sits, stands, walks, and so forth, the
     instructor guides the movement to help maintain ease of movement (American Society for the Alexander Technique,
     n.d.-b).

             LINK TO LEARNING

     The American Society for the Alexander Technique has collected a list of research studies on the Alexander
     Technique (https://openstax.org/r/77AlexanderTech) that are all peer reviewed.

     Thorough History
     The teacher assesses the student's body by addressing any discomforts that may be linked to tension. These can
     include low back pain, hip pain, sciatic pain, symphysis pubis pain, gastrointestinal complaints, neck pain or tension
     headaches, and stress. Obtaining a thorough history allows the instructor to personalize the techniques taught.

     "Hands-On" Examination
     Alexander Technique instructors provide hands-on assessments to help identify muscle tension and enhance
     postural adjustments for the most benefit during body movements. The instructor will assess all muscles and
     posture, as shown in Figure 14.7. In-person courses are most effective because of this hands-on evaluation.
     Teachers of the Alexander Technique are required to be certified in the method. They complete an approved teacher
     training course and must have 1,600 hours of training over a 3-year period (American Society for the Alexander
     Technique, n.d.-a). They must also maintain continuing education.

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.4 · Alexander Technique                                                                                                         645

FIGURE 14.7 Examination of Muscles The Alexander Technique instructor performs hands-on assessments to identify areas of tension.
(credit: "The Back Pain SOS" by Sebel Babu/flickr, Public Domain)

Online Courses
Online courses can successfully teach the Alexander Technique because much of the work is done through self-
awareness of one's own body movements. The person can practice the movements while watching the courses. This
also allows students to replay techniques while practicing.

Alexander Technique: Positions for Pregnancy

Typical posture in pregnancy includes an arched back, which causes low back pain. This should be adjusted to a
relaxed head and neck in neutral positions with the head leading the spine. This posture is employed in body
movements such as sitting in a chair or standing up from a seated position. Suggested movements in pregnancy
include squatting, breath work with the whispered "ah," and release of tension when sitting, standing, and walking
(The Alexander Technique, 2023).

Using Alexander Technique in the First Stage of Labor
During the first stage of labor, progress can be assisted by maintaining a relaxed body with continued release of
tension before, during, and after contractions. Restful positions like side lying can be alternated with vertical
movements and squats to encourage regular progression. The whispered "ah" or a reminder to the self to smile can
release the jaw and throat, which may also release the chest and abdomen (The Alexander Technique, 2023).

Using Alexander Technique in the Second Stage of Labor
Similar to the first stage, squats and the whispered "ah" can help create a relaxed pelvic floor that the fetus is able
to move through with ease. Pushing with expulsive efforts while directing the movement down without tension in
the head and neck can be helpful. Pushing in different positions can also be helpful (The Alexander Technique,
2023).

Breast-Feeding and Alexander Technique
Breast-feeding can be associated with significant neck, shoulder, and back pain. Back pain is one of the most
documented conditions that improve with use of the Alexander Technique. Movements to consider would be neutral
646  14 · Childbirth Education Options

     head position with supported sitting for upright or forward-leaning spine. The breast-feeding person will release
     tension and support the newborn in a way that prevents hunched shoulders (The Alexander Technique, 2023).

     Postpartum Year and Alexander Technique
     Reminders to the birthing person to continue to utilize this resource throughout postpartum recovery can encourage
     wellness and relieve many aches and pains. Positions to consider are the release of upper body strain with a neutral
     head. Proper sit-to-stand and stand-to-sit techniques with alignment will help prevent pain and injury. As the child
     grows, they will notice and mimic parental movements of a relaxed posture with free movement (The Alexander
     Technique, 2023).

     14.5 Birth Plans

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the purpose of a birth plan
         · Identify the content of a birth plan

     Birth plans can be empowering because they give a sense of control to the birthing person. Birth plans can also
     cause deep distress, depending on how the birthing person experiences their birth and the level of support they
     receive for their preferences. Nurses are crucial in helping to identify the desires of their patients and in supporting
     those goals as well as possible. If plans need to change, nurses can discuss the medical reasons for the change and
     help ensure that a different part of the plan will be utilized.

     Purpose of a Birth Plan

     A birth plan is meant to be a form of communication between a birthing person, their support people, and the care
     team they have chosen for their birth. ACOG (2022) notes that a birth plan is "a written outline of what you would
     like to happen during labor and delivery" (p. 1). ACOG (2022) also provides a template for a sample birth plan. While
     some birth plans include requests that seem routine, others include specific or unusual requests. Some birth plans
     are specific to the childbirth education and preparation the birthing person is using. Many childbirth education
     programs will provide information on birth plans; other programs might assist the patient in creating a birth plan
     based on the philosophies of the childbirth method. One of the greatest benefits of writing a birth plan is the
     knowledge that comes from the research and preparation needed to formulate the plan itself. When done well, a
     birth plan is simply a list of preferences a birthing person has for their birth. The person understands that this is a
     plan, but that alternatives may be necessary if unforeseen changes occur.

             LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

     Patients Who Decline Interventions in Pregnancy

     When pregnant patients refuse interventions or treatment that can cause negative consequences to the patient or
     the fetus, nurses and health-care providers are faced with an ethical dilemma. According to the American College of
     Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019), pregnancy does not negate a patient's right to refuse treatment. ACOG also
     states that coercion is unethical and recommends asking why the patient is refusing. Understanding the reason for
     refusing allows nurses and health-care providers to reach a decision based on the patient's values and the evidence
     of best practice. Ultimately, the nurse must respect the patient's autonomy.

     Content of a Birth Plan

     Birth plans are as individual as a resume, but like a resume, they have typical core components. In general, the plan
     will include (ACOG, 2022):

         · desires for pain management and how the patient plans to request these
         · wishes for positioning in labor
         · environmental comforts or requests like dim lighting, multiple pillows, a birthing ball
         · IV access (planned or as needed)
         · desires for fetal and contraction monitoring

     Access for free at openstax.org
14.5 · Birth Plans                                                                                                                 647

    · whether antibiotics will be accepted or declined in labor
    · how the person wants to manage the pushing phase, such as not pushing in lithotomy position or having warm

        compresses for the perineum
    · wishes for episiotomy or request to avoid unless an emergency arises
    · skin-to-skin contact after birth
    · feeding preferences
    · newborn procedures and their timing
    · plans for the placenta
    · secondary plans for change in birth mode to cesarean, such as having a support person present, photos/

        videos, skin-to-skin and breast-feeding in the operating room, and clear drape to view the birth

For a model birth plan, see Figure 14.8.

FIGURE 14.8 Birth Plan Birth plan templates can be downloaded for ease of use and to ensure all topics are covered. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

When the nurse admits the laboring person, the nurse should ask if they have a birth plan and review it with the
patient or support person. This is a time for the patient to see that the nurse is aware of their desires. It puts the
patient at ease and shows that the nurse is willing to work with them to provide the type of birth they have planned.
This is also a time for the nurse to explain anything that cannot be done in that setting and to help the patient design
an alternative plan as needed. Nurses play a large part in ensuring the patient's wishes are followed. If an
unforeseen event occurs and a deviation from the plan must be made, the nurse can share the patient's wishes with
the health-care provider and discuss options to attempt to respect those wishes as much as possible.
648 14 · Summary

Summary

14.1 Lamaze International Childbirth Education

Lamaze International provides evidence-based education to people all over the world. The organization provides
childbirth education to families, provides recommendations for health-care providers and practices, advocates for
birthing rights, and proposes ways to protect physiologic birth. Nurses can learn a great deal by becoming active in
Lamaze International.

14.2 Bradley Method

The Bradley Method is childbirth education that includes nutrition, exercise, knowledge of medical interventions,
and continuous labor support. This method supports unmedicated birth. Essential to the Bradley Method is the
support person for the laboring person.

14.3 Hypnobirthing: The Mongan Method

HypnoBirthing is a childbirth preparation technique that teaches self-hypnosis to utilize during labor and birth. The
philosophy is grounded in the fear-tension-pain cycle, the idea that fear causes tension, which then causes pain;
therefore, if a person can reduce fear, they can reduce pain. Persons are taught to release fear through affirmations
and relaxation. Techniques to use during labor, such as deep breathing, relaxation, and visualization, are practiced
daily to prepare for use in labor. During labor, the person will desire no interventions, no interruptions in the
hypnosis process, and use of supportive language. Persons who use HypnoBirthing report their births were beautiful
and transformative, regardless of the outcome.

14.4 Alexander Technique

Alexander Technique is used for pregnancy, birth, postpartum period, breast-feeding, and the rest of the person's
life. The technique revolves around relaxing muscles to allow them to work properly. It also involves keeping the
appropriate posture while walking, sitting, standing, and engaging in any type of movement. The technique
describes inhibiting, not rushing into movement, and directing, preparing the body prior to movement. Instructors
for this technique can provide hands-on assessment and instruction in movement and alignment. Online classes can
provide instructions for those unable to find an in-person instructor. This technique allows the birthing person to use
their body posture to increase relaxation and decrease discomfort to enhance the process of labor.

14.5 Birth Plans

Birth plans allow the birthing person to express choices and desires for their labor and birth. These plans act as the
communication between the laboring person, significant other, nurse, health-care provider, and staff. Birth plans can
be developed during childbirth education classes, or templates can be found on websites. Nurses are crucial in
helping support the person's wishes.

Key Terms

birth plan form of communication between a birthing person, their support people, and the care team they have
    chosen for their birth outlining their wishes for the labor and birth

childbirth education becoming educated in the process of pregnancy, labor, birth, and postpartum and newborn
    care

deepening relaxation to the point where the birthing person is in a limp, almost anesthetized state
directing consciously organizing one's body prior to and during an action so that the head leads the body's

    movement
inhibiting conscious act of preventing oneself from rushing into an action without thoughtful consideration of the

    body
physiologic birth birth that occurs vaginally and without medical intervention

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. What is Lamaze International Childbirth Education based on?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    14 · Assessments 649

       a. breathing techniques
       b. comprehensive evidence-based childbirth teachings
       c. empowerment of the nursing staff
       d. positions to promote breast-feeding

2. What does the nurse say about labor beginning to the laboring person who has studied Lamaze?
       a. "We should walk in the hallways to get your labor started."
       b. "Let's turn the lights down and get you into a comfortable position with your partner next to you."
       c. "I bet you are ready for the Pitocin to get started to get your baby here."
       d. "Early labor is the best time for you to come to the hospital."

3. How would a patient who has taken Lamaze education respond when the health-care provider recommends
    breaking the bag of waters in early labor?
       a. "As long as it will speed up my labor, that is fine."
       b. "I trust whatever intervention you think is right."
       c. "What are the risks and benefits of breaking my water right now?"
       d. "Will I be able to get an epidural after you break my water?"

4. What statement by a health-care provider is an example of shared decision making between a health-care
    provider and a patient?
       a. "I'm going to start this medication because it is best for your baby."
       b. "Can you agree with me because I am your health-care provider?"
       c. "I understand how the hospital works, and it will be easier for you to just do what is easy for the
            nurses."
       d. "Do you feel ready to make a decision after we talked about this medication?"

5. The nurse is attempting to explain physiologic birth. What do they say?
       a. "Physiologic birth involves interventions that do not harm the baby."
       b. "Physiologic birth occurs only in birth centers."
       c. "If your partner and I give you support, you can have a birth without medical intervention."
       d. "If you want to have a cesarean birth, we can ask your health-care provider to schedule it."

6. Why was the Bradley Method originally introduced?
       a. as a novel approach to pregnancy where low-intervention, medication-free births were the goal
       b. as an education program that supported use of twilight birth
       c. as a system of supporting families wanting community birth
       d. as a program of education that focused on the importance of using a doula instead of a partner as a
            birth support

7. Nutrition is an integral part of the Bradley Method. What important nutrition advice is taught in this method?
       a. Only eat low-fat foods.
       b. Increase protein to 100 g per day.
       c. Do not eat dairy because it causes food allergies.
       d. Eat a low-protein diet.

8. In what way is the Mongan Method of childbirth education beneficial to birthing people?
       a. It helps people push with great effort in second stage labor.
       b. Birthing people feel confident about the use of an epidural to relax the body.
       c. People are taught how to release fear to decrease pain.
       d. HypnoBirthing is proven to be 100 percent effective in relieving pain in labor.

9. Who created the Mongan Method?
       a. physician
650 14 · Assessments

           b. midwife
           c. hypnotherapist
           d. organization

  10. What is the theory that supports HypnoBirthing?
           a. the fear-tension-pain theory
           b. the theory that pain is productive in labor
           c. the idea that self-hypnosis always works if you try hard enough
           d. the theory that when hypnotized during labor, the environment does not matter because the person is
                not aware of the surroundings

  11. What technique is used for visualization and deepening in HypnoBirthing?
           a. counting contractions
           b. the "on-off" switch
           c. visualizing the instruments used to assist with birth
           d. deepening into hypnosis to help push harder

  12. What does HypnoBirthing teach about the emotional and physical changes in pregnancy?
           a. Fear of childbirth provides a healthy incentive to learn.
           b. Physical changes in pregnancy make relaxation harder.
           c. Physical and emotional changes are normal.
           d. Emotional changes cause anxiety that is difficult to let go of.

  13. F. M. Alexander was an actor who developed a medical technique. What was the basis for this technique?
           a. Relaxing his throat helped his voice return to normal.
           b. Relaxing his back helped him overcome chronic back pain.
           c. Sitting upright allowed him to breathe better.
           d. Better posture controlled his movements.

  14. Relaxation of muscles in labor provides many benefits. What is one benefit of this technique in labor?
           a. Relaxation will prevent a cesarean section.
           b. Relaxation of the pelvic floor helps in pushing the fetus in the second stage.
           c. Relaxation of the abdomen ensures an unmedicated birth.
           d. Relaxation causes the contractions to decrease in strength.

  15. What can self-awareness with postural adjustments lead to?
           a. tension formation
           b. tension release
           c. suboptimal posture
           d. back pain

  16. What is one characteristic of the Alexander Technique the nurse can explain to a patient?
           a. taught only in person
           b. focused on unmedicated birth
           c. taught by a person who will assess the muscles and posture
           d. only useful for pregnancy but not birth

  17. What is the purpose of a birth plan?
           a. dream about birth
           b. learn about birth options and determine personal preferences
           c. list all things not wanted for the birth
           d. ensure an unmedicated birth

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         14 · Assessments 651

  18. The laboring person asks the nurse to review the birth plan. What item is on a typical birth plan?
           a. where the patient will be staying after birth
           b. who will be watching their other children
           c. what position they want to birth in
           d. how they will time contractions

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. What are the six healthy birth practices taught in the Lamaze program?

    2. Why does shared decision making matter?

    3. Contrast the Bradley Method's recommendations for birthing people in the first stage versus the second stage
        of labor.

    4. What positive expectations will birthing persons have from learning the Mongan Method?

    5. How might the nurse use the Alexander Technique to assist a patient with significant pelvic floor tension
        during labor?

    6. What are the components of a birth plan?

Reflection Questions

    1. Explain how interventions can disrupt physiologic birth.

    2. What does the evidence show about the effect of continuous labor support on birth outcomes?

    3. Discuss the process of relaxation and deepening according to HypnoBirthing.

    4. A birthing person tells the nurse that the purpose of her birth plan is to not have a cesarean birth. How should
        the nurse respond?

What Should the Nurse Do?

Marie, a 28-year-old pregnant female in her second trimester, presents at the community health center for her
routine prenatal checkup. Marie expresses interest in the Lamaze childbirth education program to prepare for her
upcoming delivery. She has a history of uncomplicated pregnancies and deliveries but is seeking a more informed
and empowered experience this time. Marie reports no concerning symptoms, and her medical and psychiatric
history is unremarkable. Vital signs are stable, and the physical examination reveals a healthy pregnancy
progression. During the consultation, Marie emphasizes her desire for shared decision making and understanding
the physiologic aspects of childbirth.

    1. How has the history of Lamaze, starting with Dr. Fernand Lamaze's breathing techniques, shaped its evolution
        into a comprehensive childbirth education program, and in what ways can Marie benefit from its
        transformation?

    2. How do the six evidence-based healthy birth practices recommended by Lamaze, including spontaneous
        labor initiation and continuous labor support, align with the principles of physiologic birth, and why are these
        practices essential for birthing persons like Marie who are seeking an informed and empowered birth
        experience?

    3. Why is shared decision making emphasized in Lamaze education, and how does it empower persons like
        Marie in their birthing experience?

    4. Why does Lamaze education stress the significance of understanding the physiologic aspects of birth? Why is
        this knowledge valuable for birthing persons like Marie and their partners?

    5. What does Lamaze education offer in terms of preparing birthing persons like Marie and their families for the
        postpartum period, and why is this information essential?

James, a 32-year-old expectant partner, attends a prenatal appointment at the community health clinic with his
wife, Emma, who is 30 years old and in her second trimester of pregnancy. Emma is interested in exploring natural
childbirth options and has specifically inquired about the Bradley Method. Both James and Emma are actively
engaged in preparing for the birthing experience. Emma reports experiencing occasional headaches and mild back
652 14 · Assessments

pain, common discomforts associated with pregnancy. Her medical and psychiatric history are otherwise
unremarkable. Vital signs are within normal ranges. During the consultation, Emma emphasizes her interest in
understanding the history of the Bradley Method, the significance of prenatal nutrition and exercise, and the
importance of continuous labor support.

    6. Considering James and Emma's interest in the Bradley Method, how does the history of the Bradley Method,
        beginning with Dr. Robert A. Bradley's focus on unmedicated, low-intervention births, reflect its evolution into
        a comprehensive childbirth education program?

    7. Given Emma's interest in the Bradley Method, how does the program incorporate prenatal nutrition and
        exercise recommendations, and why are these elements considered crucial for promoting a healthy
        pregnancy and uncomplicated birth?

    8. In the context of James and Emma's engagement with the Bradley Method, how does the program advocate
        for continuous labor support, and why is this considered vital for improving outcomes and experiences for
        birthing persons?

    9. Given James and Emma's interest in the Bradley Method, how does the program differentiate its teachings for
        the first and second stages of labor, and how does it prepare both the birthing person and the labor support
        person for each stage?

Sophie, a 28-year-old pregnant female, attends a prenatal appointment at the local birthing center with her
husband, Michael, in their second trimester. Sophie is intrigued by HypnoBirthing, the Mongan Method of Childbirth
Education, and expresses a desire to learn more about this approach for her upcoming delivery. She reports
occasional feelings of anxiety and anticipatory stress related to childbirth. Sophie has a history of mild anxiety,
which has been managed without medication, and no significant medical or psychiatric issues. She discloses that
her anxiety tends to manifest as restlessness and occasional difficulty in sleeping. Despite these challenges, Sophie
is motivated to explore natural methods to enhance her childbirth experience. During the consultation, Sophie's vital
signs are stable, and the physical examination is unremarkable. Additionally, Sophie mentions that she has been
experiencing mild lower back pain, common in pregnancy, which she attributes to her job, involves prolonged
periods of standing.

  10. Considering Sophie's interest in the HypnoBirthing Mongan Method, how does the history of this approach
        reflect a unique focus on the mental aspects of childbirth and how birth can be experienced with minimal
        discomfort?

  11. In Sophie's case, how does the Mongan Method aim to provide pain control, and what reported benefits might
        Sophie experience, as mentioned in the chapter?

  12. How does the Mongan Method instill positive expectations in birthing persons, as observed in Sophie's
        interest in exploring natural methods for enhancing her childbirth experience?

  13. Considering Sophie's occasional anxiety, how might the visualization and deepening process in the Mongan
        Method specifically assist Sophie during labor and birth?

  14. In the context of Sophie's pregnancy, how does the Mongan Method address and generalize the normal
        physical and emotional changes that birthing persons may undergo during childbirth?

Michelle, a 34-year-old pregnant female, attends a prenatal appointment at the local community center in her third
trimester. She is intrigued by the potential benefits of the Alexander Technique for childbirth and expresses a desire
to learn more about this approach. Michelle reports occasional lower back pain and discomfort related to her
pregnancy, which has led her to seek alternative methods for pain management. She has a history of generalized
anxiety disorder but is currently not on medication, managing her symptoms through mindfulness and relaxation
techniques. Michelle's vital signs are stable, and the physical examination reveals typical signs of a healthy
pregnancy.

  15. Where can Michelle find an instructor for the Alexander Technique?
  16. How might the Alexander Technique benefit Michelle during labor and birth, and what evidence supports its

        use?
  17. How would Michelle be educated about self-awareness and releasing muscle tension through the Alexander

        Technique?
  18. Why might private classes in the Alexander Technique be advantageous to Michelle?
  19. What positions does the Alexander Technique recommend for Michelle during pregnancy, labor, and

        postpartum?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         14 · Assessments 653

Campbell, a 29-year-old pregnant female, visits her obstetrician at the local women's health clinic for a routine
prenatal appointment. Campbell is in her second trimester and has a history of mild hypertension, which is well
controlled with medication. She reports occasional feelings of anxiety related to her upcoming delivery. Campbell's
vital signs are stable, and her physical examination shows typical signs of a healthy pregnancy. During the
appointment, Campbell expresses an interest in creating a birth plan. She hopes to have a clear outline of her
preferences and expectations for labor and delivery. Campbell mentions that she wants to be actively involved in
decision making and feels that a birth plan will help her communicate her desires effectively to her health-care
team.

  20. How can a birth plan serve as a tool for effective communication between Campbell, her support team, and
        the health-care providers during labor and delivery?

  21. In what ways can nurses contribute to the empowerment of birthing persons like Campbell through the
        support of their birth plans?

  22. Considering Campbell's case, what specific components or preferences might be important to include in her
        birth plan, given her history of mild hypertension and anxiety?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. Trace the historical development of Lamaze childbirth education. How did the Lamaze method evolve from
        focusing on breathing techniques to becoming a comprehensive philosophy of birth education?

    2. How do the six evidence-based healthy birth practices advocated by Lamaze International contribute to
        positive birth outcomes and experiences?

    3. Describe the role of shared decision making in Lamaze International's childbirth education. How does early
        education empower persons to actively participate in decision making during the peripartum period?

    4. Summarize the significance of understanding physiologic birth in Lamaze education. How does this
        understanding contribute to the preparation of birthing persons and their partners?

    5. Outline the postpartum education provided in Lamaze childbirth education. How does this education support
        birthing persons and their families in the transition to parenthood?

    6. Outline the historical development of the Bradley Method. How did Dr. Robert A. Bradley's experiences shape
        the foundation of this childbirth education approach?

    7. Discuss the significance of prenatal nutrition and exercise within the Bradley Method. How does the method
        incorporate these elements to support healthy pregnancies and births?

    8. Summarize the role of continuous labor support in the Bradley Method. How did this method contribute to the
        evolution of support people moving from the waiting room to the birthing room?

    9. How do the Bradley Method's recommendations align with the physiologic aspects of labor?

  10. Examine the historical development of the HypnoBirthing Mongan Method and Marie F. Mongan's motivation
        for developing it. Who was Marie F. Mongan, and what led to the creation of this childbirth education method?

  11. Summarize the evidence supporting the Mongan Method. What benefits do birthing people report when
        utilizing this method, and how does it contribute to a positive childbirth experience?

  12. Verbalize the positive expectations that birthing persons can attain through the Mongan Method. How does
        this method aim to change perceptions and expectations surrounding childbirth?

  13. Summarize the visualization and deepening process in the Mongan Method. How does practicing self-
        hypnosis, relaxation, and deepening benefit the birthing person during labor and birth?

  14. How does the Mongan Method prepare birthing persons for the physiologic and emotional aspects of labor?

  15. Describe the history of the Alexander Technique and its relevance to childbirth.

  16. Summarize the evidence supporting the benefits of the Alexander Technique for the birthing person during
        labor and birth. What are the reported benefits, and how does it contribute to psychologic well-being?
654 14 · References

  17. How do the concepts of inhibiting and directing contribute to mindful movement?

  18. Why is private instruction in the Alexander Technique often recommended, and what benefits can be derived
        from in-person courses?

  19. Summarize the recommended positions for comfort taught in the Alexander Technique during pregnancy,
        labor, and postpartum.

  20. Why do birthing persons create birth plans, and how do nurses contribute to supporting the outlined goals?

  21. What are the common components found in a birth plan that nurses may encounter?

  22. What key components should be included in a birth plan, and how does understanding its purpose contribute
        to effective nursing care?

References

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2016). ACOG Committee Opinion no. 664: Refusal of
    medically recommended treatment during pregnancy. Reaffirmed 2019. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-
    guidance/committee-opinion/articles/2016/06/refusal-of-medically-recommended-treatment-during-
    pregnancy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019). ACOG Committee Opinion No. 766 Summary:
   Approaches to limit intervention during labor and birth. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 133(2), 406-408.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000003081

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022). Sample birth plan template. https://www.acog.org/
    womens-health/health-tools/sample-birth-plan

American Society for the Alexander Technique. (n.d.-a). Find a teacher. https://www.amsatonline.org/aws/AMSAT/
    pt/sp/find_a_teacher

American Society for the Alexander Technique. (n.d.-b). How to learn. https://www.amsatonline.org/aws/AMSAT/pt/
    sp/lessons

Arnold, J., Gillerman, H., & Zimmerer, T. (n.d.). How the Alexander Technique can help during pregnancy, childbirth,
   and parenthood. https://alexandertechnique.com/articles/pregnancy/

Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses. (2022). Standards for professional registered nurse
   staffing for perinatal units. Journal of Obstetric & Gynecologic Neonatal Nursing, 51(4), e5-e98. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.jogn.2022.02.003

Baby-Friendly USA. (2024). The Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative. https://www.babyfriendlyusa.org/about/

Banoofatemeh, S., Oreyzi, H. R., & Bahadoran, P. (2017). Effects of implementing the Alexander Technique on
   enjoying the sense of motherhood in the postpartum period. Iranian Journal of Nursing and Midwifery Research,
   22(5), 392-397. https://doi.org/10.4103/ijnmr.IJNMR_26_16

Boules, N. (n.d.). Cultural birthing practices and experiences. Baulkham Hills Holroyd Parramatta Migrant Resource
    Centre. https://cmrc.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/cultural_birthing_practices_and_experiences.pdf

Bradley, R. A., Hathaway, M., Hathaway, J., & Hathaway, J. (2008). Husband-coached childbirth: The Bradley
   method of natural childbirth. Bantam.

BradleyBirth.com. (n.d.). A well balanced pregnancy diet consists of: https://www.bradleybirth.com/diet.aspx

Campbell J. (2020). Understanding Millennial moms' choices: A nursing survey about Childbirth education in
    primigravid women. The Journal of Perinatal Education, 29(4), 208-218. https://doi.org/10.1891/J-PE-
    D-19-00030

Duffee, S. (2021). The evolution of breathing in labour. CAPPA. https://cappa.net/2021/04/26/the-evolution-of-
    breathing-in-labour

Grauer, A. (n.d.). Finding a healthcare provider: Learning why finding the right healthcare provider and birth place is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            14 · References 655

   important. Lamaze International. https://www.lamaze.org/pregnancy-doctor

Gurevich, R., & Odunsi, T. (2021, October 26). What is the Bradley method? Verywell Family.
    https://www.verywellfamily.com/the-bradley-method-4586903

Hanefeld, N., Glover, L., Jomeen, J., & Wadephul, F. (2021). Women's experiences of using the Alexander Technique
   in the postpartum: `...in a way, it's just as beneficial as sleep.' Midwifery, 103, 103155. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.midw.2021.103155

Huang, J., Zang, Y., Ren, L. H., Li, F. J., & Lu, H. (2019). A review and comparison of common maternal positions
   during the second-stage of labor. International Journal of Nursing Sciences, 6(4), 460-467. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.ijnss.2019.06.007

International Childbirth Education Association. (2015). ICEA position paper: Physiologic birth. https://icea.org/wp-
    content/uploads/2016/01/Physiologic_Birth_PP.pdf

Isidro-Cloudas, T., & Hargrove, I. M. (2023, September 19). What to know about the hypnobirthing technique.
    Parents. https://www.parents.com/pregnancy/giving-birth/vaginal/all-about-hypnobirthing

Kinsey, D., Glover, L., & Wadephul, F. (2021). How does the Alexander Technique lead to psychological and non-
   physical outcomes? A realist review. European Journal of Integrative Medicine, 46, 101371. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.eujim.2021.101371

Lamaze International. (2017). Exercises for every trimester & favorite at-home prenatal fitness videos.
    https://www.lamaze.org/Giving-Birth-with-Confidence/GBWC-Post/TitleLink/Exercises-for-Every-Trimester-
    Favorite-At-home-Prenatal-Fitness-Videos

Lamaze International. (n.d.). About us: Our history. https://www.lamaze.org/about-lamaze

Likar, A., & Clare-Newman, C. (n.d.). Pregnancy and childbirth with the Alexander Technique.
    https://alexandertechnique.com/articles2/pregnancy/

Lothian, J., & DeVries, C. (2017). Giving birth with confidence (what to expect) . Meadowbrook Press.

Mahalakshmi, T., Kirubamani, H., & Mangalagowri, P. (2018). Effectiveness of Lamaze method on mode of labor
   among primigravid mothers. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research, 52(1),
    31-35. https://globalresearchonline.net/journalcontents/v52-1/06.pdf

Makarem, N., Chau, K., Miller, E. C., Gyamfi-Bannerman, C., Tous, I., Booker, W., Catov, J. M., Haas, D. M., Grobman,
    W. A., Levine, L. D., McNeil, R., Bairey Merz, C. N., Reddy, U., Wapner, R. J., Wong, M. S., & Bello, N. A. (2022).
   Association of a Mediterranean diet pattern with adverse pregnancy outcomes among US women. JAMA Network
   Open, 5(12):e2248165. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.48165

Mongan, M. (2015). HypnoBirthing (4th ed.). E-Book ed. Health Publishers.

Muza, S. (2012). Midwifery organizations band together in support of normal physiologic birth. Lamaze
    International. https://www.lamaze.org/Connecting-the-Dots/Post/TitleLink/Midwifery-Organizations-Band-
    Together-in-Support-of-Normal-Physiologic-Birth

Ondeck, M. (2019). Healthy birth practice #2: Walk, move around, and change positions throughout labor. The
   Journal of Perinatal Education, 28(2), 81-87. https://doi.org/10.1891/1058-1243.28.2.81

Prusky, S. (2010). What is the meaning of normal birth? Lamaze International. https://www.lamaze.org/Connecting-
    the-Dots/Post/TitleLink/What-is-the-Meaning-of-Normal-Birth

Sioma-Markowska, U., Porba, R., Machura. M., & Skrzypulec-Plinta, V. Paternal engagement during childbirth
   depending on the manner of their preparation. (2016). Gynekologia Polska, 87(9), 639-643. https://doi.org/
    10.5603/gp.2016.0059

Stjernholm, Y. V., da Dilva Charvalho, P., Bergdahl, O., Vladic, T., & Petersson, M. (2021). Continuous support
    promotes obstetric labor progress and vaginal delivery in primiparous women: A randomized controlled study.
   Frontiers in Psychology, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.582823
656 14 · References

Terreri, C. (2020, June 8). Universal rights in giving birth. Lamaze International. https://www.lamaze.org/Giving-
    Birth-with-Confidence/GBWC-Post/universal-rights-in-giving-birth-1

Uldal, T., Ostmoen, M. S., Dahl, B., & Roseth, I. (2023). Women's experiences with hypnobirth: A qualitative study.
   Sexual & Reproductive Healthcare, 37, 100890. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.srhc.2023.100890

Vanderlaan, J., & Givens, S. (n.d.). Evidence-based childbirth education: An essential step in shared decision-making
   for maternity care. Lamaze International. https://www.lamaze.org/Portals/0/
    LI_495916-20_SharedDecision_r3.pdf

What is a safe and healthy birth? (n.d.). Lamaze International. https://www.lamaze.org/lamaze-childbirth
Who was F. Matthias Alexander? (n.d.). https://alexandertechnique.com/fma/
Wu, C. Ge, Y., Zhang, X., Du, Y., He, S., Ji, Z., & Lang, H. (2021). The combined effects of Lamaze breathing training

   and nursing intervention on the delivery in primipara: A PRISMA systematic review meta-analysis. Medicine
   (Baltimore), 100(4), e23920. https://doi.org/10.1097/md.0000000000023920
Zhu, Y., Liu, Y., Fu, W., Zeng, F., Cao, Y., Dou, W., Duan, D., Chen, Y., Lyu, Q., & Zhao, X. (2023). Associations of dietary
   patterns and pre-eclampsia: A matched case-control study. British Journal of Nutrition, 129(2), 247-254.
    https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007114522001210

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 15

Process of Labor and Birth

FIGURE 15.1 Laboring Person in a Birthing Center The low-risk person can ambulate and change positions during labor. Some use a
doula for support. (credit: by Jefferson Rudy and Agência Senado/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
15.1 Factors Influencing the Process of Labor and Birth
15.2 Stages of Labor
15.3 Physiologic Adaptations during Labor and Birth
15.4 Psychosocial Adaptations during Labor and Birth
15.5 Family Adaptations during Labor and Birth
INTRODUCTION Labor is a physiologic process that allows the pregnant person to pass from pregnancy to birth
and postpartum recovery. This process occurred with little interference until the 20th century, when medical
advancements changed the course of labor. Initially, these advancements did not improve maternal or newborn
outcomes significantly, but over time, that changed. Worldwide, maternal and newborn outcomes vary greatly, but
overall, they have improved significantly (World Health Organization [WHO], 2024). However, the United States is
seeing an increase in maternal morbidity and mortality compared to other developed countries (Hoyert, 2023).
There is now a call to action to reverse this trend by improving maternal health care in the United States, utilizing
best practices, reducing health disparities, and increasing access to care during pregnancy, labor, and the first year
postpartum. Nurses are crucial in the implementation of these practices, with a solid understanding of what is
normal so that deviations from normal can be identified and quickly treated to improve outcomes.
658  15 · Process of Labor and Birth

     15.1 Factors Influencing the Process of Labor and Birth

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Discuss the role of the laboring person and fetus in initiating labor
         · Explain the signs indicating impending labor
         · Describe the five P's influencing the process of labor and birth
         · Analyze the influence of the five P's on the process of labor and birth

     Many factors impact the process of labor for laboring people and the fetus they carry. These factors range from
     physiology and pathophysiology to psychology and even the environment in which labor occurs. Understanding the
     expected progression and the factors that can help or hinder the labor process helps nurses provide the quality care
     necessary to improve outcomes and support physiologic birth.

     To remember the crucial factors that influence labor and birth, nurses use the memory aid of the five P's: power,
     passage, passenger, position, and psyche. These P's describe the forces of labor, the pelvic anatomy, the fetal
     influence on labor, the physical positions involved, and the impact that the mind can have as well. This module will
     explore each of these as well as additional psychosocial and family factors and note how the nurse can support the
     process for the laboring person and the passenger they are birthing.

     What Is Labor?

     The Merriam-Webster online dictionary defines labor as follows: "to exert one's powers of body or mind especially
     with painful or strenuous effort" (2023). While this definition is not specific to birth, it is worth noting that labor
     implies intense physical and emotional work. Nurses are uniquely qualified to support and care for people
     experiencing the intensity of labor. For the purpose of birth, labor is defined as uterine contractions that lead to
     dilation and effacement of the cervix and move the presenting fetal part through the pelvis (American College of
     Obstetricians and Gynecologists [ACOG], 2024). If the pregnant person is not in active labor, the nurse understands
     the need for providing education and support. The nurse can assist both laboring and nonlaboring persons in coping
     with their symptoms and providing comfort measures.

     Factors in the Initiation of Labor
     While the actual mechanisms that initiate labor have proven difficult to identify, it is theorized that the pregnant
     person, fetus, and placenta each have a part in the process. The initiation of labor includes complex adaptations of
     multiple systems, including psychologic factors such as perception of safety versus danger (Hundley et al., 2020).
     Suggested factors originating from the pregnant person include uterine stretch from the growing fetus and amniotic
     fluid as well as a decrease in circulating progesterone levels and an increase in estrogen levels (Hundley et al.,
     2020). Progesterone acts on receptors of the uterus to reduce activity, in a sense quieting the uterus. Once this level
     drops, the uterus becomes primed and ready to respond to oxytocin, which initiates uterine contractions in an
     intermittent pattern every few minutes until birth and through the postpartum period to prevent hemorrhage.
     Placental release of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) peaks at term in pregnancy and increases in preterm
     labor (Hundley et al., 2020). CRH is believed to stimulate the fetal brain to stimulate lung maturity, which in turn
     helps initiate uterine contractions through increasing cortisol levels and support of the estrogen dominance
     hormone balance (Hundley et al., 2020).

     Signs Indicating Impending Labor

     The start of labor can have no signs, or there can be multiple signs that labor is near. Each labor and birthing
     experience is different, even if the birthing person has given birth before. In 10 percent of pregnancies, the bags of
     water will break prior to the onset of regular contractions. While this is one way that labor can begin, other ways are
     much more subtle. These signs can range from uterine cramps consistent with those felt with menses prior to
     pregnancy, to changes in fetal position or station, and even to the energetic boost colloquially referred to as
     "nesting."

     When potential signs of labor appear, the nurse's role is first to identify if labor is present. This can be done by
     assessing for the presence of uterine contractions. A typical active labor pattern commonly consists of contractions
     that are strong on palpation, occur every 2 to 3 minutes, and last approximately 60 to 70 seconds. The nurse can

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.1 · Factors Influencing the Process of Labor and Birth                                                                  659

also perform a vaginal exam to determine cervical dilation, effacement, and fetal station upon the patient's arrival
and then a recheck approximately 1 to 4 hours later to determine the presence of cervical change. If no cervical
change is present within 4 hours, the patient is not currently in labor. The nurse must also identify whether the
amniotic sac is ruptured. This is done by a health-care provider or trained nurse, who attempts to identify the
presence of amniotic fluid in the vaginal vault or leaking from the cervix (Dayal & Hong, 2023). If a ruptured amniotic
sac is ruled out, the nurse can then turn to providing comfort measures and counseling for the patient in the final
weeks of pregnancy.

When signs of labor appear prior to spontaneous active labor, the nurse's role is to first provide reassurance of
safety and validation of the person's experience. Then, the nurse reviews the signs of progression to labor, including
the following:

    · regular, painful contractions closer together and stronger than the current Braxton Hicks contractions;
    · rupture of membranes;
    · bloody show;
    · nausea and/or vomiting; and deep pelvic pressure (March of Dimes, 2019).

Routine emergency warnings for pregnancy should also be reviewed: vaginal bleeding that saturates a sanitary pad,
decreases in fetal movement, fetal kick count under 10 movements within 2 hours, and signs of preeclampsia
(headache, epigastric pain, edema in hands and/or feet, or visual changes). Next, comfort measures for the specific
symptom should be provided to reduce the discomfort experienced by the laboring person.

Lightening
The process by which the fetal presenting part descends into the maternal pelvis prior to or during labor is called
lightening. If the laboring person presents stating that the "baby has dropped" or that they can suddenly "breathe
better," lightening can be confirmed by Leopold's maneuvers when indicated. Using Leopold's maneuvers, the nurse
identifies if the presenting fetal part has descended into the maternal pelvis and reassures the laboring person that
lightening is expected and can be a sign of impending labor, but it can also be the body preparing for the labor
process that could still be several weeks away (see Chapter 11 Prenatal Care). A vaginal examination may also be
performed to identify the fetal station internally. Fundal height measurements could decrease slightly by 1 to 2 cm
from the previous week in the case of lightening. If a more significant decrease is noted, an ultrasound scan may be
indicated to assess fetal well-being, growth, and amniotic fluid level (ACOG, 2017a).

When lightening occurs, the nurse takes the opportunity to educate the person on other signs of labor to report or to
present to the place of birth for evaluation. Also, the nurse reassures them that lightening on its own is not indicative
of current labor but may be a precursor to the other signs of labor. The nurse encourages preparation for labor as
well as the promotion of comfort while waiting for labor, whenever it may begin.

Nursing interventions for lightening may include providing comfort with heat or ice, position changes like the hands-
and-knees position to relieve pelvic pressure, suggestions for using a pregnancy support belt, and continued
suggestions for daily body movement and positions to promote optimal fetal positioning for birth. Suggested body
movements for comfort include (Garbelli & Lira, 2021):

    · stretching of the psoas muscle by lying on each side with the upper leg draped over the lower leg,
    · time in the hands-and-knees or knee-chest position,
    · release of pelvic pressure by lifting the abdomen,
    · pelvic tilts with or without a birthing ball in each direction for relief of hip pain, and
    · gentle walking with an asymmetric gait, encouraging hip movements by one leg stepping higher than the other

        on a solid surface.

        LINK TO LEARNING

This video from Optimal Maternal Positioning demonstrates the pelvic side-lying release (https://openstax.org/r/
77optposit) for helping to align the pelvic floor, which can be used during pregnancy or labor.
660  15 · Process of Labor and Birth

     Braxton Hicks Contractions
     Contractions can occur throughout pregnancy, even at very early gestation. They can be palpated as early as 20
     weeks' gestation on the pregnant abdomen. Contractions that occur without cervical change are referred to as
     Braxton Hicks contractions, named after the physician who first identified them in the literature in the 1800s, Dr.
     John Braxton Hicks (Young, 1960). These contractions of the uterine muscle fibers are often mild, infrequent, and
     indistinguishable by the laboring person; but they can be regular, frequent, and painful, depending on the
     experience reported by the pregnant person. It is common for Braxton Hicks contractions to occur sooner, more
     often, and with increasing intensity based on the more pregnancies a person has experienced. Increasing frequency
     and intensity of these contractions can be triggered by low water intake, a full bladder, constipation, physical
     activity, and sexual intercourse (Raines & Cooper, 2023).

     To determine the difference between labor contractions and Braxton Hicks contractions, the nurse should obtain a
     full history of the presenting symptoms, assess the maternal-fetal vital signs, and perform a focused physical
     examination. Part of that examination will be a vaginal exam to assess cervical dilation, effacement, and fetal
     station. If the cervix is not immediately indicative of true labor, then the laboring person and their fetus may be
     observed for 1 to 4 hours. Reassessment of the laboring person, including the cervix for any change in dilation/
     effacement/station at that time, would indicate labor has begun. If no cervical change is noted during the
     observation period, the nurse should include this finding with a complete report of the laboring person's history and
     presenting symptoms to the health-care provider. Appropriate follow-up with the health-care provider should be
     recommended. If cervical change is noted and labor has been identified, the nurse should notify the provider and
     coordinate nursing interventions for admission and treatment according to provider and facility protocols.

     When Braxton Hicks contractions have been identified by the nurse, counseling or patient education is indicated.
     First, the nurse should reassure the person of safety and validate their experience. Then, the nurse can review the
     signs of progression to labor with the patient as stated previously. Routine emergency warnings for pregnancy
     should also be reviewed (see Table 11.9 and Prenatal Care: Part 1). Next, the nurse can provide or teach the patient
     about comfort measures for relief, including position changes, oral hydration, hydrotherapy, heat or ice application,
     acetaminophen (Tylenol) use, emptying of the bladder, promotion of bowel health, and rest. All of these can be
     effective at reducing the intensity or frequency of Braxton Hicks contractions. Finally, the nurse reviews follow-up
     needs for routine prenatal care and the date and time of the next scheduled appointment.

     Mucus Discharge
     The cervix is composed of tissue that produces mucus to protect the pregnancy from the extrauterine environment.
     Prior to the body preparing for labor, the formation of a mucus plug reduces the risk of infection (Weiss, 2022).
     Throughout pregnancy, the cervix continues to create this mucus, which can be experienced by pregnant people as
     a notable increase in the amount of normal vaginal discharge. This is referred to as leukorrhea. Leukorrhea of
     pregnancy should be evaluated because discharge can also be a sign of vaginal infection or leaking of amniotic fluid
     (Khaskheli et al., 2021). Loss of the mucus plug can take place slowly over time, presenting as leukorrhea, or in one
     distinct occurrence. The loss of the mucosal plug or a significant portion of it can be alarming to the pregnant person
     because the plug can be clear to yellow with or without blood within the mucus. When this sudden appearance of
     mucus occurs, especially when blood is present, pregnant people can experience anxiety leading to a phone call or
     an emergency department visit. Once labor, infection, and rupture of membranes have been ruled out with the
     appropriate evaluation and testing, the nurse can reassure the patient that an increase in discharge related to
     physiologic changes in pregnancy is normal. The nurse then reviews emergency warnings for progression to labor,
     infection, or rupture of membranes to help the laboring person differentiate the expected mucus discharge from
     symptoms indicating the need for another evaluation.

     Increased Energy
     In the third trimester of pregnancy, fatigue is a commonly reported symptom, so when fatigue suddenly resolves or
     decreases dramatically, this burst of energy can be a sign of impending labor. In some cultures, this energy increase
     is referred to as nesting. Pregnant people will often report this with excitement, as it is a common symptom in the
     days or weeks leading to birth. The nurse should appropriately screen for mental health disorders that can present
     as persistent overactivity; the expected increased energy should be short in duration and combined with
     appropriate rest and self-care (ACOG, 2018). Once pathology is excluded, the nurse should provide encouragement
     for the pregnant person and reassurance of normality as well as reminders to stay hydrated and well nourished, and

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.1 · Factors Influencing the Process of Labor and Birth                                                                  661

to rest between activities and at night to promote wellness prior to labor.

Cervical Changes
As the body prepares for birth, the cervix can undergo subtle or significant changes in dilation, effacement, position,
and consistency. Cervical dilation prior to labor can be subtle, with just slight progression from a closed cervix to one
that is 1 or 2 cm dilated. However, it is also possible to see advanced dilation of 6 cm with no signs of labor. Cervical
effacement can also be subtle, with only 20 percent to 50 percent of effacement beginning prior to labor, but it is
possible to encounter a paper-thin, 100 percent effaced cervical os that can be difficult to differentiate from the rest
of the lower uterine segment. The cervix is typically posterior when the body is not in labor but can move to mid
position or even an anterior position in the weeks, days, or hours leading to birth. Consistency of the cervix can also
be a sign of impending labor; the texture of the cervix softens to allow it to be more responsive to the contractions in
labor (Burch, 2022). Of note, these changes can occur sooner and more significantly with pregnant people who have
had previous vaginal deliveries. The nurse should rule out labor by assessing for cervical change under the influence
of contractions.

        LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

Evaluating Labor

A nurse evaluated a gravida 2 para 1 pregnant person at 39 weeks' gestation who presented with a report of regular,
painful contractions every 5 minutes, each lasting 1 minute, for 1 hour. The initial cervical exam was 4 cm dilation,
50 percent effaced, at -2 station. After monitoring for 20 minutes, the nurse noted contractions to be occurring
every 5 minutes with a Category 1 fetal heart rate (FHR) pattern. Monitoring was discontinued, and the patient was
assisted to ambulate or reposition for 2 hours, with fetal heart tones obtained every 30 minutes via intermittent
auscultation. FHR was 130 to 140, and no decelerations were noted during the intermittent auscultation. At the end
of the monitoring period, the cervical exam remained unchanged. At that time, the nurse reported the patient's
unchanged status to the provider and was instructed to discharge the patient home with labor precautions and to
follow up in the office if labor did not begin by the regularly scheduled prenatal visit later that week. The patient
called 4 hours later, reporting that they had just birthed their baby at home unassisted. The newborn was audibly
crying vigorously. The nurse instructed the patient to call 911 for emergency assistance and transport to the nearest
facility for continued care. Consider whether the care team is ethically or legally liable for this event.

The pregnant person was evaluated for cervical change. When no cervical change was noted, the pregnant person
was determined to not be in active labor and was discharged home in stable condition. Did the care team provide
evidence-based care? Did the nurse follow all policies and procedures and provide adequate documentation?

Rupture of the Membranes
Rupture of membranes (ROM) occurs when the two layers of the amniotic sac have openings that result in leaking of
the amniotic fluid through the vaginal opening that is noticeable by the laboring person. ROM can occur
spontaneously prior to the onset of labor, during labor, or as an intervention when the labor is induced or
augmented. Without intervention, most laboring people will experience spontaneous rupture of membranes (SROM)
during active labor or during second stage labor; however, in a small subset of people, birth can occur with intact
membranes in what is referred to as an "en caul" birth.

To identify rupture of membranes, nurses can use visual inspection of any sanitary napkins or absorbent materials
brought in by the laboring person. The nurse can complete a digital vaginal examination, obtain commercially
available diagnostic tests for amniotic fluid (Table 15.1), or assist with sterile speculum exams to identify pooling in
the posterior fornix. Samples of fluid can be assessed using nitrazine paper to determine pH and/or microscopic
examination revealing a distinct ferning pattern (shown in Figure 15.2). Of note, nurses can complete specific
training to be certified to perform sterile speculum exams in obstetric and gynecologic settings.
662  15 · Process of Labor and Birth

     FIGURE 15.2 Ferning of Amniotic Fluid on Microscope Slide As amniotic fluid dries on a microscope slide, it creates patterns that look
     like the fronds of a fern. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

                                                 Test Name Accuracy of Test

                                                 Amnisure 95.7% sensitivity, 92.3% specificity

                                                 ROM Plus 99% sensitivity, 91% specificity

                                                 Nitrazine 78.1% sensitivity, 97.8% specificity

                                                        TABLE 15.1 Commercially Available Tests for Amniotic Fluid
                                                        (Aetna, 2023; Thumm et al., 2020)

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Beliefs Surrounding the Amniotic Sac

     Many cultures across the world believe that newborns born inside (en) or covered by a portion of the amniotic sac
     (caul) are special due to how rarely these births occur. This belief is thought to date as far back as Roman times or
     before in some Asian cultures and has remained strong, especially in Southern states among Black Americans (Rich,
     1976). Some people believe babies born en caul are lucky and have supernatural powers (Ronca, 2021). Today,
     intentional en caul births for extremely preterm infants are being utilized in Japan (Murakoshi, 2020) to reduce
     pressure-related trauma to the fragile preterm patient and prevent vertical incisions on the uterus common with
     cesarean deliveries of extremely low birth weight fetuses.

     Factors Influencing Labor and Birth

     The five P's--power, passage, passenger, position, and psyche--are a way to remember the components that make
     up the physiology of birth. The strength of the uterine muscle contractions and the birthing person's expulsive
     efforts is power. The pelvic anatomy that the fetus navigates during birth is passage. The fetus and how they
     proceed through the passage is considered passenger. The position of the laboring and birthing person impacts
     much of the birth process and is often a very simple way to change the course of labor. Finally, the psyche, or mind,
     of the laboring and birthing person can have a lasting impact on every stage of labor and birth. Each of these is
     discussed in greater detail in the sections that follow.
     Power
     Birth is one of the most intense experiences the human body can endure. That intensity is fueled by the power of the
     muscles and the effort expended in labor and birth. It is important to note that while medications and anesthesia
     can reduce the perception and sensation of pain during the experience, the bodily acts of labor and birth are still
     physically demanding. As such, the nurse needs to closely monitor the process and support the health and wellness
     of the laboring person and their passenger.

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.1 · Factors Influencing the Process of Labor and Birth                                                                                       663

Contractions
The myometrium of the uterus is made of smooth muscle fibers that contract when stimulated, causing downward
pressure on the fetus. The fetus subsequently applies pressure to the cervix, leading to cervical effacement,
dilation, and changes in fetal station when contractions are persistent and strong. Figure 15.3 illustrates how
effacement, dilation, and fetal station are measured. The muscle fibers of the uterus also progressively retract as
the muscle contraction subsides to reduce the length of the fibers and prevent the fetus from rising all the way back
to the original position prior to the contraction. This coordinated contraction and release of the muscle fibers with
retraction during the release makes up the contractions in labor and birth (McEvoy & Sabir, 2022). These
progressive muscle contractions across the uterus are the power behind the first stage of labor. Contractions occur
in a wave-like formation, beginning with less intensity, building to more intensity, and then returning to the resting
tone of the muscle fibers between the contractions. Nurses assess the frequency, intensity, and duration of
contractions, as shown in Figure 15.4. Patterns emerge in the stages of birth that relate to the other four P's; these
patterns can be a guide for how to adjust an abnormal labor.

FIGURE 15.3 Cervical Effacement and Dilation and Fetal Station (a) Effacement is the gradual thinning, shortening, and drawing up of
the cervix. It is measured from 0 percent to 100 percent. (b) Dilation is the gradual opening of the cervix measured in centimeters. (c) Fetal
station measures how far above or below the ischial spines the fetus's head is positioned in the pelvis. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

FIGURE 15.4 Assessing Labor Contractions The nurse monitors the frequency, intensity, and duration of a laboring person's contractions.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Pushing Effort of the Person in Labor
The power of labor also refers to the second stage of labor when the birthing person begins expulsive efforts to
move the fetus through the pelvis and pelvic floor. Pushing efforts are often referred to as effective or ineffective
based on the fetal station progress in relation to the maternal pelvis (Huang, 2019). The power of pushing can be
affected by muscular strength and coordination, epidural anesthesia causing decreased sensation of the urge to
push, fetal positioning that is optimal or suboptimal for vaginal birth, and the strength of the uterine contractions
supporting the birthing person in their efforts to deliver their passenger.
Passage
The passage, or way through which birth occurs with labor, includes the pelvic structures of bone and soft tissue.
664  15 · Process of Labor and Birth

     Relaxin, one of the hormones that prepare the body for birth, softens the ligaments of the pelvis, causing a shift in
     the pelvic floor anatomy to accommodate the changes in diameter needed for birth. The passage can be affected by
     the laboring person's mobility in pregnancy and labor, perineal massage prior to birth, pelvic floor health, pelvic
     anatomy diameters, and in rare cases health conditions that affect those diameters.

     Pelvis Shape
     Traditionally, the pelvic diameters and overall shape were categorized into four different pelvis shapes: gynecoid,
     android, anthropoid, and platypelloid, which were determined by clinical pelvimetry or by measuring of the pelvic
     structures digitally during a vaginal exam. However, growing evidence suggests that these categories are entrenched
     in racial bias and are of little importance in relation to birth outcomes (VanSickle et al., 2022). Traditionally, the
     gynecoid pelvis was the preferred pelvic shape because the circular inlet was the most favorable for occipital
     anterior fetal position for delivery, with less likelihood of prolonged or complicated labors. Anthropoid pelvis shapes
     are associated with a long oval inlet, which is more often associated with occipital posterior deliveries that can have
     more complications and interventions. Platypelloid pelvis shapes are associated with a short oval inlet and a
     transverse facing fetal head for birth, which is associated with more complex labors with increased interventions.
     Android, or the male pelvis shape, has a heart-shaped inlet that is associated with arrest of labor deep in the pelvis.
     The issue with these different shapes is that evidence has not shown that they are independently predictive of
     positive or negative birth outcomes. This was consistent in the most recent Cochrane review of pelvimetry that
     found no improved outcomes with the use of pelvimetry versus no use of pelvimetry and an increased risk for
     cesarean section in those exposed to pelvimetry (Pattinson et al., 2017). Figure 15.5 illustrates pelvis shapes; some
     practitioners still use these terms, but the nurse should understand the limited value of the pelvic characteristics.

     FIGURE 15.5 The Four Types of Female Pelvis Once thought to be indicative of the relative ease or complexity of birth, pelvic shape
     characteristics are no longer considered to be of much predictive value. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
     license)

     Soft Tissue
     The pelvic floor supports the abdominal cavity throughout the lifespan of all humans, but during birth it becomes
     much more dynamic and serves a crucial function in vaginal delivery. The major muscles and fascia provide
     resistance for fetal rotation and descent within the pelvis. Alterations in function can occur when the pelvic floor has
     too much or too little support for the movement of the fetus through the passage. For laboring people with previous

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.1 · Factors Influencing the Process of Labor and Birth                                                                         665

pelvic floor damage or multiple births, weakness of the muscles can allow for malposition leading to dysfunctional
labor. For laboring people with increased resistance of the pelvic floor due to a trauma history, overcorrection of
muscles after previous pelvic floor damage, or strenuous exercise, increased resistance can lead to dysfunctional
labor as well (Gachon et al., 2020). The goal with the pelvic floor is to provide adequate support while also allowing
for stretching over the fetal presenting part to allow passage for birth.

Passenger
While labor is often focused on the experience of the laboring person, it is crucial to understand the fetal factors that
affect labor. The fetus can impact labor significantly, depending on the fetal tolerance to the powers and passage as
well as the fetal size and position within the pelvis. The fetus is physiologically designed to pass through the vaginal
tissues and pelvic diameters, often following specific patterns of progression that can lead to changes in the labor
process experienced by both the fetus and the laboring person.

Fetal Head
The cranial bones of the fetus have sutures that are not yet fused and fontanelles that compress to allow for
significant alteration in shape (Figure 15.6. Compression of the cranial bones, sutures, and fontanelles to allow for
the fetus to pass through the birthing person's pelvis is called molding. It allows the skull to accommodate the
pelvic diameters of the inlet, the midpelvis, and the outlet. The diameter of the fetal skull along with its ability to
pass through the pelvic anatomy is significantly affected by the presence of molding as well as fetal lie, attitude, and
position, which are reviewed in the following sections.

FIGURE 15.6 Normal Skill of the Newborn The sutures of the fetal skull allow it to compress without lasting damage during birth.
(modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Fetal Lie
The fetal lie refers to the relationship of the fetal long axis, or spine, to the maternal long axis. Fortunately, greater
than 95 percent of fetuses present in a longitudinal lie at term. A non-longitudinal lie is more common with preterm
gestation, grand multiparity, abdominal wall laxity, uterine anomalies, or the presence of uterine fibroids. See
Chapter 11 Prenatal Care for more discussion of fetal lie.

The transverse lie describes a fetus with the long axis perpendicular to the maternal long axis. When a fetus is in the
transverse lie, the fetal spine is further described to be in the back-down or back-up orientation. Transverse lie at
term is not compatible with vaginal birth and indicates the need for a change in fetal position or ultimately a
cesarean birth (Ghi & Dall'Asta, 2024). The oblique lie describes a fetus with the long axis at an angle between the
perpendicular and parallel. Fetuses with this lie are often further described by the location of the presenting part in
relation to the maternal abdominal quadrants--for example, fetal head in left lower quadrant. An oblique lie will
often convert to a longitudinal lie with the increased intrauterine pressure caused by contractions in active labor, but
this lie can be associated with abnormal labor progress due to lack of pressure on the cervix by the presenting part.
See Figure 11.6 for illustrations of fetal lie.

An external cephalic version (ECV) can be offered in an attempt to change the fetal position and, if successful, can
negate the need for a cesarean birth. An ECV is a procedure in which the fetus is manipulated through the external
abdominal wall in an attempt to move the fetus into a cephalic presentation; this procedure is 58 percent successful
666  15 · Process of Labor and Birth

     (Shanahan et al., 2023). The health-care provider discusses the risks and benefits with the pregnant person, and a
     decision is made whether to proceed with the ECV. The risks include fetal heart rate bradycardia or other transient
     abnormalities, rupture of membranes, vaginal bleeding, cord prolapse, placental abruption, stillbirth, and
     emergency cesarean section (Shanahan et al., 2023). The provider will explain that ECVs are more successful in
     multipara persons, when the presenting part is unengaged, with a posterior placenta and normal amniotic fluid
     amount (Shanahan et al,, 2023). An ECV is contraindicated in those with a history of a vertical cesarean scar,
     multiples, too little amniotic fluid (oligohydramnios), uterine or fetal anomalies, nonreassuring fetal heart rate, or
     fetal growth restriction (Shanahan et al., 2023). After consent is signed, the nurse will administer terbutaline,
     nifedipine, or call for an epidural placement to relax the uterus, depending on the order from the health-care
     provider. The procedure will include monitoring of the fetus via an ultrasound or Doppler scan. The nurse prepares
     for a possible emergency cesarean birth by having the operating room ready and ensuring that staff are available for
     the cesarean. After the uterus is relaxed, the health-care provider or providers will attempt to lift the presenting part
     of the fetus and rotate the fetus to the cephalic position. If successful, the person is a candidate for a vaginal birth; if
     not, the person will be scheduled for a cesarean birth. Figure 15.7 illustrates the procedure.

     FIGURE 15.7 External Cephalic Version The fetus is manipulated through the external maternal abdomen from breech position through
     the transverse lie and into a cephalic presentation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Fetal Attitude
     The fetal attitude is the presence of flexion or extension (also referred to as deflexed) of the fetal head and neck. In
     most labors at term, the fetus presents with a flexed head and neck to decrease the diameter of the fetal head to
     conform to the maternal pelvis. This is also known as the vertex presenting. When the fetal head is extended, the
     fetus is described as brow or face presenting. Face presentation requires a completely deflexed or extended head to
     enter the pelvic inlet (Ghi & Dall'Asta, 2024). A variety of fetal attitudes are shown in Figure 15.8.

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.1 · Factors Influencing the Process of Labor and Birth                                                                                     667

FIGURE 15.8 Fetal Attitudes Fetal attitude ranges from vertex (a) to completely deflexed or extended (d). These are all considered
cephalic presentations because the head is the body part that presents first. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY
4.0 license)

Fetal Presentation
The fetal presentation is the part of the fetus that occupies the lower part of the uterus, also referred to as the
presenting part. The fetal presentation can be determined by Leopold's maneuvers or during a vaginal exam.
Cephalic presentation describes the fetal head being the closest fetal part to the maternal pelvis (see Figure 15.8).
Breech refers to the fetal buttocks or lower extremities presenting closest to the maternal pelvis. Breech fetuses are
of several types, including frank breech, complete breech, incomplete breech, and footling breech (Figure 15.9).
668  15 · Process of Labor and Birth

     FIGURE 15.9 Different Types of Breech Presentation The type of breech presentation is based on the position of the fetus and the part of
     the body presenting: (a) frank breech, (b) complete breech, (c) footling breech, and (d) shoulder presentation. (attribution: Copyright Rice
     University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Fetal Position
     The fetal position is the relation of the presenting fetal part to the pelvic anatomic landmarks (Figure 15.10). Using
     Leopold's maneuvers and internal vaginal exam, the nurse should attempt to identify the fetal position. Via
     Leopold's maneuvers, the nurse identifies fetal lie, fetal presentation, and where the fetal back is lying, and
     assesses the attitude to predict the position that will be noted in the vaginal exam (face/brow/vertex). During the
     internal exam, the nurse digitally examines the fetal presenting part for identifying features to map the position in
     relation to the maternal pelvis.

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.1 · Factors Influencing the Process of Labor and Birth                                                                                  669

FIGURE 15.10 Fetal Positions Fetal positions in utero are named based on the position and the presenting part of the fetus. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

For the vertex fetus, the identifying features are the sagittal suture, anterior fontanelle, and posterior fontanelle.
First, the nurse identifies the sagittal suture and determines the orientation. Is it anterior-posterior, oblique, or
transverse in relation to the maternal pelvis? Next, the nurse follows the sagittal suture bilaterally to identify the
fontanelles. The posterior fontanelle is often compressed when labor has progressed enough to palpate the
fontanelles and presents as a Y-shaped depression with three sutures approximated or overlapping. The anterior
fontanelle is not compressed and will be palpated as a diamond-shaped depression with four sutures lining the
fontanelle. The occiput, where the posterior fontanelle is noted, is the denominator for describing the fetal position
in a vertex fetus. It can also be helpful to determine if the sagittal suture is midline (synclitic position), toward the
670  15 · Process of Labor and Birth

     sacral promontory (anterior asynclitic position), or the pubic arch (posterior asynclitic position) because asynclitic
     positions can increase the risk of abnormal labor patterns.

     Fetal position is the most difficult aspect of the passenger to accurately identify. In 2020 one study found that the
     sensitivity of Leopold's maneuvers is reassuring at 93.2 percent but the specificity was very low at 30 percent
     (Udompornthanakij et al, 2020). Due to the high rate of inaccurate identification, the nurse should understand that if
     the interventions to assist with the presumed malposition or desired position are not effective, reassessment or a
     trial of alternative interventions is reasonable. This skill can be developed with practice, and many OB/GYN nurses
     and providers can increase their accuracy in this skill when they combine it with ultrasound confirmation
     (Udompornthanakij et al, 2020).

     For presentations other than cephalic, the denominator when describing position is:

         · breech: fetal sacrum
         · face: fetal mentum
         · shoulder: acromion

     Position of the Birthing Person during Labor and Birth
     When nurses consider the birth process, it is important to recognize that labor is a dynamic progression that
     requires many shifts and changes by the maternal pelvis and especially the fetus. The easiest way to promote the
     normal physiologic progression of labor is to encourage an upright position when laboring and movement and
     position changes for the laboring person. By repositioning the laboring person, the fetal position will often shift as
     well. This continued movement encourages the internal rotational maneuvers necessary for the fetus to progress
     through the pelvis to complete the birth process. Because of this, when a slow labor or fetal heart rate change
     occurs, the nurse should think, "What position is the patient in?" followed closely by "What position should I try
     next?"

     There are many proposed positions for each stage of labor with accompanying reasons why each is recommended.
     The nurse must remember that movement, especially upright movement, is the most crucial factor in supporting
     normal, or intervening in abnormal, labor (Garbelli & Lira, 2021). Many cultures have deep-rooted norms in birth
     that can be as specific as which position the birthing person assumes the moment their baby is born. In many
     cultures, upright birth is depicted in ancient art and built into modern health-care systems. In the United States, the
     norm has become the lithotomy position, but a growing body of evidence suggests this position may actually cause
     harm to the birthing person through increased risk of pelvic floor dysfunction or injury. This position may also harm
     the fetus through increased stress during the second stage (Huang et al., 2019).

     Nurses must be sure to protect the body mechanics of the patient, especially when epidural anesthesia is in use.
     There have been reports of musculoskeletal and nerve injuries from prolonged use of single positions, especially
     those with significant hip flexion like lithotomy. The nurse should consider frequent position changes to left and
     right side-lying position, squatting, hands-and-knees position, high Fowler's position with asymmetric legs
     supported on a peanut shaped birth ball, closed-knee positions for outlet opening with low station, or even
     supported upright positions with epidurals that allow for lower body movement. Nurses also need to assess their
     own body mechanics when supporting patients in labor. Some hospitals have created policies that do not allow
     nurses to lift a patient's legs when in lithotomy positions due to the risk for staff injury.

     Psyche of the Birthing Person during Labor and Birth
     The hormones of birth function optimally in comfortable, low-stimulation environments that avoid stress, anxiety,
     fear, and negativity (Bellini et al., 2023). To support the positive psyche of the laboring person, the nurse should
     assist them in creating their most comfortable environment. The same way many people prepare for sleep is often
     the best support for the patient's psyche in physiologic birth. Consider a quiet, dark room, with only soft lighting, if
     any, present; introduce pleasant smells, peaceful music, or white noise if silence is not preferred or possible; and
     surround the birthing person with personal comfort items, including soft fabrics for bedding or clothing. Most
     birthing facilities are not designed with this purpose in mind, but some nurses have become experts at transforming
     the environment to support the physiology of labor. Many labor units now offer alternative lighting, face masks,
     black-out curtains or shades, diffusers with essential oils like lavender to promote calm and pleasant aromas, noise-
     reducing panels, alternative labor gowns, sound systems where patients can play their own music, and reduced
     visitor restrictions to allow for support teams that patients want and need.

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.2 · Stages of Labor                                                                                                      671

        LINK TO LEARNING

This video animation depicts the coordination of uterine contractions, pushing, and fetal movements
(https://openstax.org/r/77birthfetus) that work together to birth the fetus.

15.2 Stages of Labor

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Explain the events occurring in the phases of the first stage of labor
    · Describe the events within the second stage of labor
    · Explain the mechanisms of labor
    · Describe the events within the third stage of labor
    · Explain the events occurring in the first hour after labor and birth

Labor progresses in a multistage process that can follow the typical pattern or deviate significantly in a variation of
normal or in a pathologic deviation. The latter warrants nursing interventions or recognition of the deviation and the
need to consult with the provider for interventions outside the scope of nursing. To understand when to intervene,
the nurse must first understand the normal progression through the stages of labor. The first stage begins with
uterine contractions and cervical change that progress through the early and active phase. The routine time frames
for first stage labor include the latent phase of labor, up to 14 hours in multiparous persons and up to 20 hours for
nulliparous persons. Active labor begins when the laboring person's cervix reaches 6 cm dilated; multiparous
persons progress faster to complete dilation (Olsen & Ramus, 2022). Lack of cervical dilation in 4 hours with
consistent contractions or 6 hours without consistent contractions indicates an arrest of labor, leading to
interventions such as augmentation and/or cesarean birth (Olsen & Ramus, 2022).

In the second stage, the cervix is completely dilated, and maternal pushing efforts begin, ending in vaginal birth as
the presenting part rotates through the birth canal and is expelled from the vagina. The average time frame for the
second stage is less than 4 hours for birthing persons having their first child and less than 3 in multiparous persons
(Olsen & Ramus, 2022). The third stage begins with the completion of birth of the newborn and ends when the
placenta is delivered. The average time frame for this stage is between 5 and 30 minutes (Olsen & Ramus, 2022).
The 1 to 4 hours after birth of the placenta are also referred to as the fourth stage of labor, which often requires one-
to-one patient ratios for in-depth nursing care due to the need for more support and monitoring for both the birthing
person and their newborn.

First Stage of Labor

The first stage of labor begins with uterine contractions resulting in cervical change. These contractions are often
reported as mild uterine cramping that builds in intensity and frequency throughout early labor until it reaches a
pattern. The nurse assesses cervical effacement and dilation consistent with active labor. When effacement and
dilation are complete, labor transitions into the second stage, and pushing can begin. Early labor is often better
tolerated with minimal support from nurses and support people. However, laboring people vary in their tolerance of
discomfort and should be treated according to their wishes, no matter what stage of labor is present. Nurses should
know and offer support and both nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic pain relief options for each stage and phase
of labor.

Early Phase
The early phase of stage 1 of labor begins with uterine contractions that elicit cervical change within 4 hours or less
and ends when cervical dilation progresses to 6 cm (Olsen & Ramus, 2022). To encourage labor progression during
the early phase, mobility and upright positioning are helpful for both comfort and cervical dilation. Comfort
techniques include ambulation, frequent position changes, massage (light or firm based on patient preference),
counter pressure on hips or low back, hydrotherapy done in a shower with upright positioning, narcotic pain
medications, nitrous oxide, and even epidural anesthesia if ordered by the health-care provider.

If a laboring person has an epidural in the early phase of labor, it is crucial for the nurse to continue position changes
672  15 · Process of Labor and Birth

     every 20 to 30 minutes or more frequently to facilitate fetal rotation and descent. The laboring person is not getting
     the physiologic signals to do this because of the medication present for pain control. Positions that are helpful with
     an epidural in place include side-lying release on each side, exaggerated runners, upright with symmetric and
     asymmetric leg positioning, hands and knees (be sure to get lift support and position legs securely to protect patient
     and nurse body mechanics), and pelvic tilts to encourage engagement of the presenting fetal part (Tilden et al.,
     2022) (Figure 15.11).

     FIGURE 15.11 Common Positions in Labor There are many positions that may promote comfort during labor. (attribution: Copyright Rice
     University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Active Phase
     The active phase begins when the early phase ends (6 cm dilation) and ends when the second stage of labor begins
     (10 cm dilation). The active phase is often associated with contractions occurring every 2 to 5 minutes, each lasting
     60 seconds, with an intensity that requires more support of the laboring person to cope with the pain. This phase
     progresses more quickly than the early phase of labor for most laboring people.

     Other signs that a laboring person is reaching the active phase of labor can be nausea and vomiting, becoming more
     focused and internal, being unable to answer questions or converse during contractions, and feeling rectal pressure.
     Asking laboring people to recline or lie in a bed during the active phase without epidural anesthesia can significantly
     increase pain. Upright positioning and free movement are necessary coping techniques for this phase of labor.
     Nurses can support this physiologic process and assist laboring people by advocating for intermittent auscultation
     instead of continuous fetal monitoring, if appropriate based on risk factors. Nurses should encourage movement and
     ambulation and remind laboring persons to urinate, drink water, and eat small nutritious snacks. If fatigue is a
     concern for the laboring person, restful positions that prevent severe pain include (Garbelli & Lira, 2021):

         · hands and knees with a peanut-shaped birth ball under the arms to allow passive or active movement without
             strain on the hands and wrists,

         · seated position with legs supported alternately with a peanut-shaped birth ball, and/or
         · side lying with a peanut shaped birth ball with counter pressure as needed to the hips and low back.

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.2 · Stages of Labor                                                                                                    673

Heat or ice can be applied in these positions as well, for comfort to allow for rest. Breathing techniques, progressive
pelvic floor muscle relaxation, and positive affirmations are also helpful during the active phase.

If epidural anesthesia is being used, the nurse must continue to be diligent with position changes every 20 to 30
minutes and use of the peanut ball to encourage fetal rotation and descent (Grenvik et al., 2023). The nurse should
discuss the laboring person's preferences for the second stage of labor and review the benefits of different pushing
techniques and positions. Throughout labor, the nurse should answer any questions and address any fears
surrounding the birth to prepare the laboring person's mind as their body prepares.

Second Stage of Labor

When the cervix is 10 cm dilated and 100 percent effaced, it is completely or fully dilated, and the second stage
begins. Pushing efforts can begin immediately or can be delayed until the birthing person feels the urge to push.
Pushing efforts can be spontaneous, without coaching or direction if signs of progress are observed (ACOG, 2023).
Perineal bulging with maternal efforts, visualization of the fetal presenting part, and passing of maternal stools are
signs that progress is being made. Use of these signs avoids the risk for infection and perineal edema associated
with multiple or prolonged vaginal examinations. If progress is unclear within the first 30 minutes, the nurse should
consider having the birthing person change positions and directing the maternal effort down toward the rectum or
changing between open-glottis and closed-glottis pushing to find what works for the birthing person. Research has
shown benefits for changing positions during the second stage, with upright or side-lying positions showing
improved outcomes for the birthing person and fetus, and lithotomy or supine positions causing increased risk for
perineal tearing, longer pushing time, more pain, and increased fetal heart rate abnormalities (Huang et al., 2019).
Open-glottis pushing and closed-glottis pushing should be determined by the birthing person. Research shows that
nurses who are educated on optimal position changes and pushing techniques reduce cesarean rates compared to
those who do not complete this additional education (Dent et al., 2023).

The average nulliparous person without an epidural will need to push effectively for 2 to 3 hours to birth their
newborn. With an epidural, the expected time frame expands to 3 to 4 hours. For the average multiparous person,
the second stage could last an hour, or 2 hours with an epidural. When pushing efforts exceed 3 hours in a
multiparous birthing person and 4 hours in a nulliparous birthing person, there is a small but statistically significant
increase in risk for postpartum hemorrhage, chorioamnionitis, endometritis, postpartum fever, obstetric anal
sphincter injury, persistent occiput posterior position, shoulder dystocia, neonatal intensive care unit admission, and
neonatal sepsis (Pergialiotis et al., 2020). The nurse should take a shared decision-making approach with the
provider and the birthing person when discussing prolonged pushing efforts. The risks, benefits, and indications for
interventions and alternatives that accommodate the birthing person's preferences and risk tolerance should be
discussed. ACOG recommends considering operative vaginal deliveries as a strategy for reducing the risk for
cesarean birth due to national increases in cesarean birth without improved outcomes (2023).

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

Shared Decision-Making

The incidence of medical errors resulting in poor patient outcomes led to the Quality and Safety Education for
Nurses (QSEN) project. The objective of the QSEN project is to educate nurses at the prelicensure level with the
knowledge, skills, attitudes, and values required to increase the quality and safety of the system of health care,
improving patient outcomes (Sherwood & Barnsteiner, 2021). Integration of the QSEN competency of patient-
centered care has also led to improved patient satisfaction when providing compassionate care.

An essential part of the patient-centered care QSEN competency is shared decision-making. Shared decision
making means the patient and health-care team work together to make the health-care decisions best for the
birthing person and fetus. The patient's preferences, needs, and beliefs are respected, leading to the development
of a partnership between the health-care team and the patient. For many pregnant patients, shared decision-
making starts with a birth plan. During the labor and birth process, the patient's and support persons' preferences,
needs, and beliefs expressed in the birth plan are respected by health-care personnel when providing patient care,
following standards of care, and implementing health-care provider orders. For example, during labor and birth,
674  15 · Process of Labor and Birth

     decisions are made regarding the use of intermittent or continuous fetal and contraction monitoring and external or
     internal monitoring, need for IV access or continuous IV fluid infusion, induction and augmentation of labor,
     extending the length of second stage bearing down efforts, use of vacuum extractor or forceps, and need for
     cesarean birth.

     Mechanisms of Labor

     When crowning of the fetal head is noted, the nurse should prepare for imminent birth even though it may take
     some time with slow, controlled expulsive efforts by the birthing person. The provider attending the birth should be
     present with hands poised to assist with any emergencies or to provide perineal support. A meta-analysis of seven
     studies found that perineal massage during the second stage prevented episiotomy and decreased the duration of
     pushing but was not effective in decreasing the severity or incidence of perineal tears (Marcos-Rodríguez et al.,
     2023). Once the fetal head delivers, the provider will check for the presence of a nuchal cord. Also, after delivery of
     the head, the restitution of the fetal shoulders occurs, which means the shoulders turn to the left or right oblique
     diameter of the pelvis to allow easier passage of the shoulders under the maternal pubic arch. This is where a
     shoulder dystocia may develop with incomplete restitution or impaction of the fetal shoulder despite adequate
     restitution. Restitution is then followed by external rotation of the fetal head for the fetal face to be directed toward
     the left or right thigh of the birthing person. After external rotation, the fetal shoulders are typically delivered with
     gentle downward traction on the anterior shoulder followed by upward traction on the posterior shoulder, then
     lifting the newborn toward the birthing person's abdomen. The nurse must consider the position of the birthing
     person, as these movements will differ if the anatomy is reversed in the hands-and-knees or kneeling position. Once
     the fetal shoulders are delivered, the remainder of the body should follow smoothly without traction placed under
     the fetal axilla or neck. Support of the body can be done gently to guide the remaining body with flat hands to
     prevent tissue trauma in the newborn. The mechanisms of labor are summarized in Figure 15.12.

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.2 · Stages of Labor                                                                                                        675

FIGURE 15.12 Mechanisms of Labor The cardinal movements of the birth of the newborn begin before engagement and end with the
delivery of the posterior shoulder. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Third Stage of Labor

Birth has occurred, and the third stage of labor begins. Placental delivery should occur within 30 minutes of the time
of birth to reduce the risk for hemorrhage (Begley, 2019). Reports of cramping from the birthing person, lengthening
of the umbilical cord, change in the shape of the uterus due to involution as the placenta detaches from the uterus
and moves out of the uterus and into the vaginal canal, and increased vaginal bleeding are signs that the placenta
has detached and subsequent delivery is imminent. To facilitate the birth of the placenta, allowing the newborn to
latch to the breast and stay skin-to-skin can increase physiologic maternal oxytocin levels (Vittner et al., 2018).

If the placenta has not delivered within the expected 30 minutes or significant bleeding is occurring, gentle cord
traction with one hand and pressure on the uterus with the opposite hand by the provider attending the birth can
lead to the birth of the placenta. See 19.9 Complications in the Third Stage of Labor for interventions for retained
placenta.

Table 15.2 summarizes cervical dilation in the stages of labor.
676  15 · Process of Labor and Birth

                                      Stage of Labor              Cervical Dilation

                                      First stage (early phase) 0-6 cm

                                      First stage (active phase) 6-10 cm

                                      Second stage                10 cm to birth

                                      Third stage                 Birth to placenta delivery
                                                                  Cervix begins to close

                                      TABLE 15.2 Stages of Labor

     Fourth Stage of Labor

     The fourth stage begins after the birth of the placenta. This stage includes the time to repair any perineal trauma
     and ends 1 to 4 hours after delivery of the placenta. This time is of the utmost importance and requires the
     continued presence of a skilled attendant or nurse to monitor closely for complications. Complications during this
     time include an increased risk of maternal hemorrhage; uterine atony; bladder distention; pain from perineal trauma
     or breast-feeding attempts; fatigue; hypotension or the development of a fever; and difficulty in ambulating due to
     birth, blood loss, perineal trauma, or epidural anesthesia. Frequent taking of vital signs and assessment of fundal
     height/tone/vaginal bleeding are necessary. The nurse should keep the room warm, keep the baby blankets dry,
     consider a hat if the newborn has hair that is staying wet, prevent interruptions in skin-to-skin contact and initiation
     of breast-feeding for 1 to 2 hours before weighing, measuring, or administering medications to the newborn.

             REAL RN STORIES

     Nurse: Courtney, BSN, RN, C-EFM
     Years in practice: 6
     Clinical setting: Labor and delivery unit
     Geographic location: Texas

     A few years ago, a patient arrived in obvious distress in what appeared to be active labor. The patient was thrashing
     in the EMS transport stretcher and restraints, screaming for help, saying, "The baby is coming." I arrived to receive
     the transport and assume care for the patient's triage in labor and delivery. I first helped transfer the patient to a
     labor and delivery bed without restraints and calmly coached the patient to take deep, slow breaths to allow for
     oxygen for both them and their fetus. The patient responded with deep breathing attempts while still trying to ask
     for relief. I explained the need to ask basic medical questions and obtained vital signs for the patient and their fetus
     prior to administering pain relief. I quickly and effectively addressed major health problems, medications, allergies,
     and pregnancy history while obtaining maternal and fetal vital signs. The patient denied any pertinent medical
     history and reported this was their third pregnancy, currently at 38 weeks' gestation with two previous term vaginal
     births without complications. The patient was receiving care from an OB/GYN who was credentialed at our facility
     and who sent prenatal records at 36 weeks' gestation for review on admission to labor and delivery. These records
     were being obtained by the unit secretary at that time. Contractions appeared on the monitor every 2 to 3 minutes,
     each lasting 1 minute, and were strong on palpation. The fetal baseline was 125 bpm, with moderate variability,
     positive for accelerations, and negative for decelerations. The maternal vitals were as follows: BP 122/76, pulse 95,
     PO2 96%, temperature 98.0° F, and pain 10/10 with contractions. The cervical exam showed 9/100/0 station with
     LOA fetus. I notified the provider that the patient was progressing quickly with birth imminently expected. The
     provider was en route to delivery and requested an anesthesia consult to consider epidural anesthesia, as this was
     the patient's preference for birth. Anesthesia as presented and recommended for the patient was too close to the
     time of delivery; further, laboratory test results had not come back and the IV fluid bolus was not yet administered,
     so epidural anesthesia was contraindicated. IV medication was contraindicated as well due to fetal risk at birth, and
     nitrous oxide was not available at our facility. I then continued to increase the patient's access to nonpharmacologic

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.3 · Physiologic Adaptations during Labor and Birth                                                                      677

pain relief options by moving the patient to the shower to allow for hydrotherapy and intermittent auscultation. This
provided significant relief, and the patient was able to speak clearly between contractions. I then explained the
information again about epidural access in the patient's case and recommended continued hydrotherapy, deep
breathing, and counterpressure when needed for pelvic pressure. The patient began spontaneously pushing, and
because our facility policy did not allow for birth utilizing hydrotherapy, I had the patient move to the toilet for
expulsive efforts. The OB/GYN arrived and entered the bathroom, where the patient expelled the fetal head, stood,
and delivered the rest of the fetal body, which was then passed through the maternal legs for skin-to-skin contact
and delayed cord clamping while the patient was transported back to the labor bed for the third stage of labor.

15.3 Physiologic Adaptations during Labor and Birth

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Explain the physiologic changes of the person during the first stage of labor
    · Explain the physiologic changes of the person during the second stage of labor
    · Explain the physiologic changes of the person during the third stage of labor
    · Explain the physiologic changes of the person during the hour after birth

The pregnant body undergoes a great deal of change during labor and birth, including many physiologic changes that
enable the fetus to maneuver through the birth canal and be born. These physiologic alterations differ in each stage
of labor and should be monitored by the nurse while the person is laboring and birthing.

Physiologic Adaptations during the First Stage of Labor

The shift from term pregnancy to the first stage of labor occurs when contractions lead to cervical change. During
this shift, the body also prepares for the changes necessary for labor, birth, and the postpartum period. The
alterations in nearly all body systems allow for the focus to move from pregnancy to birth during these hours or
days. The nurse needs to understand how labor and birth impact body systems to be able to anticipate normal
changes and identify deviations from normal that indicate the need for nursing intervention or consultation with the
provider.

Vital Signs
The laboring person's heart rate increases during contractions, and the baseline can increase or decrease. Sustained
increases in heart rate warrant an investigation for possible signs of infection and excessive blood loss.

Blood pressure (BP) increases during contractions and returns to baseline between contractions. Slow increases in
BP can be noted with the experience of pain; however, significant increases (>140/90 mm Hg) should be
investigated for the presence of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, which can occur during pregnancy, labor, birth,
and the postpartum period (ACOG, 2020). Any hypotension should be investigated as possible infection, anesthesia
side effects, or a sign of a concealed hemorrhage.

The laboring person's temperature can increase with exposure to misoprostol (Cytotec) as well as epidural
anesthesia, but any increase above 100.4° F (38° C) warrants investigation for possible infection.

The respiratory rate can increase, especially in unmedicated labor due to breathing techniques used as a coping
mechanism.

The laboring person's oxygen saturation can decrease with epidural anesthesia, especially if the medication gets
above recommended levels, or when magnesium sulfate is administered for preeclampsia.

Fetal Descent
The pregnant person's body continues to facilitate the labor process with contractions causing downward pressure
on the presenting fetal part, which leads to descent through the pelvis. This typically occurs with internal rotation of
the fetus combined with the physical pressure of uterine contractions and changes in pelvic diameters through
maternal positioning in labor. During the first stage, the fetus is typically not engaged in the pelvis with a station of
-1 to -3, but can be lower if fetal head engagement occurred prior to labor or rapidly during labor (see Figure
15.3(c)).
678  15 · Process of Labor and Birth

     Cardiovascular
     Cardiac output increases an additional 10 percent to 15 percent in the first stage of labor (Martin et al., 2022). This
     is likely related to increased stroke volume from the sensation of pain and/or the work of the body even when
     adequate anesthesia is present. The body is also protecting vasodilation around the uterine muscle to allow for
     perfusion of the fetus during the work of labor, which will need to abruptly switch to vasoconstriction after birth.

     Musculoskeletal
     Pelvic floor anatomy is stretching to accommodate the descent of the fetus in labor. The pelvis is affected by
     relaxing and position changes to increase diameters and allow passage of the fetus (Cohen & Friedman, 2023). The
     sacrum will often become more pronounced, especially when the laboring person is in an upright position, as the
     presenting part of the fetus engages into the pelvis and places internal pressure on the sacrum.

     Gastrointestinal
     Gastric emptying and motility are further slowed during labor. Slowed gastrointestinal function combined with
     intense pain and abdominal pressure can increase the likelihood of nausea and vomiting in labor, especially in the
     active phase of the first stage of labor. This can explain why many people in labor without anesthesia do not have
     the desire to eat, but those with epidural anesthesia may experience hunger. The physical exertion of labor requires
     nutritional support, and current recommendations are to consider oral hydration, electrolyte support through oral or
     intravenous replacement, and light solid food intake. The oral intake of hydration and nutrition is controversial in
     labor due to a history of fear surrounding the risk of aspiration in the rare event that general anesthesia is indicated
     during labor. Restriction of oral intake is not currently supported by research for low-risk labors, but protocol has
     been slow to change in many anesthesia orders and facilities (Singata et al., 2013).

     Physiologic Adaptations during the Second Stage of Labor

     The second stage of labor requires extensive maternal effort and fetal tolerance to achieve a spontaneous vaginal
     birth. To support this, the body prepares to adapt to these needs with certain changes. Contractions may space, or
     pause, to allow for greater rest between pushing efforts, blood pressure and heart rate increase for increased
     perfusion potential, the pelvis must remain mobile with consistent changes to allow for passage of the passenger,
     and other body processes may slow to divert energy to necessary functions for birth. Nurses can support patients by
     promoting these changes and offering reassurance of normality as well as monitoring for any pathologic changes
     that are outside the physiologic ones.

     Contraction Pattern
     Contractions during the second stage can space, or pause, immediately prior to the urge to push or during pushing
     efforts. This may be protective of the fetal acid-base balance. The increased force of the contractions combined with
     maternal expulsive efforts decreases oxygen perfusion to the fetus.

     Vital Signs
     In the second stage, blood pressure increases by another 10 mm Hg during active pushing, and both heart rate and
     respiratory rate increase as well.

     Cardiovascular
     As noted precedingly, heart rate and blood pressure increase in the second stage. Maternal exhaustion can be
     impacted by this, and appropriate rest or breaks between pushing efforts may be necessary if exhaustion or
     abnormal vital signs occur.

     Musculoskeletal
     Continued position changes and shifts in pelvic diameters or change in fetal position allow for fetal descent
     following the cardinal movements of vaginal birth. The birthing person will also often have an adrenaline surge,
     causing significant shaking or tremors during the end of the first stage and second stage of labor (Gicheru et al.,
     2019). These appear similar to chills experienced during a fever and will typically resolve in 1 to 2 hours after birth.

     Gastrointestinal
     Continued slowing of gastric emptying could be a contributing factor to the nausea and vomiting experienced during
     the second stage of labor. Increased acidity of the slowed gastric contents may lead to acid reflux or "heartburn"
     being reported by the birthing person. Epidural use is associated with less slowing of gastric emptying and may

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.3 · Physiologic Adaptations during Labor and Birth                                                                      679

contribute to lower risk for aspiration in the use of general anesthesia (Bataille et al., 2014).

Physiologic Adaptations during the Third Stage of Labor

After birth of the fetus has occurred, the body makes significant shifts to accommodate for and limit blood loss. The
body suddenly shifts from perfusing the fetus through the time of highest need to rapid vasoconstriction of the
pelvic vasculature to prevent hemorrhage (Smith, 2020). The presence of the placenta prevents the completion of
this process. Until the placenta is expelled, it interrupts vasoconstriction and prevents necessary hormonal shifts.

Uterus and Cervix
The term uterus is significantly distended and well perfused with purposeful vasodilation through the second stage
of labor. The delivery of the fetus and drainage of remaining amniotic fluid that occurs with birth results in a rapid
decrease in the internal pressure exerted on the uterine wall from within. In response to this, there is rapid
vasoconstriction of the vessels that supply the pelvic floor. The 500 mL of blood flow routed to that area during labor
is shunted back to the central circulation to compensate for expected blood loss of the same amount (Smith, 2020).
Uterine contractions continue to shorten the muscle fibers and further decrease the uterine size, which can lead to
placental detachment and subsequent delivery. The cervix will decrease in dilation and effacement as well but will
remain partially dilated until the placenta delivers, typically around 5 cm dilation/50 percent effacement at this
stage (Martin et al., 2022).

Cardiovascular
Rapid decrease in heart rate and blood pressure to prelabor levels may be noted or can occur slowly over the first 2
weeks postpartum. Hypotension and tachycardia are late symptoms of significant blood loss and warrant precise
identification and treatment of the site of the bleeding. The shift of blood volume following uterine involution can
increase the risk of cardiac complications such as cardiomyopathy and pulmonary edema, especially in those with
preexisting heart conditions or hypertensive disorders in pregnancy (Martin et al., 2022).

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Medications Prescribed during the Process of Labor and Birth

Medications prescribed for the discomfort of labor and birth are classified as analgesics and anesthetics. Both of
these classifications are described in detail in 17.2 Pharmacological Pain Management.

Medications prescribed for the induction or augmentation of labor and to manage postpartum bleeding are
classified as uterotonics and are described in detail in 18.3 Nursing Care During the Third Stage of Labor.

Physiologic Adaptations during the Fourth Stage of Labor

The fourth stage of labor is a very vulnerable time for the birthing person due to the rapid shifts occurring in many
body systems as well as the risk for postpartum hemorrhage. Postpartum hemorrhage is one of the leading causes
of maternal morbidity and mortality across the world. Postpartum hemorrhage is defined as blood loss greater than
1,000 mL following childbirth (ACOG, 2017b). See 20.1 Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period and 21.2
Postpartum Hemorrhage for more in-depth nursing care and management of postpartum hemorrhage. The nursing
role of monitoring and educating during this vulnerable time is one of the most crucial tools available in reducing the
risk of adverse outcomes in birthing people.

Vital Signs
In the fourth stage, the blood pressure and pulse may be slightly elevated or return to normal Significant or
symptomatic decreases in blood pressure and heart rate call for careful assessment for blood loss, which can be
overt or concealed. The respiratory rate returns to normal. Temperature may be slightly elevated (up to 100.4° F or
38° C) or normal (Martin et al., 2022).

Uterus and Cervix
Uterine involution continues during the fourth stage of labor. The fundus is expected to be firm, midline, and located
near the umbilicus. Cervical dilation resolves, leading to a closed cervix shortly after delivery of the placenta (Martin
et al., 2022).
680  15 · Process of Labor and Birth

     Lochia
     Bright or dark red lochia are expected for the entire fourth stage of labor. Continued measurement of this bleeding
     for a total quantitative blood loss can be useful in monitoring for the potential need for intervention. Quantitative
     blood loss is measured via calculation of the weight of blood-filled material with the weight of the material
     subtracted. Fundal assessment should produce only a small amount of bleeding. If continued leaking of streams of
     blood is noted or large clots are expressed during the fundal assessment, prompt consultation, increased
     monitoring, and interventions in collaboration with the health-care provider are indicated (Martin et al., 2022).

     Perineum
     Tenderness, edema, and a burning sensation along lacerations are to be expected. Topical sprays, ice, rest, anti-
     inflammatory medications, and use of a peri-bottle during urination to dilute urine can be useful tools to promote
     comfort during this time. Significant bruising or severe pain should be evaluated by the provider because of the risk
     for hematoma formation. Perineal sitz baths can also be utilized for pain control and promotion of healing. These are
     also available commercially if patients prefer to use them at home after discharge.

     Bladder
     Some postpartum patients experience decreased bladder sensation after birth. In those cases, the nurse should
     encourage the patient to attempt to void at regular intervals until the urge to void returns. The nurse should evaluate
     the patient's bladder for distention, especially after epidural use. Some increase in voids can be seen as the body
     eliminates excess fluids in the first 2 weeks postpartum. Any bladder distention or decrease in urine output should
     be promptly reported to and evaluated by the provider. A distended bladder is one of the leading causes of
     postpartum uterine atony and can lead to postpartum hemorrhage (Martin et al., 2022).

     Musculoskeletal
     The work of labor can cause significant aches and pains that should be treated with rest, ice or heat, and support for
     ambulation as needed (Martin et al., 2022). If epidural anesthesia was used, it may be several hours before the
     birthing person is able to ambulate without assistance. The nurse should be sure to assess fall risk and call for
     assistance when supporting ambulation the first time after an epidural is discontinued.

     Gastrointestinal
     Bowel health can generate intense fear in the birthing person. The nurse should support bowel health with oral
     hydration, quality dietary intake with appropriate fiber, and the administration of a stool softener for any person with
     severe perineal tearing, hemorrhoids, cesarean birth, or those using narcotic pain medications (Martin et al., 2022).

       CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

       Differentiating between Normal Adaptation and Early Warning Signs of Complications

       Take action: Identify transition to tachycardia and assess for other chorioamnionitis symptoms.

       When caring for a patient in the second stage of labor, an increase in heart rate can be expected due to the
       significant maternal effort required. When this increase becomes sustained and above 120 bpm, the nurse notes
       the change in the maternal vital signs. The nurse then obtains a full set of vitals, including a repeat temperature,
       and assesses the fetal heart rate for any changes as well. The maternal temperature is now 100.6° F with a
       heart rate of 140. The nurse discontinues pushing efforts and calls the provider to report the change in vitals.
       The provider orders an IV fluid bolus, a complete blood count (CBC), and antibiotics. The provider also orders
       the nurse to resume pushing efforts while the provider is en route to bedside management of the patient
       because this second stage of labor has increased in complexity.

     15.4 Psychosocial Adaptations during Labor and Birth

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the normal psychologic changes of the person during the four stages of labor
         · Explain the normal sociologic changes of the person during the four stages of labor

     Labor and birth cause some of the most dynamic physical changes a body can endure, and the mind is greatly

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.4 · Psychosocial Adaptations during Labor and Birth                                                                    681

affected by the work the body is doing. Major changes in the psyche of the laboring and birthing person are often
present in overwhelming ways--positive, challenging, or, in many cases, both. Because the mind and body are so
affected, the relationships to others around the birthing person are also impacted during this time of transition from
pregnancy to labor, birth, and parenthood (Olza et al., 2020). This is also a time when the birthing person gets to
know and understand their culture's traditions, expectations, hopes, and fears specific to the experience of birth.

Nurses are vital to the experience of birthing people during their transition to parenthood. Nurses can impact this
experience in a positive way by reducing trauma and providing support for the mental and physical health of the
birthing person. Unfortunately, nurses can also contribute to or even cause trauma to the birthing person and their
family. Understanding this great responsibility is the first step to practicing trauma-informed nursing care and
reducing the risk of birth trauma in birthing people and their families.

Psychologic Changes during the Process of Labor and Birth

Leading up to labor, pregnant people may feel everything from excitement, joy, and anticipation to extreme fear,
anxiety, and panic. Some of those extreme levels of emotion can be tempered by taking childbirth classes, preparing
the home for the early postpartum period, securing a birth or postpartum doula for support, or discussing birth with
friends and family (Olza et al., 2020). While the anticipation is almost always great, the experience of this vast range
of emotions can vary from person to person and pregnancy to pregnancy, making it difficult to prepare pregnant
people for what they will feel. They often won't know what they're feeling until the moment an emotion begins.

As labor begins, emotions can be heightened or may abruptly switch to the opposite of what the pregnant person
was experiencing. In early labor, most people can be present and feel those emotions; but as labor progresses,
especially if the person is unmedicated, the intensity of labor can become all-consuming, and the laboring person
will often internalize emotions and focus on laboring through the contractions and other sensations of active labor
(Olza et al., 2020). It is common in labor to have a pause before the second stage begins, where the birthing person
has a moment of clarity, feels stronger emotions again, and prepares for the birth.

Birth is a process that many describe as impossible to explain but that others can describe in exquisite detail. Those
able to name their feelings often report feeling overwhelming euphoria, peace, and joy; others report relief,
numbness, or floating/out of body experiences; and still others recognize fear or anxiety that this part of birth is
ending, and new parenthood is beginning (Olza et al., 2020). The most important thing to do as a nurse during this
moment is to be there and listen. If reassurance or support is needed, the nurse can offer it while protecting the
space for the birthing person to process the moment. In protecting the space, the nurse allows the overwhelming
moment to pass slowly. It is okay to just hold the baby and not count toes for that first moment. The nurse allows
the birthing person or their support person to confirm (or announce) the newborn's sex. Protecting the space may
involve echoing the words the birthing person uses for reassurance rather than inserting the nurse's own
interpretation or commentary. Nursing staff should try to limit interruptions for assessments for at least that
moment unless medically indicated not to do so. Another way to protect the space is to encourage decision making
for the third stage to have taken place prior to that moment. Now is not the time to ask about active management
with oxytocin unless the risk factors or bleeding have changed since delivery. The nurse should advocate for the
patient's wishes if reminders are needed for delayed cord clamping, delayed newborn measurements/medication
administration, physiologic versus active management of the third stage, uninterrupted skin-to-skin contact, breast-
feeding or breast crawl plans, and so on. Nurses need to offer a therapeutic presence in this moment and protect
the space of this new family unit.

The fourth stage of labor comes with the slow return to a less heightened emotional state for most. The fatigue and
exhaustion from the labor can start to overwhelm the feelings that were all-encompassing just moments ago (Olza
et al., 2020). Continued transition to the newness of parenthood as well as continued bonding for the family occurs
during the necessary fourth stage nursing assessments to monitor maternal and newborn safety. Families may want
to notify other family members, take pictures, call or video chat with loved ones, and even update social media in
those early hours. The nurse should follow the birthing person's lead for how fast or slow this process occurs and
should normalize private moments of bonding before notifying others if that is the desire of the birthing person.
Gentle reminders of moments to capture, experience, or put to memory during this period can be helpful if the
family does not have specific or prepared ideas for this time.

The events that occur during labor may be perceived as traumatic to the birthing person, especially when unplanned
682  15 · Process of Labor and Birth

     or unexpected. These events include (but are not limited to) cesarean birth, use of forceps or vacuum extractor,
     multiple uncomfortable vaginal exams, inability to receive an epidural for discomfort, episiotomy, perineal
     lacerations, shoulder dystocia, postpartum hemorrhage, and feelings of lack of control over decisions regarding the
     birth (ACOG, 2021).

     Sociologic Changes during the Process of Labor and Birth

     Leading up to labor and birth, the experience of a pregnant person can shift as society begins to recognize them as a
     parent or a parent of more children. For parents, this can be a new financial expectation or strain. Parents may
     experience changes in role expectations in work or family life; emotional changes within the family with the addition
     of their youngest member; or changes in the household caused by reduced space, moving into different homes, or
     even losing access to homes due to parenthood or additional children (Sæther et al., 2023). Pregnancy, labor, and
     birth can cause intense emotional changes that can strain or solidify relationships with partners and extend to
     multiple generations. While each family experiences this differently, it is crucial for nurses to recognize that this role
     change or relationship shift can be a significant factor in the health of a birthing person and their newborn. Nurses
     should have an in-depth discussion of social factors during the intake assessment to identify potential needs for
     support. In addition, nurses should remember to always assess for intimate partner violence during this discussion,
     as not all sociologic changes in pregnancy are healthy ones (Holmes & Kim, 2019). More discussion of intimate
     partner violence is found in Chapter 9 Violence Against Women.

     During labor, sociologic changes can continue to be positive, neutral, or negative. The intensity of labor and birth can
     amplify strong bonds or amplify weaknesses of bonds in the social support system of the birthing person (Sæther et
     al., 2023). The nurse should be prepared for moments of joy, love, and tears from anyone in the room. Also, the
     nurse must be diligent in preparing for moments of fear or outbursts that can occur when relationships are
     experiencing hardship. A prudent nurse understands unit policies for unstable or dangerous relationship shifts that
     can occur in the depths of labor, and never forgets to monitor the safety of the nurse and other staff present in
     addition to that of the patient. If the nurse is in danger, so are the laboring person and their newborn.

     The third stage can be overwhelming because all the postbirth processes take place quickly. The nurse should strive
     to protect the bonds of the family, individually and as a group, as much as possible while completing the necessary
     tasks. Many families prepare less for this stage of labor, and it can be foreign to them. The nurse should support the
     family by explaining all procedures and providing reassurance of normality when indicated as well as any deviation
     from normal that needs additional intervention or support. Keeping the environment calm and limiting disruptions
     as much as possible can help this stage feel less clinical and more about family bonding (Bellini et al., 2023). The
     calm environment can promote physiologic changes in oxytocin levels that may be protective for complications of
     the third stage, such as retained placenta and postpartum hemorrhage.

     The fourth stage is a very vulnerable time for many birthing people as they navigate the handling of this new person,
     become comfortable with breast-feeding or bottle-feeding, and deal with the realities of postpartum recovery
     discomforts. Families will often introduce the newborn to other family members as they are ready, either during the
     fourth stage or in the days and weeks following. Different families and cultures have traditions about what is best or
     appropriate during this time. The nurse should be sure to assess for any cultural or familial traditions, needs, or
     wants. For example, many cultures prefer not to have males, even if related, present during newborn diaper changes
     or breast-feeding for the promotion of modesty; other cultures strongly advocate for public breast-feeding and can
     be offended by offering coverage of the breast or nipple during feedings (Finlayson et al., 2020). Before additional
     visitors or support people come to meet the new baby, the nurse should determine any desires for privacy during
     bleeding assessments or feedings so that the birthing person has the opportunity to voice those preferences
     privately. Nurses should continue to interrupt as little as possible while the parent-newborn bond forms and
     sociologic shift occurs.

     15.5 Family Adaptations during Labor and Birth

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the importance of the partner or support person during the process of labor and birth
         · Explain the importance of the family to the person who is laboring

     Access for free at openstax.org
15.5 · Family Adaptations during Labor and Birth                                                                         683

Not so long ago, people birthing in hospitals in the United States experienced labor and birth without support people
present, in a medicated state, and with little to no memory of their birth. The shift in our culture to include spouses
or partners, trained birth support people like doulas, and even photographers or videographers has occurred slowly.
Research shows that the presence of these support people, especially those experienced in birth like a doula, can
improve the experience of the birthing person, reduce trauma, and improve health outcomes (Sobczak et al., 2023).

Partner and Support Person Adaptations during the Process of Labor and Birth

Some partners feel empowered in their role as a non-birthing partner; others may feel disempowered and unsure of
their new role. Some partners rise to the challenge and provide excellent labor support that meets or exceeds the
quality of a trained birth doula; others are less prepared or too overwhelmed to provide support in the way preferred
by the birthing person (Saether et al., 2023). The experience of both the birthing person and their partner can be
improved by taking preparatory classes on labor, birth, and the postpartum period and discussing the birth with
experienced parents (Vanderlaan & Givens, n.d.). The planned support person should be prepared to experience the
sights and sounds of birth, know their own limits or needs, maintain their own hydration and nutrition so that they
are able to provide support, and have any unanswered questions addressed before the onset of labor so that they
feel prepared. Nurses can support the birthing person's desired level of involvement of the support person by asking
the patient or by reading the birth plan.

Some birthing patients are unable to have their desired partner with them at the birth for multiple reasons (military,
no longer in the relationship, unavailable). The nurse can be an emotional and physical support to the patient. A
doula can also be the support person. Doulas often have basic training in physical and emotional support of laboring
people and may have certification. Doulas can suggest position changes and comfort measures, as well as be a
reassuring presence at the bedside. Research shows the addition of an experienced support person can improve
birth experiences (Sobczak et al., 2023). In the current birth culture where trauma can occur, the necessity of
support cannot be stressed enough. This is especially true if a birthing person is a person of color or belongs to
another marginalized population.

Family Adaptations during the Process of Labor and Birth

Which family members are present during the four stages of labor is a very personal choice that may be impacted by
the route of delivery, birthplace policies, health issues or the presence of infection, the health of each relationship
with the birthing person, and cultural expectations. During the COVID-19 pandemic, restrictions on support people
caused worsening of outcomes and an increase in negative experiences of birth as well as postpartum mood
changes like depression, according to research (Shuman et al., 2022). Historically, family involvement during
pregnancy included giving advice, helping prepare for birth, and attending the labor and birth; this involvement
decreased stress and increased emotional security (Hawkins et al., 2021). Nurses should be prepared for
supporting birthing people and their families by providing education, reassurance of the normality of labor and birth
experiences, and family access to the extent the laboring person wishes it. Each family will have differing needs for
their birth based on personal, societal, and cultural expectations. Prioritizing this support can improve outcomes
and experiences for families.

        LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

Surrogacy

Surrogacy can be a significant ethical or legal issue with varying levels of complexity based on the circumstances
and the state where the pregnancy occurs. Nurses need to be aware of surrogacy laws, facility policy, and plans for
security around these very unpredictable pregnancies. For example, consider the following situation: Fetal heart
rate decelerations are present, and the birthing person is a surrogate for two intended parents who are present for
the delivery. The provider recommends moving to a cesarean birth immediately for fetal protection. The birthing
person declines and requests alternative options due to the risks of surgery to their body. The intended parents
demand the surgery begin immediately. What are the laws in the state? What are the facility policies, and what is
included in the contract in this specific case? This is just one example of conflicts that can arise that nurses should
be prepared to navigate or escalate through the proper chains of command.
684 15 · Summary

Summary

15.1 Factors Influencing the Process of Labor and Birth

Labor is an intricate process that involves the laboring person, the fetus, and the interactions between them. To
remember these interactions, think of the 5 P's: power, passage, passenger, position, and psyche. If any of these
components is not functioning as expected, the labor and birth can be impacted. Nurses should understand the
usual progression and assess frequently to identify deviations from the expected so that appropriate nursing
interventions can be implemented to improve outcomes. Nurses should also be aware of when nursing interventions
have not resolved the situation and contact the provider so that they can make changes to the plan of care.
Remember, nurses are an independent resource that can greatly influence the experiences and outcomes of
patients they care for in labor. Nurses' efforts may improve the United States' maternal morbidity and mortality
rates to be closer to the low rates of other developed countries.

15.2 Stages of Labor

The nurse's understanding of the expected progression of the four stages of labor is crucial when providing care
during each step, starting at triage through transfer of the patient to the postpartum recovery room. Correct
identification of labor, followed by appropriate monitoring of the health of the birthing person and fetus for each
stage, and use of interventions/consultation when necessary if complications present are the core actions of the
nurse. Using evidence-based care with up-to-date and accurate information is the most powerful tool nurses have
to improve outcomes as well as increase positive experiences for their patients.

15.3 Physiologic Adaptations during Labor and Birth

As the body enters labor and progresses through each of the four stages, significant alterations in body processes
occur. Knowing each of these can help nurses identify the progression through labor, identify if the progression is
not occurring as expected, and safely identify when pathologic deviations occur. Incorrectly noting a normal change
as a pathologic one can increase the risk for unnecessary interventions including cesarean birth, which increases
the morbidity and mortality risk for the birthing person and their fetus. However, dismissing a pathologic change as
an adaptation of pregnancy can also cause this same increased risk. Nurses must use their hands-on assessment
skills early, often, and accurately to ensure that risks for fetal and maternal morbidity and mortality are reduced.

15.4 Psychosocial Adaptations during Labor and Birth

Nurses have been the most trusted professionals for the past 20 years, according to Americans who were polled
(American Nurses Association, 2023). This trust is built by caring for the whole person, including mind and body.
Labor and birth are times when both mind care and body care are needed. The physiologic and sociologic changes
throughout the labor and birth process are multidimensional. High-quality nursing support can make a difference in
the outcomes and experiences of new parents.

15.5 Family Adaptations during Labor and Birth

Support during labor and birth can ease the intensity of these overwhelming processes. Whether this support is
through a hired doula, a trusted friend, a loving partner, or an entire group including extended family, the support
desired should be determined by the birthing person. Nurses should make space for this support and include the
support team as much as desired by the birthing person. This continuous support is associated with improved
outcomes.

Key Terms

active phase phase of labor in the first stage that lasts from 6 cm (nulliparous) or 4 cm (multiparous) to 10 cm/
    100 percent effacement

early phase early part of the first stage of labor lasting until 6 cm in a nulliparous person and 4 cm in a multiparous
    person

external cephalic version (ECV) procedure that attempts to change the fetal position and, if successful, can
    negate the need for a cesarean birth

fetal attitude description of the presence of flexion or extension (also referred to as deflexed) of the fetal head
    and neck

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         15 · Assessments 685

fetal position relation of the presenting fetal part to the pelvic anatomic landmarks
first stage stage of labor in which contractions and cervical dilation occur; ends with complete dilation/effacement
fourth stage stage of labor that begins after the placenta delivery and the end of perineal assessment/repair and

    ends 1 to 4 hours later
labor uterine contractions that lead to dilation and effacement of the cervix and move the presenting fetal part

    through the pelvis
lightening process by which the fetal presenting part descends into the maternal pelvis; occurs prior to or during

    labor
molding compression of the cranial bones, sutures, and fontanelles of the fetus to allow for the fetus to pass

    through the birthing person's pelvis
oblique lie describes a fetus with the long axis at an angle between the perpendicular and parallel
passage pelvic anatomy that the fetus navigates during birth
passenger fetus and how they proceed through the passage
position position of the laboring and birthing person; impacts much of the birth process and often changes the

    course of labor
power strength of the uterine muscle contractions and the birthing person's expulsive efforts
psyche mind of the laboring and birthing person, which can have a lasting impact on every stage of labor and birth
restitution external rotation of the fetal head once the head is born, whereby the fetus then turns to the left or

    right oblique diameter of the pelvis to allow passage of the shoulders under the maternal pubic arch
second stage stage of labor in which the cervix reaches 10 cm dilation/100 percent effacement; lasts until birth

    occurs
third stage stage of labor that begins after birth and ends with completion of the placenta delivery and perineal

    assessment/repair
transverse lie describes a fetus with the long axis perpendicular to the maternal long axis

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. What is a direct influence on cervical dilation? Select all that apply.
           a. positioning of the pregnant person
           b. strength of uterine contractions
           c. length of time since ROM
           d. fetal presentation
           e. time of last bowel movement

    2. The nurse is providing discharge instructions to a person who was evaluated for possible labor. How does the
        nurse explain how losing the mucus plug could be a sign of impending labor?
           a. The mucus plug starts to be expelled due to increased estrogen before contractions begin.
           b. The mucus plug is expelled after the membranes rupture during labor.
           c. Effacement and dilation of the cervix decrease the area where the mucus plug sits.
           d. Labor is unable to begin until the mucus plug is expelled and creates a space for the fetus.

    3. If the fetal attitude is assessed to be completely deflexed on sonogram or via Leopold's maneuvers, what
        presenting part do you anticipate palpating in a vaginal exam?
           a. brow
           b. breech
           c. face
           d. occiput

    4. What makes up the powers of labor and birth?
           a. contractions and pushing efforts
           b. pelvis and pelvic floor tissues
           c. fetal position, attitude, lie, and presentation
686 15 · Assessments

           d. oxytocin

    5. When does the active phase of labor begin according to ACOG?
           a. 6 cm
           b. 3 cm
           c. 5 cm
           d. 10 cm

    6. The nurse hears the laboring patient making grunting noises. How will the nurse determine if the person is in
        the active second stage of labor?
           a. Assess for rupture of membranes.
           b. Assess for bloody show.
           c. Assess for dilation of the cervix.
           d. Assess for stool.

    7. When does the second stage of labor begin?
           a. at birth
           b. when the early phase ends
           c. when the cervix is completely dilated and effaced
           d. when pushing begins

    8. How long is the expected length of the third stage of labor?
           a. 60 minutes or less
           b. 30 minutes or less
           c. 1 hour for a multiparous person, 2 hours for a nulliparous person
           d. 3 hours for a multiparous person, 4 hours for a nulliparous person

    9. How can a nurse support the patient during the fourth stage of labor?
           a. Support pushing efforts with feedback on how much progress is being made.
           b. Ensure epidural anesthesia is adequate for pain control, reposition frequently, provide dietary intake
                per provider's order.
           c. Assess for any bleeding or amniotic fluid presence in the vaginal discharge.
           d. Provide rest, space, and time for bonding between assessments, support for feeding preferences,
                diligent monitoring for complications, pain management.

  10. The nurse is caring for a patient during the first stage of labor. What is an abnormal finding?
           a. patient moaning with contractions
           b. contractions 3 minutes apart lasting 60 seconds
           c. blood pressure 142/88
           d. respiratory rate 22

  11. What changes in hormones initiate labor?
           a. decreased progesterone, decreased estrogen, absence of oxytocin
           b. increased progesterone, decreased estrogen, absence of oxytocin
           c. increased progesterone, decreased estrogen, presence of oxytocin
           d. decreased progesterone, increased estrogen, effects of oxytocin

  12. During the second stage, what do the birthing person's vital signs most likely show?
           a. increased heart rate during contractions, baseline heart rate between contractions
           b. increased heart rate during contractions, decreased heart rate between contractions
           c. decreased heart rate during contractions, increased heart rate between contractions
           d. decreased heart rate during contractions, baseline heart rate between contractions

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      15 · Assessments 687

13. During the third stage of labor, what may the birthing person experience?
         a. expulsion of their fetus with vaginal bleeding
         b. cramping, gush of fresh vaginal bleeding, lengthening of the umbilical cord
         c. frequent episodes of dyspnea
         d. increased blood pressure and pain due to expulsive efforts

14. What should the nurse consider when the birthing person has a decrease in blood pressure after the placenta
      is delivered?
         a. The birthing person is in pain.
         b. Place the newborn skin-to-skin.
         c. The bladder is distended.
         d. Check for possible hemorrhage.

15. How does becoming a parent cause the birthing person to feel?
         a. overwhelming feelings of joy or a sense of euphoria
         b. a wide variety of emotions specific to each person's experience
         c. overwhelming fear or sadness at the loss of their previous life
         d. exhausted with little interest the newborn

16. How should the nurse respect the rapid psychologic changes occurring in the fourth stage of labor?
         a. Invite the family to come in and see the newborn.
         b. Take the lead from the parents regarding interruption of the bonding.
         c. Ask multiple questions about taking pictures of the newborn.
         d. Take the newborn to the nursery to encourage the parents to rest.

17. What anticipatory guidance should the nurse provide for new parents regarding sociologic changes?
         a. Explain that roles will not change at home.
         b. Explain that stresses will be over now that the newborn is born.
         c. Tell the parents not to stress over household changes.
         d. Prepare them for possible strains on relationships.

18. What effect will the presence of support people in labor most likely have?
         a. improve the experience of the birthing person
         b. improve the outcomes of the birthing person
         c. improve the outcomes and experience of the birthing person
         d. cause birth trauma and/or postpartum depression

19. The nurse is caring for a laboring patient with multiple family members in the room. How can the nurse
      address this situation?
         a. Educate the family that the pain the laboring person is experiencing is normal.
         b. Ask them all to leave the room.
         c. Explain that if the laboring person got an epidural, she would be more comfortable.
         d. Assume the laboring person wants the family in the room.

20. During the COVID-19 pandemic, what was revealed about the importance of labor support?
         a. Labor support can only be provided by the significant other.
         b. Laboring patients did not need support from outside sources.
         c. Outcomes for birth were not changed by pandemic requirements.
         d. Patients during the pandemic's support ban experienced more depression.

21. When should the nurse consider suggesting a doula?
         a. when the patient asks for an epidural
         b. if the nurse is unable to support the patient
688 15 · Assessments

           c. when the support person is in the military and cannot attend the birth
           d. if the patient is going to have an emergency cesarean birth

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. A patient is experiencing Braxton Hicks contractions during the third trimester. Describe the counseling or
        teaching you would provide them to encourage comfort and teach them about emergency signs pertinent to
        this stage of pregnancy.

    2. Compare labor contractions and Braxton Hicks contractions. Describe the risks of incorrectly identifying each
        of these as a labor and delivery nurse.

    3. What is the consensus on how long labor should last?
    4. What mechanisms cause the cervix to dilate and efface during active labor?
    5. How will the nurse know the placenta is close to being born?
    6. Explain the responsibilities of the nurse in the fourth stage of labor.
    7. Describe what happens to the laboring person's pulse during the first stage of labor.
    8. If a birthing person begins profusely vomiting during the first stage of labor, they are likely entering what

        phase of labor?
    9. What is a possible negative effect on the fetus during the second stage of labor due to the stress of pushing?
  10. Your patient in labor is crying. How do you address this?
  11. What emotions does the nurse expect a patient to report in early labor?
  12. Explain the importance of the presence of family support during labor and birth.

Reflection Questions

    1. Reflect on a time when you felt supported during a painful or strenuous time. What environment was the most
        helpful for you during that experience? Apply this concept to the different laboring people you might
        encounter and how you would support them.

    2. How would you respond as a nurse if your patient wanted to continue pushing efforts beyond 3 or 4 hours?
        Compare this to how you would respond if a patient wanted to discontinue pushing efforts and instead have a
        cesarean birth before 1 or 2 hours.

    3. Think about the fourth stage of labor, with all the significant changes taking place. What would help the
        birthing person feel safe and well cared for during this stage?

    4. Think about patient and staff safety in the event of threatening behavior during labor by a support person.
        How would you keep the patient, yourself, and other staff safe?

    5. Should insurance coverage for a doula be required if outcomes are improved by their presence? Reflect on the
        implications for this.

What Should the Nurse Do?

Siobhan, a 28-year-old pregnant female at 38 weeks' gestation, presents to the maternity clinic for a routine
checkup. She is a gravida 2, para 1, having delivered a healthy baby girl vaginally 3 years ago. Siobhan is
accompanied by her partner and expresses excitement and anxiety about the impending birth. Siobhan reports
experiencing intermittent lower back pain and a sense of pelvic pressure over the past 15 hours. She also mentions
a noticeable increase in vaginal discharge. She denies any vaginal bleeding, ruptured membranes, or severe
abdominal pain. Her partner notes a change in fetal movement, with the baby seeming more active than usual.
Siobhan has a history of gestational diabetes, well managed through diet and exercise. She has had regular prenatal
checkups throughout this pregnancy, and her blood pressure has remained within the normal range. Fetal
ultrasound scans have indicated a healthy, appropriately sized fetus. Siobhan's medical history is otherwise

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            15 · References 689

unremarkable.

At the time of admission her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure: 120/78 mm Hg, heart rate: 88 bpm,
respiratory rate: 18 breaths per minute, temperature: 98.6° F (37° C), and fetal heart rate: 140 bpm, regular rhythm.

    1. What key signs and symptoms in Siobhan's presentation might indicate the initiation of labor, and how would
        you distinguish them from normal third trimester discomfort?

    2. Based on an analysis of Siobhan's case, what immediate actions should a nurse take to address her concerns,
        ensure fetal well-being, and facilitate an effective labor assessment?

Carmen, a 32-year-old pregnant female at 39 weeks' gestation, arrives at the maternity clinic for a scheduled
checkup. She is accompanied by her husband, Carlos, who has been her primary support throughout the pregnancy.
Carmen is a gravida 2, para 1, with a history of a previous cesarean section. The couple is eagerly anticipating the
birth of their second child via VBAC (vaginal birth after cesarean). Carmen reports intermittent contractions and a
sense of pressure in her lower abdomen over the past 24 hours. She denies any vaginal bleeding, rupture of
membranes, or severe abdominal pain. Carlos mentions that Carmen has been experiencing increased anxiety as
her due date approaches, and they express concerns about the upcoming labor, especially considering the previous
cesarean section. Carmen has a history of gestational diabetes, which has been well managed through diet and
regular monitoring. Her blood pressure has remained within the normal range throughout the pregnancy, and fetal
ultrasound scans have shown a healthy, appropriately sized fetus. Carmen's previous cesarean section was due to
breech presentation in her first pregnancy. Her vital signs are as follows: blood pressure: 118/76 mm Hg, heart rate:
92 bpm, respiratory rate: 18 breaths per minute, temperature: 98.7° F (37.1° C), and fetal heart rate: 145 bpm,
regular rhythm.

    3. What nonpharmacologic solutions can the nurse suggest to address Carmen's anxiety and support needs
        during the prenatal visit, and how might these solutions involve Carlos in the process?

    4. As the nurse, what specific actions would you take during the visit to address Carmen's anxiety, enhance her
        understanding of the upcoming labor, and ensure both she and Carlos feel adequately supported?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. How might the psychologic aspect (psyche) of the five P's influence the progression of labor? Provide an
        example and discuss nursing interventions to support the laboring person's psychologic well-being.

    2. In a scenario where a laboring person has a contracted pelvis (passage), how might this impact the powers
        (contractions) and the overall birthing process? What actions would you take as a nurse?

    3. During the late active phase of the first stage, a laboring person expresses feeling overwhelmed and anxious.
        How would you adapt your communication and support strategies to address their emotional needs?

    4. A laboring person exhibits prolonged bleeding during the third stage of labor. How would you differentiate
        between normal uterine contractions and potential postpartum hemorrhage? What immediate actions would
        you take?

    5. A laboring person in the active phase of the first stage appears fatigued and anxious. As an attending nurse,
        how would you explain the physiologic changes contributing to their fatigue, and what nursing interventions
        might address both physical and emotional aspects?

    6. A postpartum person complains of chills and diaphoresis within the first hour after birth. How would you
        explain the physiologic changes contributing to these symptoms, and what nursing interventions might
        provide comfort?

    7. A laboring person in the active phase of the first stage becomes increasingly anxious and requests pain
        medication despite initially planning for a natural birth. As a nursing student, how would you explain the
        psychologic changes contributing to this shift, and what nursing interventions might address the patient's
        evolving emotional state?

References

Aetna. (2023). Non-invasive fetal membranes rupture tests. https://www.aetna.com/cpb/medical/data/700_799/
    0757.html
690 15 · References

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017a, June). Ultrasound exams. https://www.acog.org/
    womens-health/faqs/ultrasound-exams

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017b). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 183: Postpartum
   hemorrhage. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 130(4), e168-e186. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000002351

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018). ACOG Committee Opinion No. 757: Screening for
   perinatal depression. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 132(4), e208-e212. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000002927

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020). ACOG Practice Bulletin Summary, No. 222:
   Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 135(6), 1492-1495. https://doi.org/
    10.1097/AOG.0000000000003892

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021, December). Frequently asked questions: Postpartum
   depression. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/postpartum-depression

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023). Clinical Practice Guideline No. 8: First and second
   stage labor management. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 135(1), 144-162. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000005447

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2024). Dictionary. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/
    dictionary

American Nurses Association. (2023, January 10). Americans continue to rank nurses most honest and ethical
   professionals. https://www.nursingworld.org/news/news-releases/2022-news-releases/americans-continue-to-
    rank-nurses-most-honest-and-ethical-professionals/

Bataille, A., Rousset, J., Marret, E., & Bonnet, F. (2014). Ultrasonographic evaluation of gastric content during labour
   under epidural analgesia: A prospective cohort study. British Journal of Anaesthesia, 112(4), 703-707.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/bja/aet435

Begley, C. M., Gyte, G. L., Devane, D., McGuire, W., Weeks, A., & Biesty, L. M. (2019). Active versus expectant
   management for women in the third stage of labour. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2.
    https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD007412.pub5

Bellini, E., Macchi, A., Setola, N., & Lindahl, G. (2023). Sensory design in the birth environment: Learning from
   existing case studies. Buildings, 13(3), 604. https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings13030604

Burch, K. (2022, April 27). What is dilation in pregnancy? https://www.verywellhealth.com/dilation-
    pregnancy-5114743

Cohen, W. H., & Friedman, E. A. (2023, July). The second stage of labor. American Journal of Obstetrics &
   Gynecology, 230(3, suppl), S865-S875. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2022.06.014

Dayal, S., & Hong, P. L. (2023). Premature rupture of membranes. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK532888

Dent, M., VanOtterloo, L., Brady, M. (2023). Improving nurse management of the second stage of labor. Nursing for
   Women's Health, 27(5), 344-353. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nwh.2023.03.005

Finlayson, K., Crossland, N., Bonet, M., & Downe, S. (2020). What matters to women in the postnatal period: A meta-
   synthesis of qualitative studies. PloS One, 15(4), e0231415. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0231415

Gachon, B., De Tayrac, R., Schmitz, T., Mahmood, T., Nizard, J., & Fritel, X. (2020). Should we advise women that
   pre-labor caesarean section prevents pelvic floor dysfunction? European Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology and
   Reproductive Biology, 244, 31-34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejogrb.2019.10.037

Garbelli, L., & Lira, V. (2021). Maternal position during labor: Midwives' knowledge and educational needs in
   northern Italy. European Journal of Midwifery, 5. https://doi.org/10.18332/ejm/136423

Ghi, T., & Dall'Asta, A. (2024). Sonographic evaluation of the fetal head position and attitude during labor. American

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            15 · References 691

   Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 230(3, suppl), S890-S900. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2022.06.003

Gicheru, M., Mung'ayi, V., Mir, S., & Kabugi, J. (2019). Comparison of weight-adjusted dose versus fixed dose
   ondansetron in preventing shivering following spinal anaesthesia for caesarean deliveries. African Health
   Sciences, 19(3), 2740-2751. https://doi.org/10.4314/ahs.v19i3.50

Grenvik, J. M., Coleman, L. A., & Berghella, V. (2023). Birthing balls to decrease labor pain and peanut balls to
   decrease length of labor: What is the evidence? American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 222(5),
    S1270-S1273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpg.2023.02.014

Hawkins, M., Misra, D., Zhang, L., Price, M., Dailey, R., & Giurgescu, C. (2021). Family involvement in pregnancy and
   psychological health among pregnant Black women. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 35(1), 42-48.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apnu.2020.09.012

Holmes, M. R., & Kim, J. (2019). Prenatal exposure to domestic violence: Summary of key research findings. Case
    Western University. https://case.edu/socialwork/traumacenter/sites/default/files/2019-04/PrenatalDV.pdf

Hoyert, D. L. (2023, March 16). Maternal mortality rates in the United States: 2021. National Center for Health
    Statistics. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/maternal-mortality/2021/maternal-mortality-rates-2021.htm

Huang, J., Zang, Y., Ren, L. H., Li, F. J., & Lu, H. (2019). A review and comparison of common maternal positions
   during the second-stage of labor. International Journal of Nursing Sciences, 6(4), 460-467. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.ijnss.2019.06.007

Hundley, V., Downe, S., & Buckley, S. J. (2020). The initiation of labour at term gestation: Physiology and practice
   implications. Clinical Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 67, 4-18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2020.02.006

Khaskheli, M., Baloch, S., Baloch, A. S., & Shah, S. G. S. (2021). Vaginal discharge during pregnancy and associated
   adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes. Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences, 37(5), 1302-1308.
    https://doi.org/10.12669/pjms.37.5.4187

March of Dimes. (2019). Stages of labor. https://www.marchofdimes.org/find-support/topics/birth/stages-labor

Marcos-Rodríguez, A., Leirós-Rodríguez, R., & Hernandez-Lucas, P. (2023). Efficacy of perineal massage during the
   second stage of labor for the prevention of perineal injury: A systematic review and meta-analysis. International
   Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics, 162(3), 802-810. https://doi.org/10.1002/ijgo.14723

Martin, C., Viky, M., Rokibullah, & Sofinia, H. (2022). The physiological changes in the postpartum period after
   childbirth. Asian Journal of Humanities and Sciences, 1(3). https://doi.org/10.59888/ajosh.v1i03.19

McEvoy, A., & Sabir, S. (2022). Physiology, pregnancy contractions. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK532927/

Merriam-Webster. (n.d.). Labor. In Merriam-Webster.com dictionary. https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/
    labor

Murakoshi, T. (2020). "En caul" cesarean delivery for extremely premature fetuses: Surgical technique and
   anesthetic options. Surgery Journal, 16(6), Suppl 2, S104-S109. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0040-1712927

Olarinoye A. O., Olaomo N. O., Adesina, K. T., Ezeoke, G. G., & Aboyeji, A. P. (2021). Comparative diagnosis of
   premature rupture of membrane by nitrazine test, urea, and creatinine estimation. International Journal of
   Health Science, 15(6):16-22.

Olsen, N. S., & Ramus, R. M. (2022, October 7). Abnormal labor. Medscape: Drugs & Diseases.
    https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/273053-overview

Olza, I., Uvnas-Moberg, K., Ekström-Bergström, A., Leahy-Warren, P., Karlsdottir, S. I., Nieuwenhuijze, M., Villarmea,
    S., Hadjigeorgiou, E., Kazmierczak, M., Spyridou, A., & Buckley, S. (2020). Birth as a neuro-psycho-social event:
   An integrative model of maternal experiences and their relation to neurohormonal events during childbirth. PloS
   One, 15(7), e0230992. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230992

Pattinson, R. C., Cuthbert, A., & Vannevel, V. (2017). Pelvimetry for fetal cephalic presentations at or near term for
692 15 · References

   deciding on mode of delivery. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 3. https://doi.org/10.1002/
    14651858.cd000161.pub2

Pergialiotis, V., Bellos, I., Antsaklis, A., Papapanagiotou, A., Loutradis, D., & Daskalakis, G. (2020). Maternal and
    neonatal outcomes following a prolonged second stage of labor: A meta-analysis of observational studies.
   European Journal of Obstetrics, Gynecology, & Reproductive Biology, 252, 62-69. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.ejogrb.2020.06.018

Raines, D. A., & Cooper, D. B. (2023). Braxton Hicks contractions. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK470546/

Rich, C. Y. (1976). Born with the veil: Black folklore in Louisiana. The Journal of American Folklore, 89(353),
    328-331. https://doi.org/10.2307/539446

Ronca, D. (2021). What's a birth caul, and why are people superstitious about it? https://people.howstuffworks.com/
    birth-caul-superstition

Sæther, K. M., Berg, R. C., Fagerlund, B. H., Glavin, K., & Jøranson, N. (2023). First-time parents' experiences related
   to parental self-efficacy: A scoping review. Research in Nursing and Health, 46(1), 101-112. https://doi.org/
    10.1002/nur.22285

Shanahan, M. M., Martingano, D. J., & Gray, C. J. (2023). External cephalic version. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK482475/

Sherwood, G., Barnsteiner, J. (Eds.) (2021). Quality and safety in nursing: A competency approach to improving
   outcomes (3rd ed.). Wiley-Blackwell.

Shuman, C. J., Peahl, A. F., Pareddy, N., Morgan, M. E., Chiangong, J., Veliz, P. T., & Dalton, V. K. (2022). Postpartum
   depression and associated risk factors during the COVID-19 pandemic. BMC Research Notes, 15(102).
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s13104-022-05991-8

Singata, M., Tranmer. J., & Gyte, G. L. (2013). Restricting oral fluid and food intake during labour. Cochrane Database
   of Systematic Reviews, 8, CD003930. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD003930.pub3

Smith, J. R. (2020, November 25). Management of the third stage of labor. Medscape: Drugs & Diseases.
    https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/275304-overview

Sobczak, A., Taylor, L., Solomon, S., Ho, J., Kemper, S., Phillips, B., Jacobson, K., Castellano, C., Ring, A., Castellano,
   B., & Jacobs, R. J. (2023). The effect of doulas on maternal and birth outcomes: A scoping review. Cureus, 15(5),
    e39451. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.39451

Thumm, B., Walsh, G., & Heyborne, K. (2020). Diagnosis of rupture of membranes: AmniSure, clinical assessment,
   and the Food and Drug Administration warning. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology MFM, 2(4),
    100200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajogmf.2020.100200

Tilden, E. L., Snowden, J. M., Bovbjerg, M. L., Cheyney, M., Lapidus, J., Wiedrick, J., & Caughey, A. B. (2022). The
    duration of spontaneous active and pushing phases of labour among 75,243 US women when intervention is
   minimal: A prospective, observational cohort study. EClinical Medicine, 22(48), 101447. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.eclinm.2022.101447

Udompornthanakij, P., Kongsomboon, K., & Hanprasertpong, T. (2020). Accuracy and factors influencing Leopold's
   manoeuvres in determining vertex presentation during late third trimester of pregnancy. Journal of Obstetrics &
   Gynaecology, 40(5):639-643. https://doi.org/10.1080/01443615.2019.1645102

Vanderlaan, J., & Givens, S. (n.d.). Evidence-based childbirth education: An essential step in shared decision-making
   for maternity care. Lamaze International. https://www.lamaze.org/Portals/0/
    LI_495916-20_SharedDecision_r3.pdf

VanSickle, C., Liese, K. L., & Rutherford, J. N. (2022). Textbook typologies: Challenging the myth of the perfect
   obstetric pelvis. The Anatomical Record, 305(4), 952-967. https://doi.org/10.1002/ar.24880

Vittner, D., McGrath, J., Robinson, J., Lawhon, G., Cusson, R., Eisenfeld, L., Walsh, S., Young, E., & Cong, X. (2018).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            15 · References 693

   Increase in oxytocin from skin-to-skin contact enhances development of parent-infant relationship. Biological
   Research for Nursing, 20(1), 54-62. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/1099800417735633
Weiss, R. E. (2022). What is the mucus plug? https://www.parents.com/mucus-plug-8619269
World Health Organization. (2024, April 26). Maternal mortality. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
    maternal-mortality
Young, J. (1960). John Braxton Hicks (1823-1897). Medical History, 4(2), 153-162. https://doi.org/10.1017/
    S0025727300025230
694 15 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 16

Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction
Monitoring

FIGURE 16.1 Monitoring the Fetus and Uterine Contractions External transducers evaluate the fetal heart rate and uterine contractions.
(credit: "A glimpse into Labor and Delivery" by Airman 1st Class Kaylee Dubois, U.S. Air Force/Joint Base Langley-Eustis, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
16.1 Basic Terms of Fetal Heart Rate and Contraction Patterns
16.2 External and Internal Monitoring
16.3 Physiological Influences on Fetal Heart Rate Patterns
16.4 Nursing Interventions Based on Fetal Heart Rate and Uterine Contraction Patterns
16.5 Intrauterine Resuscitation

INTRODUCTION During labor, the pregnant person and fetus are monitored for safety and progression of labor.
Fetal assessment involves evaluating the fetal heart rate in response to uterine contractions. Fetal assessment can
be determined by either continuous electronic fetal monitoring or intermittent fetal monitoring. The nurse initiates
the type of fetal monitoring using hospital protocols or orders written by health-care providers and the preferences
of the laboring person.
This chapter covers monitoring of FHR and UC patterns and their relationship to fetal well-being. Nurses working on
perinatal units are trained to read fetal monitor tracings and can be certified in fetal monitoring by the National
Certification Corporation (2023). This chapter describes the physiologic influences on FHR and UC patterns and how
the nurse can recognize the need for intervention. Intrauterine resuscitation is used when the FHR shows signs of
decreased oxygenation to the fetus. The labor and delivery nurse is proficient in recognizing the need for
intrauterine interventions.
696  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     16.1 Basic Terms of Fetal Heart Rate and Contraction Patterns

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the basic terminology used to describe the FHR baseline
         · Explain the basic terminology used to describe FHR baseline variability
         · Explain the basic terminology used to describe periodic changes in the FHR
         · Explain the basic terminology used to interpret contraction patterns

     The fetal heart rate (FHR) is the heart rate and rhythm of the fetus. A uterine contraction (UC) is the tightening and
     shortening of the uterine muscles. Both can be monitored during labor and birth. When the fetal monitor is used for
     continuous monitoring, it is important for the labor and delivery nurse to be aware of fetal heart rate baseline,
     variability, accelerations, and decelerations. Monitoring is used both antenatally and during the process of labor and
     birth. Nurses can use identifiable patterns of the FHR as assessment cues of fetal well-being and to determine
     appropriate interventions to ensure a positive outcome.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     AWHONN offers several levels of fetal monitoring courses (https://openstax.org/r/77fetalmonitor), including
     introduction, intermediate, advanced instructor workshops. These courses also qualify as continuing education
     hours.

     Fetal Heart Rate Baseline

     The FHR baseline is the average beats per minute in a 10-minute segment, excluding periodic changes or marked
     variability. The baseline is documented in increments of 5 beats per minute (bpm). The normal FHR baseline ranges
     from 110 to 160 bpm. Figure 16.2 illustrates a normal FHR baseline. According to the American College of
     Obstetricians and Gynecologists ([ACOG], 2009), the FHR baseline is controlled by the sympathetic and
     parasympathetic nervous systems. The sympathetic nervous system increases the FHR, while the parasympathetic
     nervous system decreases the FHR. Fetal hypoxia and hypercapnia can activate chemoreceptors that also influence
     the FHR.

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.1 · Basic Terms of Fetal Heart Rate and Contraction Patterns                                                                      697

FIGURE 16.2 Fetal Heart Rate Baseline The fetal heart rate baseline for this monitor strip is 140 bpm. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

        LINK TO LEARNING

This site provides an in-depth explanation of basic fetal heart rate patterns (https://openstax.org/r/77fetalheartrt) to
help the nurse understand baseline and common findings.

Tachycardia
An FHR baseline greater than 160 bpm for 10 minutes is called tachycardia. Figure 16.3 shows a monitor tracing
that indicates FHR tachycardia. Tachycardia can be caused by multiple factors. A common cause of FHR tachycardia
is the presence of fever in the pregnant person. Tachycardia should not be considered a sign of fetal distress in the
absence of FHR decelerations. Other risk factors for tachycardia are listed in Table 16.1. Many of these can be
addressed, and the FHR will return to normal.
698  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     FIGURE 16.3 Tachycardia This monitor tracing indicates tachycardia, which is defined as the sustained elevation of fetal heart rate
     baseline above 160 bpm for 10 minutes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Patient                                                   Risk Factors

     Pregnant person                  · infection
                                      · anxiety
                                      · dehydration
                                      · medication administration: atropine, terbutaline
                                      · hyperthyroidism
                                      · nicotine

     Fetus                            · fetal compromise/hypoxia
                                      · anemia
                                      · infection
                                      · prematurity
                                      · arrhythmia

                                     TABLE 16.1 Risk Factors for Fetal Heart Rate: Tachycardia

     Bradycardia
     Fetal bradycardia is defined as an FHR baseline less than 110 beats for 10 minutes. Figure 16.4 shows a monitor
     tracing that indicates FHR bradycardia. Bradycardia can be caused by multiple factors. The nurse must determine if
     the decrease in FHR is a benign episode of bradycardia or a pathologic prolonged deceleration (possibly lasting
     several minutes) that may need further intervention. Initial nursing actions for fetal bradycardia include
     repositioning the laboring person, administering intravenous (IV) fluid bolus, then notifying the health-care provider.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        16.1 · Basic Terms of Fetal Heart Rate and Contraction Patterns                699

See Table 16.2 for risk factors for fetal bradycardia.

FIGURE 16.4 Bradycardia This monitor tracing indicates bradycardia because the FHR is less than 110 bpm. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Patient                                                   Risk Factors

Pregnant person  · anesthesia
                 · hypotension
                 · monitoring the pregnant person's pulse instead of the fetus's
                 · medications administered: magnesium sulfate, propranolol (Inderal)
                 · hypoglycemia
                 · hypothermia
                 · uterine rupture
                 · placental abruption
                 · hypothyroidism

Fetus            · head compression from occiput posterior or transverse position
                 · congenital heart block
                 · hypoxia
                 · prolonged umbilical cord compression

TABLE 16.2 Risk Factors for Fetal Heart Rate Bradycardia
700  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     Terbutaline

     The nurse caring for laboring persons at times administers terbutaline to relax the uterus, as in cases of fetal
     bradycardia related to tachysystole. Terbutaline can be used in antepartum and intrapartum situations. Tachycardia
     is a common side effect, and the nurse will assess the pulse prior to administration. If the pulse is greater than 120
     bpm, terbutaline is not administered. The FHR will also increase while terbutaline is being used.

         · Generic Name: terbutaline
         · Trade Name: none
         · Class: tocolytic
         · Mechanism of Action: selectively stimulates beta-2 adrenergic receptors, relaxing smooth muscle
         · Indications: bronchospasm, tocolysis (preterm labor, tachysystole, prolonged deceleration)
         · Contraindications: hypersensitivity to drug, ischemic heart disease, hypertension, arrhythmia, diabetes

             mellitus, seizure disorder, hyperthyroidism,
         · Route: subcutaneous injection
         · Dose: 0.25 mg every 20 to 30 minutes, with maximum of 1 mg per 4 hours
         · Black Box Warning: Injectable terbutaline is not approved for prolonged tocolysis greater than 48 to 72

             hours. Serious adverse effects include increased heart rate, transient hyperglycemia, hypokalemia, cardiac
             arrythmias, pulmonary edema, myocardial infarction, and death reported after use in pregnant persons;
             increased fetal heart rate and neonatal hypoglycemia may also occur.
         · Education: Educate the pregnant person on common side effects of anxiety, restlessness, and increased
             pulse. Educate the person to call for chest pain, difficulty in breathing, and fast, pounding, irregular heartbeat.

     (Vallerand & Sanoski, 2022)

     Fetal Heart Rate Variability

     FHR variability is the beat-to-beat fluctuations in the FHR baseline. These fluctuations are caused by the "push and
     pull" of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems (ACOG, 2009). These fluctuations reflect an intact
     central nervous system (CNS) with normal cardiac responses. The variability is classified as absent, minimal,
     moderate, or marked. When the fetus is well oxygenated and has a normal acid-base balance, the FHR variability is
     typically moderate. When the fetus is hypoxic, the variability is minimal, absent, or marked.

     Moderate FHR Variability
     Fluctuations between 6 and 25 bpm are considered moderate FHR variability. This is considered normal FHR
     variability. In most cases, moderate FHR variability is associated with a normal umbilical cord pH. Figure 16.5 shows
     a monitor tracing that indicates moderate FHR variability.

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.1 · Basic Terms of Fetal Heart Rate and Contraction Patterns                                                                    701

FIGURE 16.5 Fetal Monitor Tracing: Moderate FHR Variability This fetal monitor tracing shows moderate variability of 6 to 25 bpm.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Minimal FHR Variability
FHR fluctuations of 5 bpm or fewer are considered minimal FHR variability. Minimal variability is associated with
fetal acidemia but cannot be the only measure of fetal well-being. Minimal variability can be caused by many
factors, such as fetal sleep cycles, fetal anomalies of the CNS, and medications administered to the pregnant
patient. Preterm gestation and magnesium sulfate treatment are associated with minimal FHR variability. Figure
16.6 shows a monitor tracing that indicates minimal FHR variability.
702  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     FIGURE 16.6 FHR Tracing Indicating Minimal Variability This monitor tracing shows minimal FHR variability with fewer than 5 bpm.
     (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Absent FHR Variability
     A lack of FHR baseline fluctuation is considered absent FHR variability. Absent variability is most often a sign of a
     severely compromised fetus. Figure 16.7 illustrates absent FHR variability. Fetal compromise can be the result of
     poor oxygenation leading to metabolic acidosis. Fetal acidemia depresses the CNS, causing a loss of FHR variability.
     Acidemia of the pregnant person can also cause absent FHR variability. Changes in the FHR variability from
     moderate to minimal or to absent may indicate fetal stress and require further investigation by the nurse and
     notification of the health-care provider.

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.1 · Basic Terms of Fetal Heart Rate and Contraction Patterns                                                                     703

FIGURE 16.7 Monitor Tracing That Indicates Absent FHR Variability This monitor tracing shows absent FHR variability, essentially a
straight line. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Marked FHR Variability
A FHR baseline fluctuation greater than 25 bpm is considered marked FHR variability. Because of the extreme
fluctuations, the FHR baseline is undeterminable. Marked FHR variability suggests hypoxia and is usually seen
during the second stage of labor. Marked variability requires further assessment to determine the cause and
notification of the health-care provider. Figure 16.8 shows a monitor tracing that indicates marked variability.
704  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     FIGURE 16.8 Marked FHR Variability This monitor tracing shows marked FHR variability with greater than 25 bpm. (attribution: Copyright
     Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Sinusoidal
     The sinusoidal FHR pattern appears wave-like with regular frequency (3 to 5 per minute) and amplitude. The wave
     pattern is not variability; variability is actually absent. The FHR is usually within the normal range, but the
     appearance of the uniform wave is apparent. Sinusoidal pattern is linked with fetal compromise, such as fetal
     anemia due to loss of blood, and medications administered to the pregnant person. See Figure 16.9 for an example
     of a sinusoidal pattern.

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.1 · Basic Terms of Fetal Heart Rate and Contraction Patterns                                                                  705

FIGURE 16.9 Sinusoidal FHR Pattern The wave-like pattern of the FHR suggests a sinusoidal pattern. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Periodic Changes in the Fetal Heart Rate

Both accelerations and decelerations of the FHR in relation to the FHR baseline are considered periodic changes in
the FHR. Periodic changes are described as abrupt or gradual. Accelerations are usually associated with fetal
movement, are not related to uterine contraction activity, and occur independently. Decelerations are classified as
early, late, variable, and prolonged. Decelerations can be associated with fetal hypoxia and require nursing
interventions.

Accelerations
Abrupt increases in the FHR above the baseline with an onset-to-peak of less than 30 seconds are called
accelerations. They are identified by an FHR peak of at least 15 bpm above the baseline with a duration of at least
15 seconds but less than 2 minutes. Before 32 weeks, accelerations of the FHR are expected to peak at 10 bpm
above the baseline with a duration of at least 10 seconds but less than 2 minutes. Figure 16.10 illustrates a monitor
tracing with FHR accelerations. Accelerations occur with fetal movement, uterine contractions, fetal scalp
stimulation, and acoustic stimulation. Accelerations are a reassuring indication of fetal well-being.
706  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     FIGURE 16.10 Monitor Tracing Showing Accelerations of the FHR This monitor tracing demonstrates FHR accelerations from 120 bpm
     to 160 bpm lasting 30 to 60 seconds. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Early Decelerations
     Gradual FHR declines that then return to baseline, mirroring the uterine contraction, are called early decelerations.
     Fetal head compression activates the vagal nerve, causing a deceleration in the FHR. The degree of deceleration is
     proportional to the strength of the uterine contraction. Decelerations are commonly seen during active labor as the
     fetal head descends into the pelvis. Early decelerations are considered normal. Figure 16.11 illustrates early FHR
     decelerations.

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.1 · Basic Terms of Fetal Heart Rate and Contraction Patterns                                                                707

FIGURE 16.11 Monitor Tracing Showing Early Decelerations of the FHR These FHR decelerations are early because they mirror the
uterine contraction. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Late Decelerations
Decelerations in the FHR below the baseline that start during a contraction and continue after completion of the
contraction are called late decelerations. Figure 16.12 illustrates late FHR decelerations. Late decelerations are
nonreassuring and almost always indicate fetal hypoxia. They are associated with uteroplacental insufficiency, a
lack of oxygenated blood coming from the uterus to the placenta to the fetus. During a contraction, the decrease in
oxygen to the fetus causes a deceleration that begins late in the contraction. The nadir, or lowest point, of the
deceleration is after the peak of the contraction. Another common cause of late decelerations is tachysystole
(contractions occurring too frequently or lasting longer than 2 minutes), often seen with the use of oxytocin
(Pitocin). Spinal or epidural anesthesia causes hypotension leading to hypoperfusion to the placenta, producing late
decelerations. Other causes of late decelerations are hypertension, postmature placenta, placental abruption, and
anemia. Late decelerations, like early decelerations, are often repetitive, forming a pattern.
708  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     FIGURE 16.12 Monitor Tracing Showing Late Decelerations of the FHR The FHR decreases during the contraction and does not return
     to baseline until after the contraction ends. These are defined as late decelerations. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
     CC BY 4.0 license)

     Variable Decelerations
     Abrupt decelerations of the FHR of at least 15 bpm below the baseline that last at least 15 to 30 seconds are called
     variable decelerations. They do not typically appear in a pattern and vary in onset, depth, and duration. Variable
     decelerations are caused by compression of the umbilical cord. Cord compression can be caused by a fetal body
     part squeezing the cord against the wall of the uterus during a uterine contraction or movement related to the
     pregnant person or fetus. Because of this, the nurse will notice that variable decelerations may or may not occur in
     conjunction with uterine contractions. Variable decelerations may lead to fetal hypoxia, especially when they are
     repetitive for a prolonged period. Figure 16.13 shows a monitor tracing with an example of variable decelerations.

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.1 · Basic Terms of Fetal Heart Rate and Contraction Patterns                                                                       709

FIGURE 16.13 Variable FHR Decelerations Variable decelerations appear with the contractions making a "V" or "W" shape. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Prolonged Decelerations
Isolated, sporadic decelerations of at least 15 bpm from the FHR baseline that last 2 to 10 minutes from onset to
return to baseline are called prolonged decelerations. The causes of prolonged decelerations are uterine
hyperactivity, cord compression, hypotension, placental abruption, seizure, or impending birth. These decelerations
are concerning due to the risk for fetal hypoxia. The extent of hypoxia relates to the depth and duration of the
deceleration; the deeper and longer the deceleration, the greater the risk of fetal hypoxia. After the prolonged
deceleration returns to baseline, the FHR tracing may show decreased variability and tachycardia. These are signs of
a significant hypoxic event. Figure 16.14 shows a monitor tracing with an example of a prolonged deceleration.
710  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     FIGURE 16.14 Prolonged FHR deceleration This monitor tracing shows tachysystole that leads to a prolonged deceleration. (attribution:
     Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Basic Terminology Used to Interpret Contraction Patterns

     Uterine contractions are monitored for frequency, intensity, and duration. As discussed in Chapter 15 Process of
     Labor and Birth, the frequency is how many minutes from the start of one contraction to the start of the next
     contraction. Intensity is the strength of the contraction. Duration is the number of seconds from the start to the end
     of a contraction.
     As shown in Figure 16.15, the monitor graph is divided by darker or more prominent vertical lines to represent 1
     minute of time and less prominent vertical lines showing 10-second intervals. The upper set of horizontal lines
     represents the fetal heart rate in beats per minute (bpm), usually in intervals of 10 bpm. The lower set of horizontal
     lines represents the intensity of the contractions in millimeters (mm) of mercury (Hg), in intervals of 5 to 10 mm Hg.

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.2 · External and Internal Monitoring                                                                                              711

FIGURE 16.15 Fetal Heart Rate and Contraction Monitor Graph This monitor tracing shows the fetal heart rate baseline of 130. The
contraction frequency is 2 to 3 minutes. The contraction duration is 45 to 70 seconds. The contraction intensity is 50 to 70 mm Hg.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

        LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

Monitoring a Nonviable Fetus

Trisomy 18 is a genetic disorder caused by having three copies of chromosome 18 instead of two. This disorder, also
known as Edwards syndrome, occurs once in every 3,315 births (Mai et al., 2019).

Fetuses with trisomy 18 are usually growth restricted and small for gestational age. Many have heart defects and
other organ abnormalities. Most fetuses with trisomy 18 die prior to birth. If born alive, most neonates with this
disorder die within the first month of life (Trisomy 18 Foundation, 2023).

Discussion Questions

In view of this prognosis,

    · what is the best way to monitor the FHR during labor?
    · what should the pregnant person know to make an informed decision regarding monitoring?
    · how can the nurse provide support to the family making these decisions?

16.2 External and Internal Monitoring

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Explain how to perform intermittent auscultation of the fetal heart rate and manual palpation of uterine
        contractions, as well as state the advantages and disadvantages of intermittent auscultation

    · Explain the placement, advantages and disadvantages, and indications for continuous external electronic
        fetal heart rate and uterine contraction monitoring

    · Interpret the electronic fetal heart rate and uterine contraction monitor graph
    · Document the assessment data of the electronic fetal heart rate and uterine contraction monitor graph

Monitoring the pregnant person and the fetus and analyzing the FHR and contraction patterns are essential parts of
the nurse's role during the antepartum period and the labor and birth process, allowing the health-care team to
anticipate and prevent complications. The nurse educates the pregnant person regarding what type of monitoring is
recommended at certain stages of pregnancy and labor. Providing a choice of monitor type when applicable
encourages shared decision making during this important time for the person and the family.
712  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     Three methods of monitoring the fetal heart rate and uterine contractions can be used when the nurse is caring for
     the antepartum or intrapartum pregnant person. The first is intermittent auscultation; the other two methods--one
     performed by attaching external electronic monitors and the other by inserting internal electronic monitors--provide
     the health-care team with continuous feedback on the fetal heart rate and uterine contractions.

     Intermittent Auscultation

     The technique of assessing fetal well-being by listening to and counting the fetal heart rate for a specified amount of
     time and at specified intervals, depending upon the stage of labor, is called intermittent auscultation (IA). The
     nurse palpates the uterus to evaluate the contractions' duration (from the beginning to the end of the contraction),
     intensity, and frequency (from the beginning of one contraction to the beginning of the next contraction). The nurse
     listens before, during, and after the contraction to evaluate for any FHR changes. The nurse may perform IA with
     either a fetoscope or a Doppler monitor. The fetoscope is similar to a stethoscope but also uses bone conduction to
     allow for better detection of the FHR. The fetoscope can be used after 20 weeks' gestation; prior to that time, the
     FHR is not detectable by fetoscope. A Doppler monitor is a handheld device that uses ultrasonic waves to detect the
     FHR. Dopplers are used in antepartum visits as well as during labor. When auscultating the FHR, it is important to
     assess the maternal heart rate at the same time to ensure the Doppler is providing fetal data.

     Determining Optimal Placement of the Auscultation Device Using Leopold's Maneuvers
     Determining the position of the fetus is important when placing the ultrasound transducer or fetoscope on the
     abdomen of the laboring person. Leopold's maneuvers are performed to assist in identifying the fetal position. The
     nurse performs the maneuvers, locates the fetal back, and then places the transducer on the laboring person's
     abdomen directly over the fetal back where the fetal heart is the loudest. Figure 16.16 illustrates where to hear the
     FHR most clearly when the fetus is vertex or breech. Figure 16.17 illustrates Leopold's maneuvers to determine the
     fetal presentation and position.

     FIGURE 16.16 Listening to the FHR The FHR is heard loudest over the fetal back. (a) If the nurse hears the FHR loudest in the lower
     abdomen, the fetus is most likely vertex. (b) If the FHR is the loudest above the umbilicus, the fetus is most likely breech. (attribution:
     Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.2 · External and Internal Monitoring                                                                                                           713

FIGURE 16.17 Leopold Maneuvers (1) Facing the patient, both hands palpate the top of the abdomen to determine the shape, mobility,
and size of the fetal part. (2) After determining what is in the fundus, the hands slide down to the sides of the uterus and determine the fetal
lie. (3) To determine the presenting part of the fetus in the pelvic inlet, the hand is held in a "C," and the thumb and fingers grasp the fetal
part in the low abdomen above the pubic bone. (4) To determine the fetal attitude and degree of descent into the pelvis, while the nurse is
turned to face the laboring person's feet, both hands palpate down the sides of the uterus to the pubic bone and presenting part. (credit:
"Handgriffe" by Christian Gerhard Leopold/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

The nurse explains to the patient that these maneuvers require touching of the abdomen to discover how the fetus
is lying inside the uterus. The nurse will lower the head of the bed with the patient on their back and begin the
assessment.

    · The first maneuver is done facing the patient. Both hands palpate the top of the abdomen to determine the
        shape, mobility, and size of the fetal part. A hard, round fetal part is the head and would diagnose the fetal
        position as noncephalic. A larger, softer fetal part is the buttock or back of the fetus.

    · The second maneuver is used to determine the placement of the fetal back. After determining what is in the
        fundus, the hands slide down to the sides of the uterus and determine the fetal lie. If the nurse determines the
        fetal lie is longitudinal (or oblique), using the palms, the right hand holds the uterus while the left palpates for
        a smooth long back or small, "bumpy" extremities. The opposite side is then palpated. If the nurse
        determines the fetal lie is transverse, the nurse will palpate the fetal head on one side and lower extremities
        on the opposite side. The fetal back will face either the fundus or the cervix.

    · The third maneuver determines the presenting part in the pelvic inlet. Holding the hand in a "C," the thumb
        and fingers grasp the fetal part in the low abdomen above the pubic bone. Again, if the part is hard and round,
        it is the fetal head. The nurse can attempt to move the head back and forth to determine if the head is
        engaged in the pelvis.

    · The fourth and last maneuver is used to determine the fetal descent into the pelvis. Turning to face the
        laboring person's feet, both hands palpate down the sides of the uterus to the pubic bone and presenting part.
        The brow cannot be palpated if the fetal head is well flexed and engaged.

After performing the Leopold maneuvers and determining the placement of the fetal presentation and back, the
nurse places the ultrasound transducer or Doppler to assess FHR.

Determining Appropriate Intervals for Intermittent Auscultation
Timing of IA is determined by the stage of labor, facility protocols, and health-care provider's orders. AWHONN
(2018) has published recommended intervals for IA based on stages of labor. Table 16.3 summarizes these
714  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     guidelines for IA. The FHR is auscultated before, during, and after a contraction.

     Latent Phase Labor   Active Phase Labor                     Second Stage Labor Passive  Second Stage Active
     (4-5 cm)             (6 cm)                                 Descent                     Pushing

     Every 15-30 minutes  Every 15-30 minutes Every 15 minutes                               Every 5-15 minutes

     TABLE 16.3 AWHONN Guidelines for Intermittent Auscultation

     With intermittent auscultation, the nurse will also monitor uterine contractions by palpation. The nurse's hand is
     placed at the top of the fundus prior to a contraction to determine baseline uterine tone. As the uterus contracts, the
     nurse feels a hardening of the uterus. The strength of the contraction is based on the laboring person's description
     of the contraction and the nurse's palpation. A mild contraction is similar to pressing on one's cheek; a moderate
     contraction is similar to pressing on the tip of the nose; and a strong contraction is similar to pressing on the
     forehead. The nurse also notes the frequency and duration of the contraction during palpation.

     Advantages and Disadvantages of Intermittent Auscultation
     One advantage of IA is the freedom of movement it allows the laboring person. Movement in labor aids the fetus in
     its descent into the pelvis and in pain control for the laboring person. Because IA does not require attached
     monitors, the laboring person can walk, shower, sit on a birthing ball, or take a bath. The lack of monitors strapped
     onto the abdomen helps the laboring person rest easier between contractions.

     One of the disadvantages of IA is the requirement for one-to-one nurse-laboring person staffing. This can be a
     challenge when the labor and delivery unit is busy and staffing is not available for one-to-one care. Another
     disadvantage is the lack of monitor tracings. Fetal monitor strips provide a visual history of the uterine contractions
     and FHR. These strips are used in communication with other health-care providers and provide a permanent record
     of labor.

     Continuous External Monitoring of FHR and Contractions

     The most common method of monitoring the fetal heart rate and contraction pattern is through continuous external
     monitoring. Doing so requires the use of two monitoring devices: an ultrasound device to evaluate the fetal heart
     rate, and a tocodynamometer (toco) to detect the frequency of uterine contractions. The nurse applies these
     external monitors to the patient's abdomen; the devices are held in place with belts or adhesives. Figure 16.18
     shows the continuous fetal monitor and the wireless fetal monitoring system. Wireless monitors allow patients to
     ambulate in labor. Other monitors are waterproof and allow for continuous monitoring during hydrotherapy and
     water birth.

     FIGURE 16.18 Continuous and Wireless Fetal Monitoring Systems (a) Continuous external monitoring uses an ultrasound device to
     evaluate the fetal heart rate and a tocodynamometer to detect the frequency of uterine contractions. (b) A wireless fetal monitoring system
     allows freedom of movement for the laboring person. The patch with the arrow monitors the contraction frequency and length. The
     remaining patches monitor the fetal heart rate. The blue box is the wireless connection. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
     under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.2 · External and Internal Monitoring                                                                                           715

Both transducers are connected to the monitor, and their signals are traced onto graph paper. The nurse explains to
the patient that these monitors are external and can lose the signal with movement of the laboring person or fetus.
The nurse explains that the laboring person should not be alarmed if they no longer see the signal on the monitor.
They are instructed to call the nurse in these instances so that the monitor can be adjusted.

Through continuous external monitoring, fetal heart rate baseline and variability can be determined, as can periodic
fetal heart rate changes. Situations requiring continuous fetal monitoring include meconium-stained fluid, multiple
gestation, preeclampsia, epidural or spinal anesthesia, and dysfunctional labor (Simkin et al., 2017).

Application of the External Monitors
Uterine and FHR monitoring can be achieved externally and internally. After performing Leopold's maneuvers, the
nurse will place the external transducer and tocodynamometer on the person's abdomen. The external monitors
provide an FHR tracing.

Applying the Ultrasound Transducer
The ultrasound transducer is placed over the fetal back closest to the fetal head, where the FHR is usually the
loudest. The nurse identifies this area using Leopold's maneuvers as previously described. The transducer is not
placed over the fetal chest because movement of the extremities interferes with continuous detection of the FHR.
Ultrasound gel is placed on the transducer to allow a medium for ultrasound waves to travel into and out of the
uterus. The transducer is then secured by a belt.

Placement of Uterine Tocodynamometer
The toco transducer senses change in the uterine muscle during a contraction. The toco transducer is placed on the
abdomen where the fundus is firmest, most often over the fetal buttocks in a cephalic presentation. While
performing Leopold's maneuvers, the nurse can assess for the optimal placement of the toco. Having determined
the optimal location, the nurse secures the toco transducer to the laboring person by a belt (Figure 16.19).

FIGURE 16.19 Placement of External Fetal Monitors The tocodynamometer is placed on the upper uterus (fundus), and the ultrasound
transducer is placed over the fetal back. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Advantages and Disadvantages of External Monitoring
The advantages of external fetal monitoring are its ease of use, the ability of the devices to record and digitally store
the monitor results, and the ability for more advanced fetal assessment. This method also does not require one-on-
one nurse staffing because the monitors are electronically connected to central monitors, which allow the nurse to
read the fetal monitor tracing from any labor room or the nurses' station and to monitor more than one patient
716  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     simultaneously. Central monitoring also allows the nursing staff and health-care providers to assess the fetal
     monitor tracing from all rooms on the unit, from an office, and from home. Additionally, external monitors can be
     used regardless of the status of the amniotic membrane or the extent of cervical dilation.

     A disadvantage of continuous external monitoring is that the required positioning of the monitor can result in the
     signal being lost when the person changes positions or gets out of bed. If wireless monitoring is not available,
     continuous monitoring can limit the pregnant person's freedom to walk, shower, or bathe. Another disadvantage is
     that the tocodynamometer can determine only the frequency and duration of the contractions, but not the strength
     of the contractions, which will need to be palpated. As discussed previously, the nurse must palpate the uterus to
     evaluate the uterine contraction.

     Continuous Internal Monitoring

     Internal fetal monitors consist of the fetal scalp electrode (FSE) that affixes to the scalp of the fetus and provides
     close monitoring of the fetal heart rate and an intrauterine pressure catheter (IUPC) that lie inside the uterus and
     measure the frequency, duration, and strength of the uterine contractions and the resting tone of the uterus. The
     amniotic sac must be ruptured prior to placement of internal monitors. Nurses and health-care providers use
     internal monitors in situations that require more in-depth fetal surveillance, such as nonreassuring fetal heart rates,
     low amniotic fluid, and difficulty in maintaining a continuous FHR tracing, and during the use of uterotonics for labor
     induction or augmentation.

     Application of Internal Monitors
     In continuous internal monitoring, an FSE is attached to the fetal scalp, avoiding the fontanelles, and the IUPC is
     placed into the uterus between the fetus and uterine wall. Figure 16.20 illustrates the internal fetal monitoring
     system.

     FIGURE 16.20 Internal Fetal Monitor System Components of internal monitoring include the intrauterine pressure catheter used to record
     uterine contractions in mm Hg and the fetal scalp electrode used to record FHR. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
     BY 4.0 license)

     Internal monitors are placed by trained health-care providers and labor and birth nurses. A cervical exam is
     performed for assessment of dilation and membrane status. The cervix must be dilated, and the amniotic
     membrane must be ruptured to pass the monitors into the uterus. If the nurse assesses a need for internal
     monitoring, the nurse will notify the health-care provider. If the amniotic sac is intact, the health-care provider must

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.2 · External and Internal Monitoring                                                                                          717

determine the need for the monitors and weigh the pros and cons of rupturing the amniotic membrane. When
appropriate, the health-care provider breaks the bag of amniotic fluid using an amniotomy hook, which is a plastic
wand with a small hook that snags the membranes. Figure 16.21 illustrates use of the amniotomy hook.

FIGURE 16.21 Amniotomy Hook and Fetal Amniotic Sac The health-care provider uses the amniotomy hook to artificially rupture the
membranes in front of the fetal head. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Fetal Scalp Electrode
To place the fetal scalp electrode (FSE), the fetal head must be low enough to be palpated during the vaginal exam,
and the cervix must be open enough to insert the FSE. The head is assessed for suture lines and fontanelles, as seen
in Figure 16.22. Avoiding the fontanelles, the nurse or the health-care provider places the scalp electrode firmly
against the fetal scalp and turns it clockwise to adhere the electrode. The nurse then connects the scalp electrode
transducer to the monitor, and the FHR electrocardiogram is detected and documented in the monitor tracing.
718  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     FIGURE 16.22 Fetal Scalp Electrode Placement The fetal scalp is assessed for fontanelles and sutures. The health-care provider places
     the electrode on the scalp over the bone. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Intrauterine Pressure Catheter
     The IUPC, seen in Figure 16.23, is inserted using a firm plastic introducer containing the pressure catheter. The
     catheter has markers to guide the depth of placement to avoid uterine perforation. To avoid the IUPC being inserted
     through the placenta, the introducer must be retracted immediately if frank red blood is noted. The pressure
     catheter transducer is attached to the monitor and traces, in exact millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), the strength of
     the contractions and the uterine resting tone.

     FIGURE 16.23 Intrauterine Pressure Catheter The IUPC lies between the uterus and the fetus. This internal monitor provides the strength
     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             16.2 · External and Internal Monitoring      719

of the contractions in mm Hg. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Advantages and Disadvantages of Internal Monitoring
Internal monitors are an advantage when conditions are detected that require comprehensive and continuous
evaluation of fetal well-being and uterine contractions. The fetal scalp electrode is the most precise way to monitor
the fetal heart rate because it receives signals directly from the fetus and transmits them to the monitor tracing. In
situations of FHR decelerations, the internal monitor can provide exact timing of the FHR deceleration in relation to
the strength of contraction. The scalp electrode also allows the nurse to evaluate variability more precisely. This
information is helpful in determining nursing interventions to resolve FHR decelerations. This monitor is also helpful
when the FHR is difficult to detect with external monitors. In the situation where labor is not progressing as
predicted, the IUPC can detect the strength of contractions. This information can assist the nurse in determining
how to manage the oxytocin during labor induction or augmentation. Another advantage is that the health-care
provider may use the FSE to rupture the membranes.

The disadvantages of internal monitors are increased risk of infection due to the rupture of membranes and the
break in skin integrity necessary to place the fetal scalp electrode. Additionally, internal monitoring introduces the
risk of injury to the fetus from the scalp electrode and the IUPC. During placement of the IUPC, there is a risk of
puncturing the uterus and placenta, which is why the IUPC is inserted by the health-care provider or by registered
nurses with advanced training in some labor and birth units.

Efficacy and Outcomes Data: Use of Continuous Electronic Fetal Monitoring

Continuous electronic fetal monitoring was developed in the 1970s. The original purpose of continuous electronic
fetal monitoring was to decrease complications such as newborn seizures, cerebral palsy, and intrapartum fetal
demise. According to the Cochrane Library (Alfirevic et al., 2017), continuous FHR monitoring with fetal scalp
electrode, when compared to IA, showed no significant improvement in overall rate of fetal deaths but did
significantly reduce the rate of neonatal seizures. The research found that intermittent versus continuous fetal scalp
electrode monitoring did not increase instrumental or cesarean births, but no difference was seen in the incidence
of cerebral palsy. Table 16.4 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of the different fetal monitoring types.

Monitor Type       Advantages                                                Disadvantages

Intermittent       Freedom of mobility                                       One-to-one nursing-pregnant person
auscultation (IA)  Ability to shower or bathe                                care
                   Not dependent upon amniotic membrane                      Lack of permanent record of FHR and UC
                   status

Continuous         Ease of use                                               Signal can be lost with movement of the
external           Ability to record and store monitor results               fetus or person
                   Allows the electronic fetal monitoring (EFM) to           Limits freedom of movement or
                   be read on any computer                                   hydrotherapy
                   Not dependent upon amniotic membrane                      Toco does not provide strength of UC
                   status

Continuous         More precise measurements of FHR and UC                   Amniotic membrane must be ruptured
internal           Does not lose signal with movement of the                 Increased risk for infection
                   fetus or person                                           Risk of injury to the fetus or uterus from
                   IUPC monitor results can help guide use of                the FSE or IUPC devices
                   oxytocin

TABLE 16.4 Advantages and Disadvantages of Different Fetal Monitoring Types

Interpretation of the Electronic Fetal and Uterine Monitor Tracing

Interpretation of the fetal heart rate consists of evaluating the baseline, variability, and periodic changes of the FHR
in relation to the uterine contractions. The nurse interprets uterine contractions by evaluating frequency, duration,
strength, and resting tone. The contraction frequency is how often the contractions occur and is determined by
720  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     measuring from the beginning of one contraction to the beginning of the next contraction. The contraction length is
     how long the contraction lasts and is determined by measuring the time between the beginning of the contraction
     and the end of the contraction. The contraction strength is the intensity of the contraction and is determined
     externally by palpation (see earlier discussion of intermittent auscultation) or internally by the IUPC. Contraction
     strength cannot be measured accurately when the external toco is used; therefore, the nurse palpates and
     describes contractions as mild, moderate, or strong. When IUPC is in use, contractions will be described in mm Hg.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Interpreting fetal monitor tracings is a skill that takes practice to refine. This fetal monitoring game
     (https://openstax.org/r/77fetalgame) reviews fetal monitoring terminology and tracings. The game can be played
     unlimited times.

     Expected uterine activity is defined as five contractions or fewer in a 10-minute period. Expected contraction length
     is between 45 and 60 seconds and may increase to 90 seconds closer to the onset of the second stage of labor.
     Abnormal uterine activity called uterine tachysystole is more than five contractions in 10 minutes or a contraction
     length of 2 or more minutes within a 30-minute period. Uterine tachysystole can be diagnosed in both spontaneous
     and induced labor.

     Efficiency of the uterine contractions during labor can be measured in Montevideo units. The nurse calculates the
     Montevideo units by subtracting the uterine resting tone in mm Hg from the mm Hg measuring the peak of the
     contraction for each contraction occurring within a 10-minute time interval (Kissler et al., 2020). Montevideo units
     can be calculated only when an IUPC is in place.

     Fetal well-being is influenced by uterine activity. Therefore, when the nurse is evaluating fetal well-being, both the
     fetal heart rate and uterine activity, as well as the fetal response to the uterine activity, must be described. A normal
     fetal monitor tracing is found in Figure 16.24.

     FIGURE 16.24 Electronic Fetal Monitor Tracing The fetal monitor traces the fetal heart rate on the top of the graph and the uterine
     contractions on the bottom of the graph. The middle line is the tracing of the pregnant person's heartbeat. (attribution: Copyright Rice
     University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Interpretation of fetal heart rate was historically a problem because of inconsistencies in terminology and reader
     error. In 2008, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Working Group created a three-tiered
     classification system to interpret fetal heart rate patterns (ACOG, 2009). The three-tiered system allows for
     consistent terminology and management by the health-care provider and nurse. A summary of the three categories
     is found in Figure 16.25.

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.2 · External and Internal Monitoring                                                                                                      721

FIGURE 16.25 Three-Tiered System for Fetal Heart Rate Interpretation The three categories used to interpret the FHR pattern provide
direction to nurses and health-care providers when determining next actions and the plan of care during the process of labor and birth.
(source: ACOG, 2009; National Institute of Child Health and Human Development; attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY 4.0 license)

Category I tracings are considered normal and do not require further actions by the nurse other than routine nursing
care for the antepartum or laboring patient. Figure 16.26 shows a Category I tracing. Category II tracing
characteristics do not meet the criteria of either Category I or III. Nursing care requires continued surveillance with
consideration of clinical circumstances and reevaluation and notification of the health-care provider. Figure 16.27
shows a Category II tracing. Category III tracings are always considered abnormal and require the nurse to contact
the health-care provider with a report of the FHR abnormalities. Nursing interventions aimed at resolving the cause
of the abnormality are discussed in 16.5 Intrauterine Resuscitation in this chapter. If interventions do not resolve
the abnormality, the birth must be expedited, most commonly via cesarean section (ACOG, 2009). Figure 16.28
shows a Category III tracing.

FIGURE 16.26 Category I Fetal Heart Rate Tracing This fetal heart rate tracing shows accelerations, moderate variability, no
decelerations, and uterine contractions suggesting early labor. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
722  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     FIGURE 16.27 Category II Tracing This fetal heart rate tracing shows minimal variability. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
     under CC BY 4.0 license)

     FIGURE 16.28 Category III Tracing This fetal heart rate tracing shows absent variability with repeat variable decelerations with uterine
     contractions every 2 to 3 minutes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

             LINK TO LEARNING

     This self-guided tutorial of EFM interpretation (https://openstax.org/r/77EFMPrep) also provides case studies and
     practice quizzes.

     Documentation of the FHR and Uterine Contraction Pattern

     Electronic health record (EHR) documentation during labor should include assessment of the pregnant person and
     the fetal heart rate. Continuous monitors record the fetal heart rate, and the tracings allow the nurse and health-
     care providers to review the current and previous tracing. The stored tracing also allows the nurse to care for the
     laboring patient during delivery and review the monitor tracing when needed.
     Documentation should show evaluation of the fetal heart rate and contraction pattern every 15 to 30 minutes if
     there is continuous monitoring, with a summary of fetal status. The documentation should also discuss the
     frequency of assessment and the interpretation of the fetal heart rate. When labor-inducing medications are in use,
     such as oxytocin (Pitocin), the nurse should document fetal status before and after increasing the dose (Simpson,
     2014).
     Documentation in labor is often determined by hospital policies. Every hospital should have a policy on the
     frequency of fetal heart rate and contraction pattern interpretation. To ensure all components of the tracing are
     documented, nurses use a standardized way of describing the FHR tracing. Figure 16.29 is an example of how to

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   16.2 · External and Internal Monitoring                                                     723

organize necessary information for documentation.

FIGURE 16.29 Documentation of Fetal and Contraction Monitoring Nurses are expected to document specific information about the
fetal heart rate and contraction patterns throughout the first and second stages of labor. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)

A process for evaluating and documenting fetal monitor tracings typically includes the following steps:

  1. Identify external or internal monitoring.
  2. Describe FHR baseline: rate and variability.
  3. Describe the presence or absence of FHR accelerations or decelerations.
  4. Identify the type of deceleration if present.
  5. Document the uterine contraction pattern with frequency, duration, intensity, and presence or absence of

        uterine resting tone.
  6. Interpret the tracing and identify the tracing as Category I, II, or III.
  7. Document the plan of care. Communication with the pregnant person and family is documented as part of the

        EHR. Nurses also document communication with the health-care provider and any new orders received from
        the provider.

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

Management of Uterine Tachysystole

Uterine tachysystole is defined as more than 5 contractions in 10 minutes averaged over 30 minutes. When
administering oxytocin for induction or augmentation of labor, uterine tachysystole is a risk factor. The following
interventions should be used when uterine tachysystole is diagnosed.

For uterine tachysystole with nonreassuring fetal heart rate pattern:

  1. Discontinue oxytocin.
  2. Turn laboring patient to lateral position.
  3. IV bolus with 500 mL lactated Ringer's (unless contraindicated).
  4. Apply O2 via mask at 8 to 10 liters per minute.
  5. Administer 0.25 mg terbutaline SQ.

For uterine tachysystole with reassuring fetal heart rate pattern:

  1. Reposition laboring patient (left or right lateral position).
  2. IV bolus with 500 mL lactated Ringer's (unless fluid restricted).
  3. If uterine activity has not returned to normal after 10 minutes, decrease oxytocin rate by half; if uterine

        activity has not returned to normal after 10 minutes, discontinue oxytocin until uterine activity has returned to
        normal ( 5 contractions in 10 minutes).
  4. Notify the health-care provider.
  5. Have terbutaline 0.25 mg SQ readily available.
  6. If the tachysystole has resolved within 30 minutes, the oxytocin infusion may be restarted at ½ of the previous
724  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

             rate. If the tachysystole has resolved in > 30 minutes, the oxytocin infusion may be restarted at the previous
             rate.

     (Lyndon & Wisner, 2021)

     16.3 Physiological Influences on Fetal Heart Rate Patterns

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the influence of uteroplacental sufficiency on the FHR pattern
         · Explain the influence of the fetal nervous system on the FHR pattern
         · Explain the influence of the fetal cardiovascular system on the FHR pattern
         · Explain the importance of fetal reserve on the FHR pattern

     Multiple factors influence the FHR. The pregnant person's influence can be positioning, blood pressure, oxygenation,
     and medications. Fetal influence can be nuchal cord, hypoxia, cord entanglement, and fetal movement. Other
     influences can be the use of uterotonics such as oxytocin (Pitocin) to increase the strength and frequency of uterine
     contractions. The Three Principles of Patient Safety offer a uniform explanation of abnormal FHR tracings (Miller &
     Miller, 2012).

         · Principle 1: Variable, late, or prolonged FHR decelerations demonstrate interruption of the oxygen transfer
             path from the environment to the fetus at one or more points.

         · Principle 2: The absence of metabolic acidemia in the fetus is reliably supported when moderate variability
             and/or accelerations of the FHR are observed.

         · Principle 3: Neurologic injury to the fetus does not occur unless the interruption of fetal oxygenation
             progresses to the significant fetal metabolic acidemia (umbilical artery < 7.0 and base deficit > 12 mmol/L).

     Fetal monitoring is used to assess the changes in FHR patterns associated with these influences. When determining
     fetal well-being, the nurse is aware of which FHR patterns are reassuring and which are nonreassuring.
     Understanding the physiologic influence causing the FHR pattern allows the nurse to intervene to correct the
     nonreassuring FHR.

     Uteroplacental Insufficiency

     A disruption of the delivery of oxygen and nutrients to the fetus from the placenta is called uteroplacental
     insufficiency. It is associated with preexisting medical conditions and lifestyle behaviors of the pregnant person.
     These include hypertension, obesity, diabetes, thyroid conditions, blood clotting disorders, smoking, and substance
     misuse. Conditions limited to pregnancy, such as preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, placenta previa, placental
     abruption, nutritional deficits, and fetal anomalies, are also associated with the development of uteroplacental
     insufficiency. These factors degrade the placenta. The placenta becomes damaged and does not function properly.
     Because of the placental damage, the fetus does not receive nutrients, and there is insufficient gas exchange
     resulting in fetal growth restriction and hypoxia (Aubin & El-Chaâr, 2022).

     Intrapartum Causes
     A cause of uteroplacental insufficiency in labor can be hypotension after epidural or spinal anesthesia. Anesthesia
     dilates the vessels, promoting hypotension. The placenta relies on blood pressure to push oxygen and nutrients
     across the placenta to the fetus. Hypotension decreases the transfer of these nutrients due to the decrease in
     pressure. Supine position can also be a cause of hypotension.

     Uterine hyperstimulation is another cause of uteroplacental insufficiency in labor. The uterus contracts, and
     perfusion to the fetus is decreased. Uterine contractions occurring too frequently can cause a prolonged decrease in
     oxygen profusion. Uterine hyperstimulation is seen most commonly with the use of oxytocin or misoprostol
     (Cytotec), medications that increase the frequency and intensity of uterine contractions.

     Catastrophic events such as placental abruption or uterine rupture cause prolonged decelerations. These events can
     be immediate or occur slowly over time. Placental abruption and uterine rupture can cause brisk vaginal bleeding,
     which should immediately alert the nurse to the cause. In other conditions, the bleeding is covert, and the nurse
     must investigate to determine the cause.

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.3 · Physiological Influences on Fetal Heart Rate Patterns                                                              725

        REAL RN STORIES

Nurse: M. Johnson, RN
Years in Practice: 15
Clinical Setting: Hospital
Geographic Location: Southeast United States

I was caring for a laboring person whose partner was very excited to be a part of the birth. They had planned for the
partner to help cut the umbilical cord. It was an important part of their birth plan. Unfortunately, a Category II
tracing was noted with minimal variability that occurred over 30 minutes. I repositioned the person to the left side,
stopped the oxytocin infusion, started an IV bolus of lactated Ringer's solution, and took the blood pressure. The
blood pressure was normal. I explained that I would watch the FHR tracing to see if an improvement in the
variability occurred. About 15 minutes later, repetitive late decelerations began occurring. I called the health-care
provider to report a Category III tracing and prepared the laboring person for a cesarean birth. I spoke with the
health-care provider and explained the importance of the partner cutting the umbilical cord. At the birth of the baby,
the partner was able to cut the cord as I took their picture. It was a beautiful moment to witness. Their newborn was
healthy with Apgar scores of 7 and 9. They were so thankful their birth plan was followed even in an emergency.

FHR Response
The FHR response to uteroplacental insufficiency can be seen in the baseline variability and periodic changes.
Baseline FHR variability decreases from moderate to minimal to absent in the presence of uteroplacental
insufficiency. Late FHR decelerations occur because of the decrease in oxygen perfusion. Prolonged decelerations
are extended signs of decreased perfusion. These FHR tracings are pathologic and need intervention.

Fetal Nervous System

The fetal nervous system influences the fetal circulatory system and in turn the baseline FHR. The autonomic
nervous system controls and regulates body functions such as breathing, blood pressure, and heart rate. In early
fetal development, the FHR may be higher than 160 bpm. As the fetus grows, the nervous system matures, and the
FHR baseline slows to a rate of 110 to 160 bpm. In cases of fetal hypoxia, the FHR slows and causes bradycardia.

Fetal Cardiovascular System

Uteroplacental insufficiency causes decreased perfusion to the fetal circulatory system. The fetus is unable to
circulate oxygenated blood, and fetal bradycardia occurs. Alterations in the fetal cardiovascular system can also
occur due to congenital heart disease. Fetal bradycardia can be caused by heart block, and tachycardia can be
caused by fetal cardiac arrhythmias.

Fetal Reserve

The fetus's capacity to tolerate the normal intermittent interruptions in oxygenation during labor and recover back to
full oxygenation is called fetal reserve (Evans et al., 2022). The fetus should recover from these interruptions if they
are separated by periods of oxygenation and recovery. The fetus can initially compensate during an event that
causes asphyxia, but if the event progresses, fetal reserve will be depleted, and severe acidosis, cardiovascular
decompensation, and brain damage will occur (Arnold & Gawrys, 2020). Fetal reserve may last several hours if the
event is not severe or is short in duration. However, some fetuses have less reserve than others. Complications
causing uteroplacental insufficiency also cause decreases in the fetal reserve. In cases of chronic uteroplacental
insufficiency such as preeclampsia, the placenta no longer functions at the optimal level. The fetus can become
growth restricted and will decompensate faster due to the lower level of fetal reserve. An FHR tracing of minimal to
absent variability, late decelerations, or prolonged decelerations signals the minimal amount or lack of fetal reserve.
726  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     16.4 Nursing Interventions Based on Fetal Heart Rate and Uterine
     Contraction Patterns

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the nursing interventions for abnormal fetal heart rate baseline
         · Explain the nursing interventions for abnormal fetal heart rate variability
         · Explain the nursing interventions for fetal heart rate decelerations
         · Explain the nursing interventions based on the three-tiered system for FHR interpretation

     The FHR monitor allows the nurse to assess the health of the fetus and how the fetus is tolerating labor. The nurse
     needs to recognize whether the fetal monitor tracing indicates a well-oxygenated fetus or a fetus in distress. Fetal
     distress can be caused by a number of factors; therefore, determining the cause of the abnormality shown on the
     tracing is paramount. The nurse needs to use specific interventions aimed at correcting those causes.

     Nursing Interventions for Abnormal Fetal Heart Rate Baseline

     The FHR baseline is a reliable indicator of fetal oxygenation. One of the most reliable signs of adequate fetal
     oxygenation is an FHR baseline between 110 and 160 bpm with moderate variability. Changes in the FHR baseline
     can be caused by medications administered to the pregnant patient during labor, such as pain management
     narcotics, magnesium sulfate, and terbutaline. These baseline changes will resolve after the medication has been
     discontinued or excreted. Nursing intervention is often not necessary, but any changes should be monitored closely.
     Changes in the FHR baseline that do require nursing intervention are fetal bradycardia and tachycardia.

     Fetal Bradycardia
     Fetal bradycardia is an FHR baseline of <110 bpm lasting more than 10 minutes. Bradycardia is abnormal and must
     be addressed urgently. The nurse must determine the cause of the bradycardia and tailor the intervention to that
     cause. The cause of bradycardia may be evident, as in the case of a prolapsed umbilical cord that is seen on
     observation. The nursing intervention for a prolapsed cord is to insert two fingers into the vagina (avoiding the
     umbilical cord), locate the presenting part, and elevate the presenting part away from the umbilical cord to resolve
     the cord compression and allow return of blood flow. The nurse must hold this position until the fetus is delivered
     via cesarean birth. Similarly, placental abruption and uterine rupture can cause hemorrhaging that is concealed but
     demonstrated through the interpretation of the FHR and UC pattern; these conditions require immediate delivery via
     cesarean birth.

     Uterine tachysystole can cause fetal bradycardia. The lack of time for fetal recovery between contractions uses up
     fetal reserve. When this reserve is depleted, fetal bradycardia occurs. The nurse will discontinue oxytocin, if in use,
     and administer a tocolytic medication such as terbutaline. The tocolytic medication relaxes the uterus, allowing
     return of placental blood flow to the fetus.

     Some covert causes of fetal bradycardia may require multiple interventions to determine the cause and resolve the
     issue. The first nursing intervention is repositioning the laboring person, unless oxytocin is being used; in that case,
     discontinuing oxytocin is necessary. The second intervention is to perform a cervical exam to assess for a prolapsed
     cord or rapid descent of the fetal head. If these interventions do not resolve the bradycardia, the nurse will
     immediately notify the health-care provider while continuing to evaluate causes and initiating intrauterine
     resuscitation, discussed later in the chapter.

     Fetal Tachycardia
     Fetal tachycardia is an FHR baseline over 160 bpm and is considered an abnormal finding. The cause of the
     tachycardia will dictate the nursing intervention. The most common cause of fetal tachycardia is fever in the
     pregnant person. If the pregnant patient exhibits a temperature of greater than 100.4° F (38° C), the nurse notifies
     the health-care provider so that they can determine which medical intervention to initiate. Antibiotics and
     antipyretics are common pharmaceutical interventions to treat fever and infection.

     Epidural anesthesia can cause a minimal rise in temperature in the laboring person. Research has shown that
     epidural anesthesia can induce inflammatory responses that produce fever (Khanna et al., 2020). Epidural
     anesthesia can also affect the thermoregulatory system, causing shivering that, in turn, causes elevated

     Access for free at openstax.org
                           16.4 · Nursing Interventions Based on Fetal Heart Rate and Uterine Contraction Patterns         727

temperature.

Dehydration, anemia, or hyperthyroidism can all cause fetal tachycardia. To limit the risk of dehydration, the nurse
monitors the intake and output of the laboring person. If dehydration is apparent, the nurse will either encourage
oral hydration or initiate an intravenous fluid bolus. The nurse can also review the history to determine if anemia or
hyperthyroidism was noted during prenatal care.

Fetal heart rate tachycardia is associated with prematurity and caused by fetal stress (especially in prolonged labor),
infection, hypoxia, anemia, or prolonged stimulation. If oxytocin is being administered, discontinuation of the
oxytocin infusion may be indicated. If this does not resolve the tachycardia, the nurse will contact the health-care
provider, describe the FHR tracing, and receive orders for further management.

Nursing Interventions for Abnormal Fetal Heart Rate Variability

FHR baseline variability is a very important characteristic for evaluating fetal well-being. As previously discussed,
variability is the best determinant of fetal oxygenation. Therefore, determining the cause of altered variability is
imperative to restoring fetal oxygenation. Pharmacologic causes of decreased variability can be pain-relieving
narcotics, cocaine, corticosteroids, and magnesium sulfate administered to the laboring person. Administration of
butorphanol (Stadol) can cause a sinusoidal pattern. These causes are transient and not pathologic. Changes
caused by these medications will resolve once the medication is excreted, and no nursing intervention is warranted.

Marked FHR baseline variability is rare. The most common time for marked variability is during the 2 hours prior to
delivery (Polnaszek et al., 2020). Marked variability is usually seen after an event of decreased fetal oxygenation,
such as a seizure of the pregnant person or cord compression, and it is associated with an increased risk for
neonatal respiratory distress after birth (Polnaszek et al., 2020). The nursing intervention for marked variability is to
prevent seizure and quickly provide oxygen after any seizure that occurs. If cord compression is present, the nurse
resolves the cord compression and again provides oxygen to the laboring person.

Nursing Interventions for Fetal Heart Rate Decelerations

Knowing the causes of each type of FHR deceleration can guide the nurse to intervene appropriately. Table 16.5
describes the nursing interventions for each type of FHR deceleration.

Type of       Cause             Intervention
Deceleration

Variable      Cord compression                     · Change position
              Oligohydramnios                      · Discontinue oxytocin
                                                   · Consider terbutaline if tachysystole
                                                   · Perform vaginal exam to check for prolapsed cord or rapid fetal

                                                      descent
                                                   · Consider amnioinfusion
                                                   · Notify the HCP

Early         Fetal head                           · Perform vaginal exam to determine cervical dilation, fetal station,
              compression                             and fetal position as needed
              Fetal vagal
              response                             · Prepare for birth

TABLE 16.5 Nursing Interventions for FHR Patterns
728  16 · Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring

     Type of       Cause                 Intervention
     Deceleration
                   Uteroplacental            · Discontinue oxytocin
     Late          insufficiency             · Consider terbutaline if tachysystole
                                             · Change position to left lateral
                                             · Correct hypotension with fluid bolus
                                             · Notify the HCP

     Prolonged     Cord compression                     · Discontinue oxytocin
                   Uteroplacental                       · Consider terbutaline if tachysystole
                   insufficiency                        · Change position
                   Fetal hemorrhage                     · Perform vaginal exam to assess for prolapsed cord
                   Fetal vagal reaction                 · Increase IV fluids
                   Fetal CNS                            · Notify the HCP
                   anomalies

     TABLE 16.5 Nursing Interventions for FHR Patterns

     Nursing Interventions Based on the Three-Tiered System for Fetal Heart Rate Interpretation

     The National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Working Group developed a three-tiered
     classification to interpret FHR patterns (ACOG, 2009). The adoption of the three categories for fetal monitoring has
     allowed all health-care providers to systematically describe fetal monitor tracings as well as consistently manage
     abnormal tracings (see Figure 16.25).

     On the basis of the tiered system, the nurse interprets the category of FHR tracing and determines the need for
     intervention. When fetal distress is identified, the nurse begins interventions to correct the cause of the insult and
     notifies the health-care provider of the incident. Category I tracings are normal and do not require interventions.
     Category II tracings are more difficult when creating a management plan. These tracings do not meet criteria for
     either normal or pathologic tracings. The nurse must evaluate for FHR accelerations and baseline variability. If the
     FHR baseline is without accelerations or moderate variability, the nurse will begin intrauterine resuscitation.
     Category II tracings that do not respond to intrauterine resuscitation become Category III. Category III tracings
     imply fetal hypoxia. Intrauterine resuscitation should be started, and birth should be expedited.

             LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

     What Happens When Interventions Do Not Occur in Response to FHR Tracings?

     Fetal heart rate monitoring provides nurses and health-care providers with information to ensure the safety of the
     fetus and the laboring person. When the fetal heart rate tracing is nonreassuring, interventions should occur to
     resolve the cause of the abnormal tracing. In cases where interventions are not initiated, fetal safety can be
     jeopardized, leading to fetal hypoxic injuries; at other times the fetus recovers without the intervention. Despite the
     outcome of the fetus, this incident should be evaluated for quality improvement. Nurses, health-care providers, and
     hospital staff should meet to discuss factors that could have influenced the situation, such as staffing issues or
     technical problems with monitoring. This process of quality improvement is not to determine fault. The process is
     used to analyze the influencing factors and create a plan to avoid the mistake in the future. Nurses play an integral
     role in quality improvement.

     Access for free at openstax.org
16.5 · Intrauterine Resuscitation                                                                                       729

16.5 Intrauterine Resuscitation

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Recognize fetal heart patterns requiring intrauterine resuscitation
    · Perform appropriate intrauterine resuscitation interventions based on the interpretation of the fetal heart

        rate pattern

Nursing interventions for nonreassuring fetal monitor tracings depend upon the cause of the tracing. For tracings
associated with fetal hypoxia, the nurse must intervene to restore oxygenation to the fetus. Specific interventions
aimed at increasing oxygen to the placenta and to the umbilical cord to reverse fetal hypoxia is called intrauterine
resuscitation.

FHR Patterns Requiring Intrauterine Resuscitation

FHR patterns indicative of decreased oxygen transfer to the fetus can respond to intrauterine resuscitation. These
FHR patterns include the following:

    · Late decelerations caused by uteroplacental insufficiency. Intrauterine resuscitation should increase blood
        flow to the placenta and fetus resolving late decelerations.

    · Prolonged decelerations caused by a disruption in oxygen transport to the fetus. Resuscitation is aimed at
        restoring the oxygen transport to the fetus.

    · Absent and minimal variability can also respond to intrauterine resuscitation.

Intrauterine Resuscitation Nursing Interventions

Steps of intrauterine resuscitation are aimed at restoring blood flow and oxygenation. As described previously, FHR
patterns that indicate an interruption in fetal oxygenation should respond to intrauterine resuscitation. The steps
involved in intrauterine resuscitation are as follows:

    · Discontinuing oxytocin to allow for reoxygenation of the fetus by decreasing contractions
    · Rotating the laboring person to the left or right lateral position to relieve supine hypotension or hypertension

        when lying or sitting up in the labor bed
    · Initiating IV fluid bolus to correct hypotension by increasing hydration to increase perfusion (Valencia et al.,

        2022)
    · Administering oxygen at 10 L/min via a non-rebreather mask to the pregnant or laboring person whose oxygen

        saturation is low
    · Administering terbutaline to resolve elevated uterine resting tone or tachysystole

The nurse can call for assistance to perform these steps as quickly as possible and to notify the health-care
provider.
730 16 · Summary

Summary

16.1 Basic Terms of Fetal Heart Rate and Contraction Patterns

The nurse uses the FHR to determine the well-being of the fetus during the antepartum and intrapartum periods by
evaluating for FHR baseline variability, accelerations, and decelerations. A reassuring FHR tracing demonstrates
adequate oxygenation and includes moderate variability, accelerations, and a baseline FHR between 110 and 160
bpm. An FHR tracing can also show signs of fetal compromise and hypoxia. Signs of a nonreassuring FHR tracing
include minimal or absent variability, late decelerations, marked variability, and prolonged decelerations. Nurses in
the perinatal area are trained and can be certified in FHR monitoring. Training in FHR and contraction monitoring
allows nurses to safely care for the laboring person and fetus.

16.2 External and Internal Monitoring

Fetal monitoring can be performed using intermittent or continuous methods, with monitoring devices applied
externally or internally. The nurse is aware of the advantages and disadvantages of each type of monitoring
technique. The specific needs of the pregnant person and fetus should guide the health-care team in choosing the
type of monitoring used.

The nurse uses the information gleaned from the fetal monitor to evaluate and determine if interventions should be
initiated. The three-tiered category of interpretation standardizes FHR terminology and guides the actions of the
provider and nurse. Standardized terminology also aids in documentation of the interpretation of the FHR and UC.
Nurses play a vital role in assessing the health of the fetus and pregnant person in the antepartum and intrapartum
periods.

16.3 Physiological Influences on Fetal Heart Rate Patterns

Physiologic changes can affect the FHR and are associated with abnormalities in the FHR tracings. Uteroplacental
insufficiency and damage to the fetal nervous system can be recognized as minimal to absent FHR variability with
late or prolonged decelerations. Fetal cardiac abnormalities can cause FHR tracings with FHR baseline spiking and
bradycardia. The fetus can compensate for these changes for a time. Once the fetal reserve is depleted, the fetus
can no longer compensate and is in danger of neurologic injury or death. The nurse is aware of the importance of
these physiologic changes and the need to intervene when observing these FHR tracings.

16.4 Nursing Interventions Based on Fetal Heart Rate and Uterine Contraction Patterns

The nurse interprets FHR tracings and determines the oxygenation of the fetus based on these tracings. The FHR
baseline is an important component of fetal monitor tracing. Changes in the FHR baseline can be seen as
bradycardia and tachycardia. FHR baseline variability is another component used to determine fetal well-being. FHR
baseline variability that is absent or marked can show signs of fetal hypoxia. Periodic changes, such as FHR
decelerations, are abnormal and assessed for need of intervention. The nurse uses all these components to
determine which of the three fetal monitoring categories the tracing belongs to. The nurse then initiates
interventions to resolve nonreassuring FHR tracings. The nurse is responsible for ensuring that proper interventions
are initiated to protect the fetus.

16.5 Intrauterine Resuscitation

Intrauterine resuscitation is often successful in restoring oxygen to the fetus. The nurse is aware of the steps of
intrauterine resuscitation and of the FHR abnormalities that respond to resuscitation, such as late or prolonged
declarations and minimal to absent variability. Intrauterine resuscitation can resolve uteroplacental insufficiency,
allowing the fetus to return to a well-oxygenated state.

Key Terms

absent FHR variability lack of FHR baseline fluctuation
accelerations abrupt increases in the FHR above the baseline 15 bpm or more lasting 15 seconds or more
bradycardia FHR baseline less than 110 bpm lasting greater than 10 minutes
contraction frequency how often the contractions are occurring, determined by measuring from the beginning of

    one contraction to the beginning of the next contraction

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         16 · Assessments 731

contraction length how long the contraction lasts, determined by measuring the time between the beginning of
    the contraction to the end of the contraction

contraction strength intensity of the contraction, determined externally by palpation or internally by the
    intrauterine pressure catheter

early decelerations usually, symmetrical, gradual FHR declines that then return to baseline, mirroring the uterine
    contraction

fetal heart rate (FHR) heart rate and rhythm of the fetus
fetal reserve fetus's capacity to tolerate the normal intermittent interruptions in oxygenation during labor and

    recover back to full oxygenation
fetal scalp electrode (FSE) affixed to the scalp of the fetus and provides close monitoring of the fetal heart rate
FHR baseline average beats per minute in a 10-minute segment, excluding periodic changes or marked variability
FHR variability beat-to-beat fluctuations in the FHR baseline
intermittent auscultation (IA) technique of assessing fetal well-being by listening to and counting the fetal heart

    rate for a specified amount of time and at specified intervals, depending upon the stage of labor
intrauterine pressure catheter (IUPC) device placed between the uterus and fetus that measures the exact

    pressure inside the uterus at rest and during contractions
intrauterine resuscitation specific interventions aimed at increasing oxygen to the placenta and to the umbilical

    cord to reverse fetal hypoxia
late decelerations symmetrical, gradual decreases in FHR after the start of a uterine contraction, with return to

    baseline after the ending of the contraction
marked FHR variability FHR baseline fluctuation greater than 25 bpm
minimal FHR variability FHR fluctuations of 5 bpm or fewer
mm Hg millimeters of mercury, abbreviated mm Hg; measurement unit of intrauterine pressure catheter
moderate FHR variability FHR fluctuations between 6 and 25 bpm
Montevideo unit unit of measurement of uterine contraction strength via IUPC
periodic changes in the FHR accelerations and decelerations of the FHR, abrupt or gradual, in relation to the FHR

    baseline
prolonged decelerations isolated, sporadic decelerations of at least 15 bpm from the FHR baseline that last 2 to

    10 minutes from onset to return to baseline
tachycardia FHR baseline greater than 160 bpm
tocodynamometer device that detects the frequency of uterine contractions
uterine contraction (UC) tightening and shortening of the uterine muscles
uteroplacental insufficiency disruption of the delivery of oxygen and nutrients to the fetus from the placenta
variable decelerations abrupt decelerations of the FHR of at least 15 bpm below the baseline that last at least 15

    seconds and less than 2 minutes, regardless of any uterine contraction

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. What is a FHR that falls within the normal baseline?
           a. 135 bpm
           b. 95 bpm
           c. 170 bpm
           d. 105 bpm

    2. What periodic change in the FHR baseline is associated with fetal hypoxia?
           a. early deceleration
           b. late deceleration
           c. variable deceleration
           d. acceleration

    3. What is a reassuring pattern a nurse would see on an FHR tracing?
           a. accelerations
732 16 · Assessments

           b. marked variability
           c. prolonged decelerations
           d. absent variability

    4. What type of FHR decelerations are a sign of possible fetal descent?
           a. early
           b. late
           c. variable
           d. prolonged

    5. The advantage of this type of monitoring includes more patient mobility and freedom of movement.
           a. internal electronic monitor
           b. external electronic monitor
           c. intermittent auscultation
           d. IUPC and scalp electrode

    6. Leopold's maneuvers allow the nurse to determine presentation and lie of the fetus. What additional
        information do the maneuvers provide?
           a. fetal head or buttocks in the uterine fundus
           b. location of the placenta
           c. stage of labor
           d. detection of fetal movement

    7. What is the most accurate way to monitor the FHR?
           a. applying a fetal scalp electrode
           b. monitoring with the external ultrasound
           c. using the Doppler monitor for intermittent auscultation
           d. auscultating with the fetoscope

    8. What type of monitor can measure the strength of a contraction?
           a. fetal scalp electrode
           b. intrauterine pressure catheter
           c. toco
           d. ultrasound

    9. The nurse evaluates the FHR and UC in the following tracing.

                                                          Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license

        How does the nurse document this finding?
           a. uterine tachysystole
           b. active labor
           c. latent labor

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      16 · Assessments 733

         d. tachycardia

10. A 20-year-old, G1P0, presents to the labor and delivery unit. The patient is contracting every 5 minutes. They
      rate their pain as 6/10 and say the only thing that helps with the pain is walking. The patient is afraid to get
      into the bed because it hurts more to lie down. What type of monitoring can you offer?
         a. intermittent auscultation
         b. external monitoring
         c. internal monitoring
         d. intrauterine pressure monitoring

11. The FHR tracing has shown moderate variability with variable decelerations over the last 30 minutes. The
      FHR tracing now shows minimal variability between variable decelerations. What is the probable cause of this
      FHR change?
         a. fetal scalp stimulation
         b. loss of fetal reserve
         c. fetal heart block
         d. fetal arrhythmia

12. The nurse is having difficulty determining the FHR with the external monitor. A fetal scalp electrode is placed,
      and FHR spiking is noted. What is the cause of this abnormal tracing?
         a. cardiac arrythmia
         b. fetal hypoxia
         c. uterine rupture
         d. labor dystocia

13. As the fetal nervous system matures, the FHR baseline changes in what way?
         a. FHR decreases.
         b. FHR increases.
         c. Marked variability occurs.
         d. Minimal variability occurs.

14. The nurse assesses late decelerations on the FHR tracing. She enters the pregnant person's room and notices
      the person lying on their back. Why should the pregnant person not lie on their back?
         a. increased risk of early decelerations
         b. increased risk of back pain
         c. increased risk of uteroplacental insufficiency
         d. increased risk of uterine labor dystocia

15. The pregnant person recently received epidural anesthesia. The blood pressure is 90/50. What type of
      periodic change in the FHR is expected?
         a. early deceleration
         b. late deceleration
         c. variable deceleration
         d. sinusoidal pattern

16. In the three-tiered categories of fetal monitoring, what characteristic does a Category II tracing have?
         a. persistent late decelerations
         b. variable decelerations with moderate variability
         c. moderate variability with accelerations
         d. baseline fetal heart rate of 80 bpm

17. What causes decreased FHR baseline variability?
         a. ampicillin
734 16 · Assessments

           b. cocaine
           c. magnesium sulfate
           d. terbutaline

  18. Tachycardia is noted on the FHR tracing. What intervention will the nurse initiate?
           a. Administer antibiotics.
           b. Increase oxytocin.
           c. Perform fetal scalp stimulation.
           d. Start an IV fluid bolus.

  19. What does management of a category III fetal monitor tracing include?
           a. decreasing the oxytocin by half
           b. expediting birth
           c. readjusting the fetal monitor
           d. increasing the magnesium sulfate

  20. What nursing intervention should be initiated for an FHR tracing with early decelerations?
           a. Decrease the oxytocin by half.
           b. Expedite delivery.
           c. Perform a vaginal exam.
           d. Readjust the fetal monitor.

  21. What is the cause of late decelerations?
           a. descent of fetal head
           b. fetal scalp stimulation
           c. imminent birth
           d. uteroplacental insufficiency

  22. What is an indication for administering terbutaline?
           a. early decelerations
           b. insufficient labor pattern
           c. tachysystole with decelerations in FHR
           d. fetal tachycardia

  23. What is intrauterine resuscitation designed to treat?
           a. hypertension
           b. hypoglycemia
           c. hyperthyroid
           d. fetal hypoxia

  24. Why does the nurse turn the laboring person to a side-lying position? Select all that apply.
           a. to increase contractions
           b. to resolve supine hypotension
           c. to reverse uterine tachysystole
           d. to increase placental perfusion

  25. When is terbutaline appropriate during intrauterine resuscitation?
           a. absent accelerations
           b. hypotension
           c. dehydration
           d. tachysystole

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         16 · Assessments 735

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. What do the FHR baseline characteristics tell the nurse about fetal oxygenation?
    2. What types of decelerations are caused by cord compression?
    3. Describe the periodic changes in this monitor strip. Are they reassuring or nonreassuring?

                                                               Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license

    4. Explain how this monitor tracing shows adequate fetal oxygenation.

                                                          Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license

    5. List the advantages and disadvantages of intermittent auscultation.
    6. List the advantages and disadvantages of external FHR monitoring.
    7. List the advantages and disadvantages of internal FHR monitoring.
736 16 · Assessments

    8. The nurse interprets the following external EFM tracing.

                                                          Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license

        How does the nurse document the summary of this tracing?
    9. Repetitive variable decelerations are noted on an FHR tracing. What condition might be the cause of this

        periodic change in the FHR pattern?
  10. The fetus has been diagnosed with growth restriction. What should the nurse expect regarding fetal reserve?
  11. Uterine contractions are occurring frequently. The nurse counts 7 contractions in a 10-minute period. What

        periodic change is expected, and what is the cause?
  12. What nursing actions does the nurse perform when a prolapsed cord is suspected?
  13. What nursing action does the nurse perform when the nurse observes a prolonged deceleration?
  14. How does the nurse determine the success of nursing actions performed to address abnormal FHR tracings?
  15. What is always the priority step in intrauterine resuscitation when oxytocin is in use?

Reflection Questions

    1. What type of FHR tracing would prompt the nurse to contact the health-care provider?
    2. What would the nurse expect to see on the fetal monitor strip after discovering the laboring person has a

        fever?
    3. Describe the following fetal monitor tracing.

                                                          Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license

    4. What type of training should labor and delivery nurses receive prior to using fetal monitors?
    5. How would the nurse educate the laboring patient on the insertion of internal monitors?
    6. Describe the possible side effect of epidural anesthesia on the FHR.
    7. Describe a sinusoidal pattern and its significance.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         16 · Assessments 737

    8. Discuss the relationship between moderate FHR variability and fetal oxygenation.

    9. What are the goals of intrauterine resuscitation?

  10. What are the nursing actions for abnormal FHR variability?

What Should the Nurse Do?

Jinmei, a 28-year-old pregnant female at 36 weeks' gestation, presents to the labor and delivery unit with
complaints of abdominal discomfort and irregular contractions. She is a gravida 2, para 1, with a history of a vaginal
delivery. Jinmei reports no significant medical history or complications during this pregnancy. Jinmei reports
experiencing intermittent abdominal discomfort for the past few hours, which she describes as different from her
previous pregnancy. She denies any vaginal bleeding, rupture of membranes, or significant changes in fetal
movement. The discomfort is not relieved by rest. Jinmei expresses concerns about the well-being of her baby and
requests a thorough evaluation. Jinmei's previous pregnancy resulted in a vaginal delivery without complications.
She has not experienced any gestational diabetes, hypertension, or other significant medical issues. Her prenatal
course during this pregnancy has been uneventful, with regular prenatal checkups and normal fetal ultrasound
scans. Her vital signs are as follows: blood pressure: 120/78 mm Hg, heart rate: 88 bpm, respiratory rate: 18
breaths per minute, and temperature: 98.6° F (37° C).

    1. Jinmei describes the abdominal discomfort as different from her previous pregnancy. How would a nurse
        analyze this information, and what hypotheses might you generate regarding the possible causes of her
        discomfort?

    2. Jinmei requests a thorough evaluation. What solutions can a nurse offer to address her concerns and provide
        a comprehensive assessment of fetal well-being, and how might the nurse involve her in the decision-making
        process?

Mitchell, a 32-year-old expectant father, rushes his wife, Amber, to the labor and delivery unit. Amber is a 28-year-
old pregnant female at 39 weeks' gestation. Mitchell reports concerns about decreased fetal movement and a
feeling that something is not right. Amber is experiencing intermittent contractions and has noted a change in the
pattern of her baby's movements. Amber reports a decrease in fetal movement over the past few hours and is
experiencing intermittent contractions. She describes the contractions as different from those she felt earlier in her
pregnancy. Mitchell is visibly worried about his wife and unborn child, emphasizing the importance of addressing
any potential issues promptly. Amber has had an uncomplicated pregnancy with regular prenatal checkups. There is
no history of chronic illnesses, gestational diabetes, or hypertension. She has been diligent in monitoring fetal
movements and adhering to recommended prenatal care. Her vital signs are as follows: blood pressure: 120/80 mm
Hg, heart rate: 90 bpm, respiratory rate: 18 breaths per minute, temperature: 98.7° F (37.1° C).

    3. What hypotheses can be prioritized regarding the potential causes of decreased fetal movement and altered
        contractions, and how might these hypotheses influence the urgency and nature of nursing interventions?

    4. What immediate nursing interventions can be implemented to assess fetal well-being and address Mitchell
        and Amber's concerns about decreased fetal movement and altered contractions?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. A fetal monitor strip shows a baseline FHR of 135 bpm. How would you explain the significance of this
        baseline to a nursing colleague, and what factors might influence variations in the FHR baseline?

    2. As a clinical nurse, you observe early decelerations in the FHR during contractions. How would you explain
        "periodic changes" to a nursing student, and what implications might early decelerations have for the fetus
        during labor?

    3. A laboring patient exhibits late decelerations in the FHR pattern. How would you explain the influence of
        uteroplacental sufficiency on this pattern, and what nursing interventions might you consider to address
        potential issues with uteroplacental blood flow?

    4. During labor, a patient's FHR pattern shows recurrent variable decelerations. As a nurse, how would you
        explain the importance of fetal reserves in responding to variable decelerations, and what actions might help
        support fetal reserves?

    5. A laboring patient exhibits late decelerations in the FHR pattern. What nursing interventions might you
738 16 · References

        consider to address potential issues with uteroplacental blood flow?

    6. In response to persistent late decelerations, what specific intrauterine resuscitation interventions can you
        perform, and how do these interventions aim to improve fetal well-being?

References

Alfirevic, Z., Gyte, G. M. L., Cuthbert, A., & Devane, D. (2017). Continuous cardiotocography (CTG) as a form of
   electronic fetal monitoring (EFM) for fetal assessment during labour. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
   2, 1465-1858. https://doi.org//10.1002/14651858.CD006066.pub3

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2009). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 106: Intrapartum fetal
   heart rate monitoring: Nomenclature, interpretation, and general management principles. Obstetrics &
   Gynecology, 114(1), 192-202. https://doi.org//10.1097/AOG.0b013e3181aef106

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022). Practice advisory: Oxygen supplementation in the
   setting of category II or III fetal heart tracings. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practice-
    advisory/articles/2022/01/oxygen-supplementation-in-the-setting-of-category-ii-or-iii-fetal-heart-tracings

Andrews, W. W. & Tita, A. T. N. (2020). Clinical conundrums: Fetal heart rate monitoring: Still a mystery more than
   half a century later. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 135(2), 469-471. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000003674

Arnold, J., & Gawrys, B. (2020). Intrapartum fetal monitoring. American Family Physician, 102(3), 158-167.
    https://www.aafp.org/pubs/afp/issues/2020/0801/p158.html

Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses. (2018). Fetal heart monitoring. Nursing for
   Women's Health, 22(6), 506-509. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1751-4851(18)30227-7

Aubin, S. L., & El-Chaâr, D. (2022). Fetal health surveillance in labor. In G. D. Posner, A. Y. Black, G. Jones & D. El-
   Chaâr (Eds.). Oxorn-Foote human labor & birth (7th ed.). McGraw Hill.

Evans, M. I., Britt, D. W., Evans, S. M., & Devoe, L. D. (2022). Changing perspectives of electronic fetal monitoring.
   Reproductive Sciences, 29(6), 1874-1894. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43032-021-00749-2

Khanna, P., Jain, S., Thariani, K., Sharma, S., & Singh, A. K. (2020). Epidural fever: Hiding in the shadows. Turkish
   Journal of Anaesthesiology and Reanimation, 48(5), 350-355. https://doi.org/10.5152/TJAR.2020.50

Kissler, K., Lowe, N. K., & Hernandez, T. L. (2020). An integrated review of uterine activity monitoring for evaluating
   labor dystocia. Journal of Midwifery & Women's Health, 65(3), 323-334. https://doi.org/10.1111/jmwh.13119

Lyndon, A., & Wisner, K. (2021). Fetal heart rate monitoring principles and practice (6th ed.). AWHONN.

Mai, C. T., Isenburg, J. L., Canfield, M. A., Meyer, R. E., Correa, A., Alverson, C. J., Lupo, P. J., Riehle-Colarusso, T.,
    Cho, S. J., Aggarwal, D., Kirby, R. S., & National Birth Defects Prevention Network. (2019). National
   population-based estimates for major birth defects, 2010-2014. Birth Defects Research, 11(18), 1420-1435.
    https://doi.org/10.1002/bdr2.1589

Miller, D. A., & Miller, L. A. (2012). Electronic fetal heart rate monitoring: Applying principles of patient safety.
   American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology, 206(4), 278-283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2011.08.016

National Certification Corporation. (2023). Electronic fetal monitoring. Certification in electronic fetal monitoring (C-
   EFM). https://www.nccwebsite.org/certification-exams/details/1/electronic-fetal-monitoring

Polnaszek, B. P., Lopez, J. D., Clark, R., Raghuraman, N., Macones, G. A., & Cahill, A. G. (2020). Marked variability in
    intrapartum electronic fetal heart rate patterns: Association with neonatal morbidity and abnormal arterial cord
   gas. Journal of Perinatology, 40(1), 56-62. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41372-019-0520-9.

Simkin, P., Hanson, L., & Ancheta, R. (2017) The labor progress handbook: Early interventions to prevent and treat
   dystocia (4th ed.) Wiley-Blackwell.

Simpson, K. R. (2014). Perinatal patient safety and professional liability issues. In K. R. Simpson & P. A. Creehan
   (Eds.). Perinatal nursing (4th ed., pp. 1-40). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            16 · References 739

Trisomy 18 Foundation. (2023). Healthcare professionals: Helping parents make a decision. Retrieved March 24,
    2023, from https://trisomy18.org/healthcare-professionals/

Valencia, C. M., Escobar, M. F., Barona, J. S., Poblete, J. A., & Kusanovic, J. P. (2022). Intrauterine fetal resuscitation.
   In C. M. Valencia (Ed.), The continuous textbook of women's medicine series: Obstetric emergencies (Vol. 13).
    Global Library of Women's Medicine. https://www.glowm.com/article/heading/vol-13--obstetric-emergencies--
    intrauterine-fetal-resuscitation/id/415083#

Vallerand, A. H., & Sanoski, C. A. (Eds.). (2022). Davis's drug guide for nurses (18th ed.). F. A. Davis Publishing.
740 16 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 17

Pain Management During Labor and Birth

FIGURE 17.1 Birthing Ball This laboring person is sitting on a birthing ball to encourage fetal descent and decrease discomfort. (credit:
reproduced with permission from Amy Giles)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
17.1 Nonpharmacological Pain Management
17.2 Pharmacological Pain Management
17.3 Anesthesia

INTRODUCTION Pain is the process of signals traveling through nerves to be interpreted by the brain. Every person
experiences pain differently, and only that person can explain their pain experience. Research has shown that labor
pain has both physiologic and psychologic causes (Beigi et al., 2010; Rúger-Navarrete et al., 2023). In the Berlit et
al. (2018) study, laboring persons with fear of and anxiety related to childbirth experienced increased pain. Those
persons with a history of sexual trauma had increased pain sensitivity that led to more traumatic births. Other
research has shown that being alone increased pain, while having a support person in the room decreased pain
(Beigi et al., 2010; Rúger-Navarrete et al., 2023).
The pregnant person typically considers all pain management techniques to determine what they desire during
labor and birth. Many persons create a birth plan to provide nurses and health-care providers with a description of
their desires during labor and birth. Most childbirth education (CBE) classes discuss pain management options;
however, not all pregnant persons or couples create a birth plan or attend CBE classes, and it is the nurse's
responsibility to describe the options available at that facility.
Options for pain management are vast, but they may be limited by the specifics of the labor and/or birthing
situation. Some nonpharmacologic pain management options include creating a peaceful environment or using
natural comfort measures, such as movement, breathing, massage, and meditation. Pharmacologic options include
narcotics, nitrous oxide, and medications to aid relaxation. Anesthetics, such as local, epidural, and pudendal, are
also options. Before and after administering the pain management option, a pain assessment scale will be used to
determine the current level of pain and if the intervention(s) has (have) adequately treated the pain. Nursing care of
742  17 · Pain Management During Labor and Birth

     the laboring person includes providing education on the choices for pain management, and determining their
     effectiveness is important in the care of the laboring person.

     17.1 Nonpharmacological Pain Management

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain various measures implemented in the physical environment during labor and birth to aid in
             relaxation

         · Describe comfort measures used to decrease the pain during the process of labor and birth
         · Explain various movement and position changes used during the process of labor and birth
         · Implement controlled breathing as needed for the person during labor and birth
         · Explain complementary and alternative pain relief measures used during the process of labor and birth

     Nonpharmacologic pain management includes multiple options. Creating a relaxing, welcoming environment
     addresses the psychologic aspect of pain, allows the laboring person to feel safe in the labor space, and decreases
     their anxiety. Anxiety stimulates the sympathetic nervous system to release stress hormones, namely, cortisol. The
     resulting "fight-or-flight" response causes longer labor and increases the perception of pain. Comfort measures
     focus on the physical aspects of labor pain. Movement allows the laboring person to position themselves in ways
     that feel better and encourages progression of labor. Controlled breathing focuses on the psychologic and physical
     aspects of labor, lowering anxiety, promoting relaxation, and decreasing pain. Other nonpharmacologic methods for
     pain management during labor include hydrotherapy, hypnosis, acupuncture, biofeedback, use of doulas, and
     childbirth education. Nursing interventions will include assisting and supporting the laboring person and partner.
     The nurse can use labor balls and pillows for positioning. Nursing interventions include offering massage,
     demonstrating breathing techniques, and assisting the person to walk and move into different positions. Being
     supportive of the person's plan for their birth is a major role of the nurse. The nurse also involves the partner by
     demonstrating techniques the partner can use to help the person. (These topics are discussed in Chapter 14
     Childbirth Education Options and Chapter 18 Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth.)

     Physical Environment

     The physical environment for labor sets the mood for the laboring person. The environment can benefit or inhibit
     labor. When the laboring person has a feeling of safety, comfort, and control, labor progresses with less pain. Bright
     lights, excessive noise, fear, or feeling out of control can inhibit labor progression and cause more pain. A quiet,
     relaxing environment allows the person to focus on their body and what they are feeling. Many laboring persons
     enjoy aromatherapy, music, and low lighting. Guided imagery and the use of focal points allow the person to focus
     on other things outside of labor and pain (Kaplan & Cevik, 2021). The nurse should inquire about the person's
     wishes for how the labor room should look and feel and strive to make it so. The nurse can communicate these
     wishes to the health-care provider and other nursing staff to ensure a calm environment.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Pregnancy and Postpartum TV produced this video, which provides numerous tips and techniques
     (https://openstax.org/r/77unmedlabor) for a successful unmedicated labor.

     Aromatherapy
     The use of essential oils to aid in relaxation is called aromatherapy. It can be used through inhalation, massage,
     bath, and acupressure points. Tabatabaeichehr and Mortazavi's (2020) meta-analysis found the most commonly
     used essential oil in labor was lavender. Studies showed that lavender reduced labor pain and anxiety 30 to 60
     minutes after inhalation and reduced pain better than biofeedback or breathing techniques. Aromatherapy massage
     was more effective than massage only. Tabatabaeichehr and Mortazavi also found that geranium, orange,
     frankincense, and chamomile were effective in reducing anxiety and pain in labor. No studies in the meta-analysis
     revealed any negative side effects of aromatherapy. The nurse can assist the laboring person by offering to massage
     their back or other areas of pain with an aromatic massage oil or lotion of the patient's choice.

     Access for free at openstax.org
17.1 · Nonpharmacological Pain Management                                                                                 743

Imagery
Pain control that uses the mind-body connection to focus the laboring person's awareness on a positive image using
all the senses is called imagery. The laboring person might imagine seeing a beautiful beach, smelling the ocean,
feeling the sand and sun, and hearing the ocean waves. Guided imagery refocuses the mind away from pain and
stress to a state of deep relaxation. Imagery also allows a sense of control over the situation. Research has shown
that using imagery decreases pain by reducing the fear of birth and allowing a distraction from pain (Yavari et al.,
2019). The nurse can help the laboring person by guiding them to stay focused during contractions. If the person
has not practiced imagery, the nurse can explain how to use imagery, ask the person for their idea of a relaxing
image, and talk them through the contraction.

Music
Music has been shown to affect the laboring person's physiologic, psychologic, and socio-emotional state. Certain
music can reduce stress, provide comfort and relaxation, and decrease pain (Surucu et al., 2018). Music can also
reduce anxiety. Many laboring persons choose music that is inspiring, comforting, or religious. Music is a very
effective and inexpensive technique to reduce pain in labor. The nurse supports the laboring person by asking if they
have music they want to use, assisting them with changing the music, and keeping the environment calm.

Lighting
Lighting in the labor room is important to the laboring person. Lighting sets the mood. Bright exam lights can make
persons feel that they are being scrutinized and lack control. Bright lights in the room can also prohibit rest. Dim
lighting has been shown to stimulate the hypothalamus to produce endorphins that can act like natural painkillers
similar to morphine (Maria et al., 2022). Dim lighting has also been shown to decrease active labor length (Maria et
al., 2022).

Focal Points
Focal points are used during contractions. In using focal points, the laboring person centers attention on a picture
or an object during the contraction to direct attention away from the contraction. The person will focus on the object
and concentrate on breathing through the contraction. The nurse can support the laboring person by suggesting
they use a picture on their phone, a baby outfit or blanket, or art on the wall as their focal point. The nurse explains
that the person will focus on that point while breathing through the contraction. During the contraction, the nurse
can help the person by gently reminding them to stay focused on the object.

Comfort Measures

Comfort measures are designed to address the physical challenges of labor. Hydrotherapy and massage aid in
relaxing the muscles. Fluids and cool cloths keep the laboring person hydrated and comfortable. Counter pressure is
very successful in decreasing pain during contractions, and effleurage is soothing and relaxing.

Hydrotherapy
The process of the laboring person submerging in water for pain relief is called hydrotherapy. If a tub is not
available, a shower can also be used for hydrotherapy. Hydrotherapy has been shown to decrease pain, encourage
movement, lower anxiety, shorten labor, and improve labor satisfaction (Tuncay et al., 2019). Research has shown
no negative side effects of hydrotherapy in the first stage of labor. Hydrotherapy allows the laboring person to float,
decreasing the weight of the uterus and fetus on the pelvis. Hydrotherapy is different from waterbirth. Waterbirth is
immersion in water during the second stage of labor and birth. The nurse prepares the warm water, assists the
laboring person into the shower or tub, and ensures safety while the person is in the shower or tub. The nurse can
also encourage the partner to help by being in the shower or tub or by pouring warm water over the person's back or
abdomen. The nurse can help position the person so that the shower is on the area that feels best. Intermittent
monitoring or waterproof continuous monitoring can be used by the nurse. Immersion and waterbirth are
contraindicated with maternal fever, vaginal bleeding, preterm gestation, or the presence of infectious diseases, and
they are not available at every birthing place.
744  17 · Pain Management During Labor and Birth

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Fetal Monitoring of a Person in a Birthing Tub

     Laboring persons who choose hydrotherapy are usually required to be low risk as determined by their health-care
     provider. Fetal monitoring occurs at the same intervals as intermittent auscultation. The waterproof Doppler or
     monitor is placed into the water over the abdomen closest to the fetal back. The nurse follows institutional policy on
     standard precautions to prevent communicable disease while monitoring the fetus. The fetal heart rate (FHR) is
     monitored before, during, and after the contraction. If the facility has waterproof remote monitors, the monitors can
     be used for continuous monitoring if the laboring person qualifies for continuous monitoring. If no waterproof
     Dopplers or monitors are available, the nurse will ask the person to stand and will perform intermittent monitoring.
     The laboring person should not need to get completely out of the tub for monitoring. (See Chapter 16 Electronic
     Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring for more information on monitoring.)

     Massage
     Massage is defined as a physical manipulation of tissue. The manipulation can be provided in different ways,
     depending upon the preference of the laboring person. Massage can be soft or hard, moving or still, and skin-to-skin
     or with a massage tool. Labor massage has been shown to decrease anxiety, provide comfort, and release
     endorphins (Nikmah et al., 2022).

     The back and sacrum are common areas of discomfort in labor. Several techniques have been proven to help relieve
     back and sacral pain. The nurse or support person can use a tennis ball to massage the low back and sacrum.
     Massaging with essential oils such as jasmine, clary sage, rose, and lavender aids in the effectiveness of the
     massage. Massage may be uncomfortable for laboring persons in some cultures or for those who have experienced
     sexual assault (Ingram et al., 2022). The feature box provides a link to demonstrate multiple types of massage for
     labor.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     This video presents multiple massage techniques (https://openstax.org/r/77labormassage) that can be used by the
     nurse, partner, or doula during labor.

     Fluids
     Fluids during labor are essential for the laboring person. In most labor and delivery units, an intravenous (IV) or
     saline lock is required; however, the IV solution does not quench thirst. The laboring person breathes in and out
     through the mouth often. This causes dry mouth and thirst. Offering the person frequent small sips of water or juice,
     ice chips, or ice pops quenches their thirst and provides calories.

     Historically, eating and drinking in labor were thought to be dangerous due to the potential of aspirating food and
     drink. This idea was based on information from the 1940s, when general anesthesia was used in many births and
     prior to the use of anesthesiologists (Tillett & Hill, 2016). Epidural and spinal anesthesia are now the most common
     types of anesthesia, and with them, the risk of aspiration is very low. The research of Shea-Lewis et al. (2018) found
     that limiting laboring persons to ice chips and fasting can cause ketosis and hyponatremia for the person and fetus.
     They found no adverse effects of oral intake on the laboring person or fetus. Offering oral intake decreased stress
     and provided comfort to the laboring person. The nurse explains to the laboring person that the digestive system
     slows during labor because the body is focused on contractions and birth. This increases the potential for nausea
     and vomiting. Therefore, the nurse may provide small amounts of fluids to help prevent vomiting based on facility
     protocols.

     Cool Cloth
     Labor is very physical work. The laboring person can become hot and sweaty. The nurse can provide a cool cloth,
     which is soothing and allows the person to cool down. A cool cloth is also helpful with nausea. The nurse is aware
     that many persons become nauseated during labor and places a cool cloth to the person's face and neck to

     Access for free at openstax.org
17.1 · Nonpharmacological Pain Management                                                                                            745

decrease those feelings.

Counter Pressure
The act of giving sustained pressure to the back, hips, sacrum, or other joints is called counter pressure (Figure
17.2). A common type of counter pressure in labor is a "hip squeeze." The nurse or support person places their
palms on the hips and applies firm pressure in pushing the hips toward each another. This relieves pain and also
opens the pelvis to allow descent of the fetus. Figure 17.3 demonstrates the hip squeeze.

FIGURE 17.2 Counter Pressure The support person's hands apply counter pressure to the lower back of the laboring person. (a) This
placement is for when the back pain is experienced on both sides of the sacrum. (b) This placement is for when the back pain is
experienced directly on the sacrum. Counter pressure decreases the back pain experienced during labor. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

FIGURE 17.3 Hip Squeeze Counter Pressure The laboring person leans on her partner while her nurse-midwife provides counter pressure
via hip squeeze. (credit: reproduced with permission from Amy Giles)
746  17 · Pain Management During Labor and Birth

     Effleurage
     Light stroking massage using the tips of the fingers in slow, long strokes is called effleurage. It relaxes the laboring
     person, closes the pain gate, and releases endorphins (Yosepha et al., 2019). Effleurage is normally used on the
     abdomen of the laboring person. The advantage of this massage is that the laboring person can do this without
     assistance. For those persons who are averse to other people's touch during labor, effleurage is a good comfort
     technique. The nurse can demonstrate how to perform effleurage to the laboring person. The nurse explains the
     gate control pain theory and the release of endorphins as a result of effleurage. Figure 17.4 demonstrates
     effleurage.

     FIGURE 17.4 Effleurage The light motion of effleurage on the pregnant abdomen can help with pain during labor. (attribution: Copyright
     Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Movement and Position

     Maternal movement in labor assists the fetus into an optimal position for birth. Walking and rocking move the pelvis,
     aiding the fetus's movement. Squatting and hands-and-knees positions can open the pelvis and relieve back pain.
     Side-lying positions are relaxing. The nurse can place pillows behind the person's back, between their legs, and
     under the abdomen to support the side-lying position. Movement can also be used as a distraction for pain control.
     Changing positions in labor leads to an easier birth, a greater sense of control, and an increased incidence of vaginal
     birth (Karaman & Yildiz, 2022). Nurses encourage frequent position changes during first and second stage labor. The
     nurse can assist in placing the person in different positions. When the person is pushing, the nurse will help the
     person to move to their side, to squat, or to assume a hands-and-knees position. These positions are associated
     with fewer perineal lacerations.
     Walking
     Walking in labor allows the laboring person to get out of the bed, have freedom of movement, and loosen the
     muscles. In some labor and delivery units, a wireless monitor can be used while the person is walking if there are no
     contraindications. If the person does not have a risk factor, intermittent auscultation allows the laboring person to
     walk without monitors. Walking moves the pelvis, which also moves the fetus. These movements can encourage the
     fetal presenting part to descend into the pelvis in a more optimal position (Garbelli & Lira (2021).
     Squatting
     Squatting is a good position for opening the pelvis in labor. Squatting opens the pelvic outlet, providing more room
     for the fetal presenting part to descend and for birth to proceed. Squatting can be done while being supported by
     the partner, doula, or nurse. This position can be challenging if the pregnant person has not practiced getting into
     and holding the squat. The nurse will assist the person to a squatting position. The nurse can offer a squat stool or a
     squat bar attached to the bed to support the laboring or birthing person in the squat (Figure 17.5).

     Access for free at openstax.org
17.1 · Nonpharmacological Pain Management                                                                                                  747

FIGURE 17.5 Squatting (a) The laboring person can sit on a squat stool being supported by the partner. (b) A squat bar can be attached to
the end of the bed, allowing support for the laboring person. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Rocking
Rocking in labor can be very soothing. Rocking is rhythmic and can be used as a distraction during a contraction.
Many different tools can help the person rock, such as a rocking chair, ball, or toilet. The laboring person can also sit
on a birthing ball and rock back and forth and side to side. The nurse can assist the laboring person to the toilet. If
there are no contraindications, the person can sit forward or backward on the toilet, allowing for a rocking motion.
The nurse can place the person in a side-lying position and help rock their hips. This relieves tension in the hips and
aids in repositioning the fetus.

Hands and Knees
Being on the hands and knees is a very common position, especially for those persons with back labor. The laboring
person can get on hands and knees and perform pelvic tilts, or cat-cow yoga positions. Pelvic tilts are the rocking of
the pelvis by moving the back up, then sinking the back down. When pelvic tilts are performed in the hands-and-
knees position, the tilts encourage a fetus in the occiput posterior position to assume the occiput anterior position,
as the heaviest part of the fetus (buttocks and back) is drawn to the anterior side by gravity (Garbelli & Lira (2021).
This position allows the nurse or support person to massage the back, apply counter pressure, and hold a hot or
cold pack onto the back. Figure 17.6 demonstrates different positions for labor.
748  17 · Pain Management During Labor and Birth

     FIGURE 17.6 Moving and Changing Positions (a) The laboring person is leaning on her partner and rocking her hips side to side. (b) The
     pregnant person is in the hands-and-knees position. (c) The laboring person is in the side-lying position to take pressure off the back and
     open the pelvis. (credit a: reproduced with permission from Amy Giles; attribution b & c: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY
     4.0 license)

             LINK TO LEARNING

     This video discusses pelvic tilts in the hands-and-knees position (https://openstax.org/r/77pelvictilts) which can be
     used during labor.
     Positioning with Birthing and Peanut Balls
     Birthing balls and peanut balls are used to assist laboring persons to open the hips and mimic a squatting position.
     Birthing balls have been shown to decrease discomfort during the first stage of labor, aid in descent of the fetus
     through the pelvis, and decrease the length of labor in laboring persons who choose to labor and deliver without an
     epidural (Grenvik et al., 2023). According to the evidence of a meta-analysis of the literature, the same results have
     not consistently been shown when the laboring person elects to have an epidural placed for the discomfort of labor
     and delivery (Grenvik et al. 2023). Figure 17.7 shows placement of the peanut ball during labor in the side-lying
     position.

     Access for free at openstax.org
17.1 · Nonpharmacological Pain Management                                                                                                         749

FIGURE 17.7 Peanut Balls Peanut balls have been shown to decrease discomfort during labor and to shorten labor. These illustrations
show various ways to position the laboring person using a peanut ball. (a) Side lying with upper leg elevated and both legs with knees
slightly bent. (b) Side lying with upper leg bent at the knee and hanging over and lower leg straight or slightly bent. (c) Side lying with legs
straddling and both knees bent (like riding a horse). (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Controlled Breathing

Controlled breathing has been used for labor pain for generations. It is also used for relaxation and pain control in
situations beyond labor pain. Many different styles of breathing have been introduced in varying types of childbirth
education. Controlled breathing is considered a type of relaxation and distraction during contractions. If the laboring
person has not learned breathing techniques through childbirth education, the nurse can teach the person and
partner different techniques. The nurse can demonstrate the different types of controlled breathing. During a
contraction, the nurse can breathe with the person to help them through it.

Cleansing Breath
A cleansing breath is a slow, deep inhalation through the nose and exhalation through the mouth. It can be used
before a contraction for preparation and after a contraction for release of tension from the contraction. The nurse
teaches the partner to watch for the cleansing breath to recognize the beginning and end of the contraction.

Deep Abdominal Breathing
Deep abdominal breathing, or belly breathing, is the process of inhaling and expanding the belly and exhaling and
releasing the belly. The laboring person can put their hand on their belly to guide the breath to their belly. Visualizing
the breath going in and out of the belly is helpful during the contraction. This type of breathing is often used in early
labor.

High Chest Breathing
High chest breathing is the process of inhaling while expanding the chest and exhaling the air as the chest falls. The
750  17 · Pain Management During Labor and Birth

     hands can be placed on the chest and abdomen. The focus is on expanding only the chest and allowing the
     abdomen to remain still. This type of breathing is often used in active labor.

     Chanting
     Chanting during labor is similar to chanting during yoga or prayer. Laboring persons can listen to music of others
     chanting or chant without music. Mostly vowel sounds are used to keep the throat open and relaxed. Many labor
     supporters feel that as the throat stays relaxed, the cervix will stay relaxed and open more easily.

     Panting
     Panting is the pattern of short and long breaths. It may sound like "hee-hee-hoo." This type of breathing is used as
     labor is progressing and contractions become more intense. Panting is done in a rhythmic pattern from the
     beginning to the end of the contraction, typically followed by a deep cleansing breath (Leutenegger et al., 2022).

     Pushing
     Breathing while pushing can be performed in different ways. Some laboring people are taught to take a large inhale,
     hold their breath, and push while counting to ten. Others are taught to take a deep inhale and slowly exhale as they
     bear down to push. These are called open and closed glottis breathing. Research has found that both open glottis
     and closed glottis breathing are effective in pushing, and the laboring person should be allowed to choose which
     type of breathing is more comfortable (Barasinski et al., 2020). The nurse should understand both types of
     breathing and support the person in their choice of technique.

     Complementary and Alternative Pain Relief Measures

     Complementary and alternative pain relief measures are methods outside conventional medical measures. People
     seeking these measures are usually looking for an alternative to the traditional methods of pain relief or a method
     that works with their philosophy of natural childbirth. Examples of complementary and alternative pain relief
     measures are biofeedback, hypnosis, acupuncture, massage, aromatherapy, and others. The nurse can support and
     assist the laboring person in using nontraditional pain methods.

     Biofeedback
     The mind-body practice called biofeedback involves a sensor that monitors different pain reactions in the body
     while the person uses techniques to control those reactions. For example, during a contraction, the pulse increases,
     as seen on the pulse oximeter. The laboring person uses breathing techniques to control the pulse during the
     contraction. Biofeedback works because the person believes the mind has control over the body. The person using
     biofeedback in labor may have been taught this method in childbirth education and will have practiced to become
     proficient prior to labor. This technique has been used for many different disciplines such as psychology, sports, and
     business (Raju & Singh, 2013).

     Hypnosis
     Hypnosis for labor is a process used to cope with labor pain. Hypnosis works by inhibiting neuronal communication
     between the sensory cortex, amygdala, and limbic system, inhibiting pain sensations (Michal et al., 2018). Pregnant
     persons take classes to learn the method of hypnosis using breathing, relaxation, and visualization during
     contractions. As an adjunct to classes, persons are provided self-hypnosis sessions to listen to and practice during
     their pregnancy. Different sessions provide affirmations, visualizations, and instructions on getting into a hypnotic
     state. Laboring persons listen to the sessions while in labor. The person turns inward and should not be disturbed
     during the contraction. The nurse is aware that the environment should be quiet with dim lighting to promote the
     hypnotic state.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     This video describes hypnobirthing (https://openstax.org/r/77hypnobirthing) and gives tips on how to use it.

     Acupressure
     The practice of stimulating specific areas of the body to elicit a specific action is called acupressure. It increases
     the release of neurotransmitters such as serotonin and dopamine, causing an analgesic effect (Michal et al., 2018).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        17.1 · Nonpharmacological Pain Management     751

Certain pressure points throughout the body are thought to aid in pain relief, while other areas are thought to
increase labor contractions to expedite birth. The most common areas for acupressure in labor are in the hands,
feet, and ears. The pressure points can be stimulated using fingers, massagers, tools, and electrical impulses.
Research has shown that acupressure decreases labor pain and also provides increased comfort during the
postpartum period (Solt Kirca & Kanza Gul, 2022). The nurse can help support the laboring person while they are
stimulating pressure points. Acupressure is usually performed by a practitioner such as a traditional Chinese
medicine specialist, chiropractor, or massage therapist. A nurse needs special training to become proficient in
acupressure and to learn which points are safe and not safe during pregnancy and labor.

        LINK TO LEARNING

This video from Evidence-Based Birth discusses how acupressure and acupuncture (https://openstax.org/r/
77accupressure) can be used for labor.

Doulas
A trained support layperson who provides emotional, physical, and social support during pregnancy, labor, and
postpartum is called a doula. Training and certification programs are available for persons desiring to become
doulas. Their training involves a variety of nonpharmacologic techniques to assist the laboring person. Doulas are
not trained to provide medical support. They accompany laboring persons to hospitals and birthing centers, or come
to homes, to provide continuous support to the person and partner. Some labor and delivery units have volunteer
doulas available for persons in need of support during labor. Patients may hire a doula and work with them
throughout the pregnancy. Evidence has shown a decrease in labor interventions, increased breast-feeding rates,
greater emotional well-being, and increased birth satisfaction with patients using doulas (McLeish & Redshaw,
2018). The nurse works in conjunction with the doula to support the laboring person. The nurse can also advocate
for the person's doula to remain in the room during labor and birth. Doulas and nurses work very well together to
achieve the type of birth the person desires. Most laboring persons pay a fee for doula support, and some facilities
are just beginning to hire doulas. Table 17.1 summarizes the nonpharmacologic comfort measures for labor
presented in this chapter.

Nonpharmacologic      Positive Effects                                  Required Tools
Measure

Supportive care/      · reduced pain in labor                           Support person
Doula                 · increased vaginal birth
                      · reduced anxiety

Childbirth education  · increased comfort in labor                      Classes, in person or online
                      · increased satisfaction of birth
                      · increased feelings of control during

                         labor and birth
                      · reduced anxiety
                      · increased vaginal birth

Breathing techniques  · reduced pain and anxiety
                      · reduced duration of labor

Hypnosis              · reduced pain and anxiety                        Classes and practice
                      · increased relaxation
                      · increased feelings of control

TABLE 17.1 Nonpharmacologic Measures to Reduce the Discomfort of Labor
752  17 · Pain Management During Labor and Birth

     Nonpharmacologic  Positive Effects                               Required Tools
     Measure                                                          Biofeedback monitor and practice
                           · increased feelings of control
     Biofeedback           · reduced pain

     Hydrotherapy                     · reduced pain and anxiety      Pool, tub, whirlpool, shower
                                      · reduced blood pressure
                                      · increased labor satisfaction

     Aromatherapy                     · improves mood                 Oils, diffuser
                                      · reduces anxiety
                                      · increases relaxation

     Massage                          · reduced pain and anxiety      Support person, tennis balls, massage oil,
                                                                      massage tools

     Acupressure                      · reduced pain                  Support person
                                      · more efficient labor

     TABLE 17.1 Nonpharmacologic Measures to Reduce the Discomfort of Labor

     Childbirth Preparation
     Many childbirth education and preparation programs are available to the pregnant person. Different programs
     address different philosophies of birth. The pregnant person can choose which program is most aligned with their
     ideas for birth or combine techniques from different childbirth educational programs. Some programs are taught at
     the birthing facility, while others are held in community centers or private residences. Hospital-based programs
     discuss childbirth options, including those at the facility. Birthing center programs are usually held in the center and
     review options for birth as well as nonpharmacologic techniques for pain relief and relaxation. Other programs are
     aligned with an organization that provides education materials and philosophies for childbirth. Online classes can
     encompass all types of methods. (See Chapter 14 Childbirth Education Options for more information.)

     CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

     Taking Action to Support the Laboring Person Using Nonpharmacologic Pain Relief
     Measures

     Bea's spouse Alex asks the nurse to assist him in decreasing the back discomfort Bea is experiencing with the
     contractions. Alex informs the nurse they have tried massaging her lower back and Bea has been in the shower
     using warm water on her back. Bea tells the nurse the pain is so intense she is considering asking for a pain
     medication, but she really desires an unmedicated labor and birth.

     At this time, the nurse considers their next actions, which are performing an interval labor assessment for
     current contraction pattern and assessing FHR pattern, vital signs, and coping mechanisms. Next, the nurse
     considers whether a vaginal exam is appropriate. If it has been more than an hour since the previous exam and
     the contraction pattern is adequate, then a vaginal exam is appropriate.

     Next, the nurse considers other nonpharmacologic pain relief measures to discuss with Bea, including tennis
     balls within a sock, alternating ice and heat to the lower back, counter pressure to the lower back, and pelvic
     rock to use gravity to change the fetus's position.

     Finally, the nurse considers whether administration of a narcotic is indicated. Since Bea is asking for
     nonpharmacologic measures at this time, the nurse would not pursue narcotics, but they might have a

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       17.2 · Pharmacological Pain Management            753

discussion to discover what Bea knows about analgesics during labor.

17.2 Pharmacological Pain Management

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Provide patient education on, administer, and monitor patients receiving analgesic medications during
        the process of labor and birth

    · Educate the patient desiring nitrous oxide for the discomfort of labor and birth
    · Explain the role of naloxone during the process of labor and birth

The laboring person determines the level of pain they are experiencing during labor. Every person has a different
level of pain tolerance and should be able to request pain relief measures at any time during labor. Analgesia refers
to the inability to feel pain, and the medications designed to lessen or eliminate pain without loss of consciousness
are called analgesics. For persons desiring analgesia in labor, many safe options are available. The nurse provides
education on different types of analgesics, their side effects, and what monitoring is required while using the
analgesic. The nurse administers the analgesics as prescribed and monitors and documents the effectiveness per
facility protocol.

Analgesia

Analgesia is used often for labor pain. It is important to note that all analgesics cross the placenta. Most analgesics
cause a depressant effect on the laboring person and the fetus; therefore, the nurse will assess the FHR, vital signs,
cervical dilation, and stage of labor prior to administering pain medication. Analgesics can be administered by many
different routes: subcutaneous, intramuscular, intravenous, inhaled, and oral. In most cases, analgesics are
administered intravenously (IV). This route allows faster pain relief to the laboring person. This route, however,
causes a depressant effect; if too high a dose is given, it can lead to respiratory depression. Intravenously
administered analgesics reach the fetus quickly and stay in the fetal system longer. If the fetus is born while the
analgesic is still circulating, the fetus can exhibit depressed respirations.

Analgesia can be divided into categories. Table 17.2 lists the categories and some examples of analgesia.

Category of Analgesia                Description                       Medications

Tranquilizer/Amnestic                Relieves anxiety                  Hydroxyzine (Vistaril)
                                     Rapid sedation

Narcotic                             Relieves pain                     Fentanyl
                                     Reduces anxiety
                                     Causes respiratory depression

Ultra-short-acting synthetic opioid  Relieves pain                     Remifentanil (Ultiva)
                                     Causes respiratory depression
                                     Rapidly metabolized
                                     Does not accumulate in the fetus

Opioid agonist-antagonist            Relieves pain                     Butorphanol (Stadol)
                                     Less respiratory depression       Nalbuphine (Nubain)

Inhaled analgesic                    Reduces anxiety                   Nitrous oxide (50% N2O/50% O2)
                                     Reduces pain
                                     Rapidly reversed

TABLE 17.2 Analgesia in Labor (McDonald et al., 2019)
754  17 · Pain Management During Labor and Birth

     Hydroxyzine
     Hydroxyzine (Vistaril) is an anxiolytic that causes drowsiness and creates a feeling of calm. Hydroxyzine is
     commonly used in latent or early labor to relieve anxiety and allow the person to rest until active labor begins. It is
     not normally used during active labor. Hydroxyzine also has antihistamine properties that can cause drowsiness to
     aid in sleep. Side effects include dry mouth, constipation, dizziness, and headache (Brunton & Knollman, 2022).
     Hydroxyzine can be administered orally and intramuscularly. The nurse educates the pregnant person that they will
     feel relaxed and sleepy but that hydroxyzine is not a pain reliever. If the person begins to experience labor pain, they
     should ask the nurse what the health-care provider has ordered for pain relief.

     Promethazine
     Promethazine (Phenergan) is an antiemetic that is given for nausea and vomiting or in conjunction with a narcotic. It
     causes drowsiness and can help the laboring person sleep. Nausea and vomiting are common discomforts in labor,
     and promethazine can be used as treatment. Promethazine's side effects include drowsiness, nervousness,
     restlessness, and dry mouth (Brunton & Knollman, 2022). Routes include oral, rectal, intramuscular (IM), and
     intravenous (IV). The nurse should be aware of the caustic nature of the medication and should give IM injections
     deep into the muscle. When administering promethazine IV push, the medication should be diluted adequately
     (usually with 5 to 10 mL of normal saline) and administered slowly (over 5 to 10 minutes). The nurse educates the
     laboring person on the side effects and encourages the person to ask for assistance when getting out of bed.

     Butorphanol
     Butorphanol (Stadol) is an opioid agonist-antagonist used for moderate to severe pain in labor. It can be given
     intramuscularly or intravenously. It causes sedation and decreased pain. Side effects include dizziness, confusion,
     nausea, constipation, respiratory depression, and withdrawal syndrome (Brunton & Knollman, 2022). Because of
     the medication's antagonist property, persons dependent on opiates can have withdrawal symptoms when taking
     butorphanol. The nurse should assess the person's social history prior to administering the medication. The nurse
     educates the laboring person and partner on the side effects and explains the need for assistance when getting out
     of bed.

     Nalbuphine
     Nalbuphine (Nubain) is an opioid agonist-antagonist used for moderate to severe pain in labor. Side effects include
     dizziness, nausea, respiratory depression, and urinary retention (Brunton & Knollman, 2022). It should not be given
     to persons with substance use disorder, as it can precipitate withdrawal. It is normally given intramuscularly or
     intravenously, but can also be administered subcutaneously. As with butorphanol, the nurse must assess the
     person's social history regarding opioid dependency and signs of opioid withdrawal prior to administering. The nurse
     explains the side effects and encourages the person to call for assistance when getting out of bed.

     Fentanyl
     Fentanyl is a potent opioid used to treat moderate to severe pain. It can be administered through an epidural
     catheter or intravenously. Side effects include nausea, bradycardia, hypotension, sedation, peripheral vasodilation,
     and potentially fatal respiratory depression (Brunton & Knollman, 2022). Some institutions require a continuous
     pulse oximeter to be used to monitor oxygen saturation while using this opioid. The nurse should keep an opioid
     antagonist readily available in case of overdose and respiratory depression. The nurse educates the laboring person
     and partner on the side effects and the importance of calling for assistance when getting out of bed.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Pain Relief Expectations

     The beliefs and perceptions of the person experiencing childbirth influence their subjective labeling and response to
     the process of labor and birth as well as any decisions made within the health-care setting. Pain is part of the labor
     and birth process, and culture influences a person's perception and communication of their pain. Laboring persons
     of various cultures may express their pain by vocalization or no expression at all and, when asked what their level of
     pain is, may state the pain is a low level. Culture or individual choice will dictate what the person chooses to relieve
     the pain and discomfort of the labor and birth process. These choices are based on the interaction of psychologic,
     social, and physiologic factors. Understanding and respecting individual choices for pain relief is essential to

     Access for free at openstax.org
17.3 · Anesthesia                                                                                                        755

culturally competent nursing care (Mousa et al., 2018).

Nitrous Oxide

Nitrous oxide (N2O) is a tasteless, odorless gas that works by releasing neurotransmitters that act like opioids in the
brain and by altering pain perception in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (Broughton et al., 2020). N2O is used for
labor analgesia in all stages of labor and is safe for the laboring person and the fetus. N2O does not cause a sedating
effect on the fetus, as narcotic analgesia does, and has a rapid onset and clearance. The safe concentration for labor
analgesia is 50% N2O to 50% oxygen. A machine permanently set at this setting is used to blend the gases; the
setting cannot be changed. The gas is inhaled through a mask held only by the laboring person. The gas is not free
flowing. The person must place the mask firmly against the face to develop negative pressure to inhale the gas. The
laboring person is in control of how much and how often to use the gas. Laboring persons describe feeling relaxed
with mild pain relief. The common side effects are nausea, vomiting, and dizziness. The nurse educates the person
and support person that the mask must be held only by the laboring person, the gas takes several breaths to
become effective, and the person must breathe through the contractions to make it effective. Opioids used in
conjunction with N2O can cause an increased risk for respiratory depression and are therefore not recommended.

Naloxone

Naloxone (Narcan) is the antidote to opioids. It rapidly replaces opioids by binding to opioid receptors and blocking
the opioid from reattaching. This reverses the respiratory depression caused by opioid overdose. On the labor and
delivery unit, naloxone is readily available because of the narcotics being administered for pain relief. Naloxone can
be administered to the laboring person if their respirations are shallow or their oxygen saturation is low (Vallerand &
Sanoski, 2023). It can be given to the newborn if respirations are slow, crying is weak, or color is poor. Opioids
rapidly cross the placenta and enter the fetal circulation. If the opioid has not metabolized and cleared from the
fetal circulation, the newborn can experience respiratory depression. In this case, the newborn may be given
naloxone to reverse the opioid-related respiratory depression. If the birthing person is opioid dependent, naloxone
should not be administered to the newborn due to possible seizure activity. The nurse monitors for respiratory
depression in the laboring person, newly delivered person, and neonate when naloxone is administered.

17.3 Anesthesia

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Assist with the education, preparation, insertion, and post care of the person receiving epidural
        anesthesia during the process of labor and birth

    · Educate the person receiving pudendal anesthesia for the discomfort of birth
    · Educate the person receiving local anesthesia for the discomfort of birth
    · Provide education to the person giving birth on the advantages and disadvantages of spinal anesthesia
    · Provide education to the person giving birth on the advantages and disadvantages of general anesthesia

Anesthesia for labor is provided in various forms, such as epidural, pudendal, and local. General anesthesia is used
in emergency cesarean births. There are positive and negative aspects of each type of anesthesia. The nurse
assesses the laboring person for the desire for anesthesia and risk factors according to the stage and timing of labor,
educates the person about the side effects associated with the type of anesthesia, and monitors the safety of the
laboring person and the fetus.

Epidural Anesthesia

The regional anesthesia produced by injection and infusion of a local anesthetic (bupivacaine [Marcaine]) and a
narcotic (fentanyl) in the epidural space around the spinal nerves to block pain from T10 to S5 during labor is called
epidural anesthesia (McDonald et al., 2019). Figure 17.8 shows the insertion of the epidural catheter. The most
common side effect of epidural anesthesia is maternal hypotension. Less common side effects include bradycardia,
respiratory depression, infection, nerve injury, and paresthesia (McDonald et al., 2019).
756  17 · Pain Management During Labor and Birth

     FIGURE 17.8 Placement of Epidural Catheter during Labor (a) The laboring person sits on the edge of the bed, supported by their
     partner while the epidural is placed. (b) The epidural catheter is placed between the vertebrae into the epidural space outside the spinal
     cord. Medication infuses through the epidural catheter to provide anesthesia to the laboring person. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
     OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     When the laboring person requests an epidural, the nurse notifies the health-care provider and receives orders for
     the epidural. The nurse ensures the person has signed the informed consent after the anesthesia provider has
     educated the laboring person on the risks and benefits of epidural anesthesia. The epidural is inserted by the
     anesthesia provider. The nurse assists the laboring person into a sitting or side-lying position based on the
     anesthesia provider's preference. For continuous infusion of anesthesia during labor and birth, the anesthesia
     provider inserts a hollow needle into the epidural space and then threads a small catheter through the needle so
     that it rests in the epidural space. After the insertion needle is removed, the catheter is attached to an infusion bag
     and epidural pump. The pump is programmed to administer anesthetic continuously and provide for limited self-
     administration by the laboring patient if the infusion does not adequately control the pain of labor. While the
     epidural is in use, the laboring person should have reduction of pain; should have loss of some sensation in the
     abdomen, perineum, and legs; but should maintain a sense of perineal pressure. If a cesarean birth becomes
     necessary, the labor epidural is usually dosed to provide deeper anesthesia for surgery. After birth, the epidural
     catheter is usually removed, and sensation slowly returns to the abdomen, perineum, and legs.

     Nursing Actions before Epidural Insertion
     Upon the patient's admission in labor, the nurse assesses the laboring person's desire for pain control. If the person
     chooses an epidural for pain control, the nurse obtains the order from the obstetric provider. Once the laboring
     person has met the health-care provider's criteria for an epidural, the nurse informs the anesthesia provider, who
     then educates the person on epidural use, risks, and benefits. The nurse reviews the admission labs and reports the
     platelet count to the anesthesia provider. If platelets are below normal (less than 150,000 per microliter), there is
     an increased risk for hemorrhage in the epidural space. The anesthesia provider will inform the nurse if the patient is
     not eligible for an epidural for labor. People with valvular heart disease, infection, coagulopathy, hypovolemia, and
     neurologic disease may not be good candidates for epidural anesthesia. The obstetric and anesthesia health-care
     providers will collaborate to determine the eligibility of each person.

     Contraindications to the use of epidural anesthesia for labor and delivery include (Ring et al., 2021):

         · coagulopathy,
         · hypovolemia,
         · allergy to the local anesthetic,
         · thrombocytopenia,
         · infection,
         · aortic or mitral valve stenosis, and

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             17.3 · Anesthesia           757

    · severe left ventricular outflow obstruction.

Obese and severely obese laboring persons have more complications during pregnancy, labor, and birth. This is
especially true when a spinal or epidural anesthetic is being placed. Because of the size of these patients, it can be
more difficult for the anesthesia provider to find the correct space for the administration of medication. The
anesthesia provider might need a special needle that is longer than normal to penetrate the tissue and enter the
epidural space.

The nurse explains to the laboring person the need to continuously monitor their vital signs and the FHR. Table 17.3
explains the nursing actions surrounding epidural anesthesia. An automatic blood pressure cuff, pulse oximeter, and
continuous fetal monitor are placed. The well-being of both the laboring person and the fetus is confirmed prior to
epidural placement. Because hypotension is a side effect of epidural anesthesia, an IV fluid bolus of 500 to 1,000
mL of lactated Ringer's or normal saline is started 10 to 60 minutes prior to epidural insertion. Laboratory results
are reviewed by the nurse and anesthesia provider to determine eligibility for anesthesia. The anesthesia provider
will review the platelet count and determine if the count is high enough to continue with the procedure. Prior to
epidural insertion, the nurse evaluates the vital signs, stage of labor, cervical change, contraction pattern, and FHR.
The nurse may also assist the person to the bathroom to void prior to insertion of the epidural if needed.

Nursing Actions               Implementation

Initiate and verify orders    Orders will be placed by health-care providers

Assess maternal fall risk     Standardized fall risk assessment

Assess well-being of          Apply continuous fetal monitor, BP device, and pulse oximeter
laboring person and fetus

Confirm laboratory studies Ensure platelet count is within normal limits

Administer IV fluid bolus     Approximately 1,000 mL IV fluid bolus 30-60 minutes prior to the procedure

Assist person to appropriate  Ensure appropriate position is maintained
position

Assess vital signs during     Vital signs monitored using continuous monitoring for person and fetus
procedure

Assess for reaction during    Monitor vital signs, metallic taste in mouth, hypotension, difficulty in speaking,
test dose                     sudden-onset headache, and neck pain during test dose

Assess for pain relief and    Monitor pain relief, vital signs per protocol (every 5-15 minutes), respiratory
side effects of epidural      depression, and level of anesthesia

  Assess for urinary retention Intermittent urinary catheterization or insertion of indwelling catheter

TABLE 17.3 Nursing Actions Surrounding Epidural Insertion (AWHONN, 2020)

Nursing Actions during Epidural Insertion
The nurse educates the person on leg numbness and explains that they will no longer be able to get out of bed. After
insertion, fall precaution education will be reinforced, and the bed will be kept low with side rails up. During the
epidural insertion, the nurse positions the person most commonly in the sitting or side-lying position with the back
in a C-position to open the spaces between the vertebrae (see Figure 17.8). The anesthesia provider inserts the
epidural catheter using sterile technique. The nurse or partner assists the patient to maintain the appropriate
position; the nurse monitors the vital signs and FHR. After insertion of the epidural catheter, the anesthesia provider
injects medication as a test dose. The nurse notes the time and any side effects reported by the laboring person.
758  17 · Pain Management During Labor and Birth

     The catheter is taped into place, and the anesthetic can be set to a continuous infusion with patient-controlled
     periodic bolus until after birth.

     Nursing Actions after Epidural Insertion
     After the epidural catheter is inserted and dosed, the nurse assists the person into a supine position with a wedge
     under one hip to displace the pregnant uterus from the vena cava and aorta, to avoid aortocaval compression
     syndrome. Vital signs and FHR are monitored every 5 to 15 minutes after insertion. The nurse also assesses the
     patient for respiratory depression, level of consciousness and paresthesia, and pain control. If the laboring person
     becomes hypotensive, the nurse will begin another bolus of IV fluid or notify the anesthesia provider. Ephedrine
     (Akovaz), a vasopressor, can be administered (as ordered) to increase blood pressure if the IV bolus does not help or
     if increased fluid is contraindicated. During the hypotensive episode, the blood pressure can decrease enough to
     reduce uteroplacental perfusion, causing late decelerations and bradycardia in the FHR. See Chapter 16 Electronic
     Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring for more information on nursing actions for fetal bradycardia and
     decelerations. The nurse monitors for late decelerations while attempting to reverse the hypotension.

     Bladder function is affected by anesthesia, and the nurse monitors for urinary retention. Depending on the stage of
     labor, cervical dilation, and the institutional policy, the nurse will drain the bladder intermittently or insert an
     indwelling urinary catheter. During the second stage of labor, the nurse will remove the indwelling urinary catheter
     before the laboring person starts pushing.

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Postepidural Hypotension

     The nurse will monitor vital signs every 5 minutes during the first 30 minutes after the epidural is placed and every
     15 minutes during the remainder of the process of labor and birth. A common side effect of the epidural is
     hypotension. If the nurse notices hypotension, the IV fluids will be increased, the anesthesia provider can be called,
     and ephedrine could be given. If the hypotension continues, perfusion to the placenta will decrease, and
     uteroplacental insufficiency will occur.

     Education of the Person Desiring an Epidural
     The nurse educates the laboring person on loss of mobility and feeling in the abdomen, perineum, and legs. The
     nurse also educates the laboring person that they will no longer be able to ambulate until after delivery and the
     effects of the anesthesia have worn off. Common side effects are mild itching, nausea, and back pain after birth at
     the epidural site. The nurse can administer antiemetics and antihistamines to reduce these side effects. Epidural
     anesthesia has been previously linked to increased risk of oxytocin augmentation, operative and instrumental birth,
     and increased length of labor; however, research suggests these outcomes are dependent upon the dosing of
     epidural medication and the practices of the obstetric care provider (Lim et al., 2018). The nurse reviews the
     procedure and the need for monitoring before, during, and after epidural placement. Informed consent is obtained.
     Institutional policies outline nursing actions related to administering a new epidural infusion bag, monitoring the
     infusion, and discontinuing the infusion.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     This video describes how an epidural (https://openstax.org/r/77epidural) works, discusses possible side effects, and
     provides evidence of how epidurals affect labor.

     Pudendal Block

     A pudendal block is the anesthetizing of the pudendal nerve that provides sensation to the perineum, anus, vulva,
     and clitoris using local anesthesia (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists [ACOG], 2019). The health-
     care provider can perform a pudendal block before or after the birth. This block is helpful when a third- or fourth-
     degree laceration repair is required, or the use of forceps or the vacuum extractor is necessary (see Chapter 18
     Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth). The advantage of the pudendal block is the lack of sedation

     Access for free at openstax.org
17.3 · Anesthesia                                                                                                                759

or loss of motor function. The disadvantage is that occasionally the laboring person does not get pain relief from the
block. Figure 17.9 demonstrates the placement of a pudendal block. The introducer or trumpet is placed into the
vagina, and lidocaine (Xylocaine) is injected between the ischial spine and sacrospinous ligament. This local
anesthetic block does not require special monitoring by the nurse. The risks of the pudendal block include damage
to the pudendal nerve, organ injury, and puncture of the pudendal artery.

FIGURE 17.9 Insertion of Pudendal Block The pudendal block is placed under the ischial spine between the pudendal nerve and the
sacrospinous ligament. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Local Anesthesia

Local anesthesia is used prior to performing an episiotomy or during repair of an episiotomy and lacerations (see
Chapter 18 Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth). This can also be used for persons without an
epidural or with an epidural that is not sufficient to relieve perineal pain. The health-care provider uses a local
anesthetic such as lidocaine or bupivacaine (Marcaine) to numb the area. The vaginal or perineal repair is then
performed. The nurse's role is to have the supplies ready and open for the provider to administer the anesthetic. The
advantage of local anesthesia is the longer-lasting pain relief at the specific area of pain. The disadvantage is the
stinging pain during the infiltration and the occasional lack of pain relief from the injection.

Spinal Block

A spinal block is the injection of a local anesthetic and narcotic into the cerebrospinal fluid to cause complete pain
control, loss of sensation, and loss of motor control. The injection is a single injection through the third, fourth, or
fifth lumbar space into the subarachnoid space. No catheter is inserted for further medication to be infused. The
effect is almost immediate. The spinal block is most commonly used for cesarean birth. One advantage of the spinal
block is the ability of the anesthesia provider to inject a narcotic, usually morphine, with the local anesthetic to
provide pain relief for approximately the first 24 hours postpartum. Another advantage is the rapid onset of spinal
anesthesia; this allows for use of a spinal block instead of general anesthesia in some emergency cesarean births. A
third advantage is the lack of sedation or drowsiness so that the birthing person can be alert during the birth of their
baby. The risks of spinal anesthesia are explained to the birthing person by the anesthesiologist and include
hypotension, respiratory depression, and nausea.

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Bupivacaine

Bupivacaine is used in spinal and epidural anesthesia.
760  17 · Pain Management During Labor and Birth

         · Generic Name: bupivacaine
         · Trade Name: Marcaine, Sensor Caine
         · Class/Action: anesthetic
         · Route/Dosage: epidural or spinal
         · High Alert/Black Box Warning: contraindicated for paracervical block
         · Indications: anesthetic for spinal or epidural
         · Mechanism of Action: blocks the conduction of nerve impulses by increasing the threshold for electrical

             excitation in the nerve
         · Contraindications: hypersensitivity to the drug, injection site infection, hepatic impairment
         · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: heart block, respiratory arrest, ventricular arrhythmia
         · Nursing Implications: Witness consent. Review patient education with the family.
         · Parent/Family Education: The nurse reminds the person not to try to get out of bed, explains the side effect

             of itching and that an antihistamine can be given, and explains the side effect of nausea and that an antiemetic
             can be given.

     (Papadakis et al., 2022)

     General Anesthesia

     General anesthesia is a systemic anesthesia in which a loss of consciousness occurs. The advantage of general
     anesthesia is its immediate onset. Typically, general anesthesia in childbirth is used only in extreme emergencies or
     when regional anesthesia is contraindicated. Because of the safety risk to the birthing person and newborn and the
     rapid onset of spinal anesthesia, general anesthesia is used less frequently than it used to be. The disadvantage to
     the neonate is that respiratory depression can occur at birth due to the sedating effect of general anesthesia. The
     disadvantage of general anesthesia for the birthing person is its relationship to anesthesia complications, aspiration,
     surgical wound infections, venous thrombosis, postpartum depression, increased perinatal mortality, and failed
     intubation (Ring et al., 2021). A failed intubation, defined as a difficult airway with lack of success on more than
     two attempts, occurs more often in pregnant persons because of physiologic changes in pregnancy (Ring et al.,
     2021). Nurses who circulate surgeries using general anesthesia are trained in the application of cricoid pressure,
     which is applied before intubation to block the esophagus and prevent aspiration should the birthing person vomit
     or regurgitate.

     Medications used for general anesthesia cross the placenta into fetal circulation; therefore, the health-care provider
     will make the cesarean incision quickly and deliver the fetus as soon as possible to reduce the risk of respiratory
     distress. Fetal risk factors related to general anesthesia include lower Apgar scores, increased assisted ventilation
     use, and increased admissions to the neonatal intensive care unit. Breast-feeding after general anesthesia can be
     more difficult to initiate, and breast-feeding success at 6 months postpartum has been shown to be lower (Ring et
     al., 2021). Table 17.4 presents a comparison of epidural, spinal, and general anesthesia.

                    Epidural                      Spinal                General

     Placement      Epidural space                Cerebrospinal fluid   Systemic
                                                  of spinal cord

     Area of        Abdomen, pelvis, legs         Abdomen, pelvis,      General
     anesthesia                                   legs

     Level of pain  Pain relief with sensation    Complete pain relief Unconscious pain relief
     management

     Movement       Some muscle control           No muscle control     No muscle control

     TABLE 17.4 Comparison of Epidural, Spinal, and General Anesthesia

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   17.3 · Anesthesia              761

          Epidural                            Spinal               General
                                                                   Yes
Use in surgery Yes, when dosage is increased  Yes
                                                                   Immediate
          beyond labor strength                                    Controlled by anesthesia
                                                                   provider; duration of surgery
Onset     10-20 minutes                       Immediate

Duration  Long lasting with continuous        Approximately 2
          infusion                            hours

TABLE 17.4 Comparison of Epidural, Spinal, and General Anesthesia
762 17 · Summary

Summary

17.1 Nonpharmacological Pain Management

The laboring person has many options for nonpharmacologic methods to control pain, fear, and anxiety in labor.
These methods focus on the physiologic, psychologic, and social aspects of labor. When the laboring person is
relaxed, fewer stress hormones are released into the body, and the person experiences less pain. Some of these
relaxation techniques, such as biofeedback and hypnosis, should be practiced during pregnancy to prepare for labor.
Other techniques, such as massage, position changes, and acupressure, can be used for the first time in labor.
Having a support person, such as a doula, partner, or nurse, can facilitate relaxation, create a better birth
environment, and increase the satisfaction of birth. The nurse will take vital signs, assess pain, and evaluate FHR
before and after interventions.

17.2 Pharmacological Pain Management

The laboring person has many options for pharmacologic pain control. Some of these medications are used for early
or latent labor, while others are used for more intense active labor. The nurse provides options for pain relief and
explains the pros and cons of each medication to the patient and support person. Each medication comes with
benefits and side effects. The nurse is responsible for knowing these side effects and being diligent in monitoring
the laboring person. Naloxone is readily available for the laboring person and newborn when opioids are in use. Vital
signs and FHR are assessed prior to administration of opiates. Pain level is assessed before and after administration
to check effectiveness.

17.3 Anesthesia

Anesthesia in childbirth is available for laboring people who choose this route for managing labor pain. Epidural
anesthesia is the most commonly used anesthesia in labor. The nurse has the responsibility of monitoring the
laboring person and fetus before, during, and after epidural anesthesia use. Spinal and general anesthesia are
reserved for use during cesarean birth or other surgical procedures. These types of anesthesia have rapid onset but
also are related to side effects for the laboring person and fetus. The nurse educates the laboring person on the use,
advantages, and disadvantages of each type of anesthesia. The nurse also monitors for the effectiveness and side
effects related to anesthesia in childbirth.

Key Terms

acupressure practice of stimulating or putting pressure on specific areas of the body
aromatherapy use of essential oils to aid in relaxation
biofeedback mind-body practice where a sensor monitors different pain reactions in the body while the person

    uses techniques to control those reactions.
counter pressure act of giving sustained pressure to the back, hips, sacrum, or other joints
doulas trained support laypersons who provide emotional, physical, and social support during pregnancy, labor,

    and postpartum
effleurage light stroking massage using the tips of the fingers in slow, long strokes
epidural anesthesia regional anesthesia produced by injection and infusion of a local anesthetic (bupivacaine

    [Marcaine]) and a narcotic (fentanyl) around the spinal nerves to block pain from T10 to S5 during labor
failed intubation difficult airway with lack of success on more than two attempts
focal points used when the laboring person focuses on a picture or an object during the contraction to direct

    attention away from the contraction
hydrotherapy process of the laboring person submerging in water for pain relief
imagery uses the mind-body connection to focus the laboring person's awareness on a positive image
pelvic tilts rocking of the pelvis by moving the back up, then sinking the back down
pudendal block local anesthetizing of the pudendal nerve that provides sensation to the perineum, anus, vulva,

    and clitoris

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         17 · Assessments 763

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. The laboring person is in pain and very anxious. They do not want to use traditional pain relief methods. What
        can the nurse offer the laboring person to help with relaxation and reducing anxiety?
           a. lavender oil
           b. epidural
           c. nalbuphine hydrochloride (Nubain)
           d. cold rag

    2. What technique, usually reserved for low-risk persons, has been shown to decrease pain, encourage
        movement, decrease anxiety, shorten labor, and improve labor satisfaction?
           a. controlled breathing
           b. aromatherapy
           c. massage
           d. hydrotherapy

    3. The fetus is in an occiput posterior position. What position can the nurse assist the laboring person into that
        may encourage the fetus to find the occiput anterior position?
           a. squatting
           b. shower
           c. hands and knees
           d. semi-Fowler

    4. What is the term for a slow, deep inhalation through the nose and exhalation through the mouth before a
        contraction for preparation and after a contraction for release of tension from the contraction?
           a. pursed-lip breathing
           b. panting
           c. chanting
           d. cleansing breath

    5. The laboring person wants to use open glottis breathing for pushing. How can the nurse support the person?
           a. Encourage the person to breathe however is most comfortable.
           b. Tell the person they should hold their breath for 10 counts.
           c. Explain that open glottis pushing is not effective.
           d. Discuss that the health-care provider would not allow them to use that breathing.

    6. The laboring person is using hypnosis for comfort measures. How can the nurse support the person?
           a. Talk them through the contractions.
           b. Keep the lights on so that everyone can see.
           c. Keep the room quiet and dimly lit.
           d. During the contraction, ask them to rate the pain.

    7. The nurse provides counter pressure to relieve pain and open the pelvis to help with fetal descent. What type
        of counter pressure is the nurse providing?
           a. hip squeeze
           b. perineal pressure
           c. shoulder pressure
           d. knee press

    8. The laboring person is anxious and hurting. What can the nurse do to help the laboring person?
           a. Offer her an epidural.
           b. Encourage frequent position changes.
764 17 · Assessments

           c. Explain that she has to care for two other persons.
           d. Tell them to call someone to come sit with them.

    9. What drug is an anxiolytic that relieves apprehension and creates a feeling of calm?
           a. hydroxyzine
           b. fentanyl
           c. codeine
           d. morphine

  10. Nausea and vomiting are common discomforts in labor. When treating with promethazine, what must the
        nurse do when administering this medication?
           a. Administer subcutaneously.
           b. Never administer with an opioid.
           c. Dilute before IV administration.
           d. Never administer in first stage labor.

  11. What would the nurse administer if the newborn has decreased or no respiratory effort at delivery after the
        person received an opiate?
           a. naloxone (Narcan)
           b. acetaminophen (Tylenol)
           c. oxygen
           d. sodium bicarbonate

  12. What does the nurse explain to the laboring person and partner about nitrous oxide?
           a. It makes the newborn have respiratory depression.
           b. It causes the laboring person to have decreased respirations.
           c. It does not affect respiration as an opiate would.
           d. The mask is held to the person's face by the partner.

  13. The nurse receives orders for pharmacologic pain relief. What does the nurse explain to the laboring person
        after administering fentanyl?
           a. "I will need to monitor your oxygen saturation."
           b. "It's important for me to insert a Foley catheter."
           c. "I will need to monitor for vaginal bleeding."
           d. "It's important for me to check your cervix after I administer this medication."

  14. What are the side effects of spinal anesthesia? Select all that apply.
           a. hypotension
           b. respiratory depression
           c. renal damage
           d. infection

  15. What is the expected effect of pudendal anesthesia?
           a. loss of sensation in the perineum
           b. decreased ability to move one's legs
           c. permanent loss of motor function
           d. loss of consciousness

  16. The nurse is monitoring the person's vital signs after the epidural is placed and notices a blood pressure of
        80/50 mm Hg. What nursing intervention can be performed prior to the epidural placement to potentially
        reduce this side effect?
           a. routine use of ephedrine
           b. IV fluid bolus

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         17 · Assessments 765

           c. insertion of indwelling urinary catheter
           d. upright positioning of the laboring person

  17. After insertion of the epidural catheter, what is the nurse's responsibility regarding patient care?
           a. monitoring vital signs every 5 to 15 minutes
           b. intermittent FHR monitoring
           c. providing the laboring person a meal
           d. instructing the laboring person to get out of bed to use the restroom

  18. What is a side effect of general anesthesia that usually limits its use to cases of emergency?
           a. hyperactive newborns
           b. newborn respiratory depression
           c. increase in uterine contractions
           d. decrease in cervical dilation

  19. What is the disadvantage of local anesthesia?
           a. decreased motor function
           b. nausea
           c. hypotension
           d. pain during injection

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. Explain how the nurse can support the laboring person who wants to walk during labor.
    2. How should the nurse explain how the patient can use aromatherapy?
    3. The laboring person is holding their breath during contractions. What breathing techniques could the nurse

        demonstrate?
    4. Explain how naloxone works as the antidote for opioid overdose.
    5. Explain how the nurse administers Phenergan IV.
    6. Explain how the nurse monitors the person receiving narcotics.
    7. What signs in the newborn necessitate the nurse give naloxone?
    8. Describe the nursing actions surrounding epidural placement.
    9. What side effects are related to general anesthesia?
  10. Describe the differences between epidural and spinal anesthesia.
  11. Describe the nurse's role in pudendal or local anesthesia placement.

Reflection Questions

    1. A new labor and delivery unit is opening. The nurse has been asked what the unit can do to support
        nonpharmacologic techniques for pain management in labor. What does the nurse recommend?

    2. Describe what a doula is and does.
    3. Describe how the nurse can aid the laboring person to relieve back pain.
    4. The laboring person and partner were unable to attend childbirth education. They ask the nurse to explain

        some techniques to help them with labor. What can the nurse teach them about physical ways to relieve labor
        pain?
    5. What education should the nurse provide to the laboring person and support person regarding the use of
        nitrous oxide?
766 17 · References

    6. Describe the advantages of spinal anesthesia over general anesthesia during childbirth.

What Should the Nurse Do?

Alejandra, a 34-year-old pregnant female at 39 weeks' gestation, arrives at the emergency department of her local
hospital accompanied by her husband. She is experiencing regular contractions and reports escalating pain
intensity. Alejandra is a gravida 2, para 1, with a history of a previous cesarean section. Alejandra describes her pain
as intense and continuous, radiating from her lower abdomen to her lower back. She reports a desire for pain relief
to cope with the discomfort of labor contractions. The couple expresses concerns about the potential for a
prolonged and painful labor process. Alejandra's first pregnancy resulted in a cesarean section due to breech
presentation. She has had a generally uncomplicated prenatal course during this pregnancy, with no significant
medical issues. Regular prenatal checkups have shown a healthy fetus with no identified complications. Her vital
signs are as follows: blood pressure: 122/78 mm Hg, heart rate: 96 bpm, respiratory rate: 20 breaths per minute,
temperature: 98.6° F (37° C), and fetal heart rate: 140 bpm, regular rhythm.

    1. What nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic pain management solutions can be offered to Alejandra,
        considering her history and current pain level, and how might involving her husband in the decision-making
        process enhance the effectiveness of these solutions?

    2. After implementing pain management strategies, what indicators should the nurse monitor to assess the
        effectiveness of the interventions, and how might the nurse adjust the plan based on Alejandra's feedback
        and progress in labor?

Izzy, a 29-year-old pregnant female at 38 weeks' gestation, arrives at the maternity unit with her partner. She
expresses anxiety about the upcoming birth and is seeking information about pain management options. Izzy
reports feeling increasingly anxious about the impending labor and is particularly concerned about managing pain
during childbirth. She is open to various pain relief options but expresses a desire for detailed information about the
advantages and disadvantages of different anesthesia methods. Izzy has a history of generalized anxiety disorder
managed with psychotherapy and occasional low-dose benzodiazepines. Prenatal checkups have revealed a healthy
pregnancy with an uncomplicated prenatal course, and there are no known contraindications to anesthesia. Vital
signs are as follows: blood pressure: 118/76 mm Hg, heart rate: 92 bpm, respiratory rate: 22 breaths per minute,
and temperature: 98.5° F (36.9° C).

    3. Given Izzy's history of anxiety and her expressed desire for detailed information, what hypotheses can be
        prioritized regarding her pain management preferences, and how might addressing her anxiety be prioritized
        in the overall plan of care?

    4. How should the nurse initiate the education and preparation process for Izzy regarding anesthesia options,
        and what steps should the nurse take to ensure her understanding and alleviate her anxiety as much as
        possible?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. Refer to Table 17.1.
        Develop a pamphlet for pregnant patients explaining two of the complementary and alternative methods to
        relieve pain during the process of labor and birth. Support the information by at least two current (published
        within the past 5 years) scholarly research studies.

    2. Develop a card that can be laminated that describes how the patient self-administers nitrous oxide. Include a
        drawing of proper placement over the patient's nose and mouth.

    3. Develop a patient education pamphlet on the purpose, insertion, side effects, and monitoring related to an
        epidural for pain relief during the process of labor and birth. Include drawings or pictures of the positions for
        insertion and the epidural space.

References

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 209: Obstetric analgesia
   and anesthesia. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 133(3), e208-e225. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000003132

Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses. (2020). Analgesia and anesthesia in the intrapartum

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            17 · References 767

   period: Evidence-based clinical practice guideline. Nursing for Women's Health, 24(S1), S1-S60. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.nwh.2019.12.002

Barasinski, C., Debost-Legrand, A., & Vendittelli, F. (2020). Is directed open-glottis pushing more effective than
    directed closed-glottis pushing during the second stage of labor? A pragmatic randomized trial--the EOLE study.
   Midwifery, 91, 102843. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.midw.2020.102843

Beigi, N. M., Broumandfar, K., Bahadoran, P., & Abedi, H. A. (2010). Women's experience of pain during childbirth.
   Iranian Journal of Nursing and Midwifery Research, 15(2), 77-82.

Berlit, S., Lis, S., Hafner, K., Kleindienst, N., Baumgartner, U., Treede, R., Sutterlin, M., & Schmahl, C. (2018). Changes
   in birth-related pain perception impact of neurobiological and psycho-social factors. Archives of Gynecology and
   Obstetrics, 297, 591-599. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00404-017-4605-4

Broughton, K., Clark, A. G., & Ray, A. P. (2020). Nitrous oxide for labor analgesia: What we know to date. Ochsner
   Journal, 20, 419-421. https://www.ochsnerjournal.org/content/ochjnl/20/4/419.full.pdf

Brunton, L., & Knollman, B. C. (2022). Goodman & Gilman's: The pharmacological basis of therapeutics (14th ed.).
    McGraw-Hill Education LLC.

Desi, R., Utami, R., Melati, R., Wizia, L., Susanti, E., Sansuwito, T., & Poddar S.(2022). Dim light effect on active phase
   acceleration during labour. Malaysian Journal of Medicine and Health Sciences, 18(Suppl 2), 235-238.
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
    358504458_Dim_Light_Effect_on_Active_Phase_Acceleration_During_Labour

Garbelli, L., & Lira, V. (2021). Maternal positions during labour: Midwives' knowledge and educational needs in
   Northern Italy. European Journal of Midwifery, 5(May), 1-9. https://doi.org/10.18332/ejm/136423

Grenvik, J. M., Coleman, L. A., & Berghella, V. (2023). Birthing balls to decrease labor pain and peanut balls to
   decrease length of labor: What is the evidence? American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 222(5),
    S1270-S1273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2023.02.014

Ingram, M. A., Brady, S., Peacock, A. S. (2022). The barriers to offering non-pharmacological pain management as
   an initial option for laboring women: A review of the literature. European Journal of Midwifery, 6, 37.
    https://doi.org/10.18332/ejm/149244

Kaplan, E., & Çevik, S. (2021). The effect of guided imagery and reflexology on pain intensity, duration of labor and
   birth satisfaction in primiparas: Randomized controlled trial. Health Care for Women International, 42(4-6),
    691-709. https://doi.org/10.1080/07399332.2021.1880411

Karaman, O., & Yildiz, H. (2022). The effect on birth pain and process of the freedom of movement in the first stage
   of labor: A randomized controlled study. Clinical and Experimental Health Sciences, 12(3), 730-738.
    https://doi.org/10.33808/clinexphealthsci.1016033

Leutenegger, V., Grylka-Baeschlin, S., Wieber, F., Daly, D., & Pehike-Milde, J. (2022). The effectiveness of skilled
    breathing and relaxation techniques during antenatal education on maternal and neonatal outcomes: A
   systematic review. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth, 22, 856. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-022-05178-w

Lim, G., Facco, F. L., Nathan, N., Waters, J. H., Wong, C. A., & Eltzschig, H. K. (2018). A review of the impact of
   obstetric anesthesia on maternal and neonatal outcomes. Anesthesiology, 129(1), 192-215. https://doi.org/
    10.1097/ALN.0000000000002182

Maria, R. D., Utamin, R., Melati, R., Wizia, L., Susanti, E., Sansuwito, T. B., Poddar, S. Dim light effect on active phase
   acceleration during labor. Malaysian Journal of Medicine and Health Sciences, 18(suppl2), 235-238.
    https://medic.upm.edu.my/upload/dokumen/2022012614513543_1378.pdf

McDonald, J. S., Chen, B., & Kwan, W. (2019). Obstetric analgesia & anesthesia. In A. H. DeCherney, L. Nathan, N.
   Laufer, & A. S. Roman (Eds.), CURRENT diagnosis & treatment: Obstetrics & gynecology (12th ed.). McGraw Hill.

McLeish, J., & Redshaw, M. (2018). A qualitative study of volunteer doulas working alongside midwives at births in
   England: Mothers' and doulas' experiences. Midwifery, 56, 53-60. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
768 17 · References

    j.midw.2017.10.002

Michal, M., Dorota, T., & Andrzej, T. (2018). Non-pharmacological methods of labor pain relief. Journal of Education,
   Health and Sport, 8(9), 1105-1114. http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1421220

Mousa, O., Abdelhafez, A. A., Abdelraheim, A. R., Yousef, A. M., Ghaney, A. E., & Gelany, S. E. (2018). Perceptions
    and practice of labor pain-relief methods among health professionals conducting delivery in Minia maternity units
   in Egypt. Obstetrics and Gynecology International, 2018, Article ID 3060953. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/
    3060953

Nikmah, A., Prasetiyanti, D. K., Winarti, E., Meireza, K., & Ogasawara, H. (2022). Effect endorphin massage on
   anxiety labor levels of first stage. Journal of Nursing Practice (Online), 5(2), 261-265. https://doi.org/10.30994/
    jnp.v5i2.219

Papadakis, M., McPhee, S. J., Rabow, M. W., & McQuaid, K. R. (Eds). (2022). Current medical diagnosis & treatment
   2023 McGraw Hill Medical.

Raju, J., & Singh, M. (2013). Effectiveness of biofeedback as a tool to reduce the perception of labour pain among
   primigravidas: Pilot study. Turkish Journal of Family Medicine & Primary Care, 7(4), 87-90. https://doi.org/
    10.5455/tjfmpc.41373

Ring, L., Landau, R., & Delgado, C. (2021). The current role of general anesthesia for cesarean delivery. Current
   Anesthesiology Reports, 11(1), 18-27. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40140-021-00437-6

Rúger-Navarrete, A., Vázquez-Lara, J. M., Antúnez-Calvente, I., Rodríguez-Díaz, L., Riesco-González, F. J., Palomo-
    Gómez, R., Gómez-Salgado, J., & Fernández-Carrasco, F. J. (2023). Antenatal fear of childbirth as a risk factor for
   a bad childbirth experience. Healthcare (Basel, Switzerland), 11(3), 297. https://doi.org/10.3390/
    healthcare11030297

Shea-Lewis, A., Eckardt, P., & Stapleton, D. (2018). CE: Original research: An investigation into the safety of oral
   intake during labor. AJN, American Journal of Nursing, 118(3), 24-31. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    01.NAJ.0000530913.80349.53

Solt Kirca, A., & Kanza Gul, D. (2022). Effects of acupressure and shower applied in the delivery on the intensity of
   labor pain and postpartum comfort. European Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, 273,
    98-104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejogrb.2022.04.018

Surucu, S. G., Ozturk, M., Vurgec, B. A., Alan, S., & Akbas, M. (2018). The effect of music on pain and anxiety of
   women during labor on first time pregnancy: A study from Turkey. Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice,
   30, 96-102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctcp.2017.12.015

Tabatabaeichehr, H., & Mortazavi, H. (2020). The effectiveness of aromatherapy in the management of labor pain
   and anxiety: A systematic review. Ethiopian Journal of Health Sciences, 30(3), 449-458. https://doi.org/
    10.4314/ejhs.v30i3.16

Tillett, J., & Hill, C. (2016). Eating and drinking in labor: Reexamining the evidence. The Journal of Perinatal &
   Neonatal Nursing, 30(2), 85-87. https://doi.org/10.1097/JPN.0000000000000168

Tuncay, S., Kaplan, S., & Moraloglu Tekin, O. (2019). An assessment of the effects of hydrotherapy during the active
   phase of labor on the labor process and parenting behavior. Clinical Nursing Research, 28(3), 298-320.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/1054773817746893

Unalmis Erdogan, S., Yanikkerem, E., & Goker, A. (2017). Effects of low back massage on perceived birth pain and
   satisfaction. Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice, 28, 169-175. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.ctcp.2017.05.016

Vallerand, A. H., & Sanoski, C. A. (2023). Davis's drug guide for nurses (18th ed.). FA Davis.

Yari, C., Masoumi, S. Z., Kazemi, F., Rafaei, M., & Yaghoobi, A. (2019). The effect of positive mental imagery on labor
    pain tolerance in primiparous women referred to Atieh Teaching-Medical Center of Hamadan, Iran, 2018.
   Research Square. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.2.14647/v1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            17 · References 769

Yosepha, D., Ginting, G. R., Tarigan, L., Ginting, R. I., Maharani, S. (2019). The effect of effleurage massage on the
   intensity of primigravida stage I labor pain latent phase. Proceedings of the International Conference on Health
   Informatics and Medical Application Technology, 135-141.
770 17 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 18

Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor
and Birth

FIGURE 18.1 Nursing Care during Labor The nurse plays an important role in supporting the patient during labor and birth. (credit:
"labor-delivery" by George Ruiz/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
18.1 Nursing Care During the First Stage of Labor
18.2 Nursing Care During the Second Stage of Labor
18.3 Nursing Care During the Third Stage of Labor
18.4 Nursing Care During the Fourth Stage of Labor

INTRODUCTION The labor and birth unit is a place of anticipation, excitement, and profound care. The nurse is an
integral part of the processes of labor and birth, providing care to the laboring person and support persons.
Understanding the four stages of labor is critical to providing effective and personalized care to the laboring person
and the fetus. In this chapter, you will navigate the intricacies of managing a person during labor and birth. You will
also learn the importance of assessment, pain management, fetal monitoring, and emotional support and their role
in ensuring the best possible outcome for the laboring person and the fetus.

18.1 Nursing Care During the First Stage of Labor

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Explain the nursing actions during obstetric triage
    · Identify the content of the admission history of the laboring person during the first stage of labor
    · Perform the admission physical exam on the laboring person during the first stage of labor
    · Explain the nursing actions when monitoring a laboring person and fetus during the first stage of labor
    · Provide comfort measures to the laboring person during the first stage of labor
772  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     Labor places physical and emotional demands on the laboring person and their support persons. The nursing care
     required during the process of labor and birth is based on the laboring person's progress, their ability to meet the
     physical and psychosocial demands of labor and birth, and fetal adaptation. The nurse also follows standards of
     care, ensuring safety and meeting the needs of both the laboring person and the fetus from admission to the labor
     and birth unit through the postpartum period.

     UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

     Labor and Delivery: Part 1

     Brianne is a 36-year-old, G1 P0, high school teacher who is being admitted to the Labor and Birth Unit at 39
     weeks' gestation for induction of labor due to gestational diabetes and possible macrosomia. Brianne states she
     and her partner, Trey, have attended a childbirth education class. Trey has come with Brianne and plans to
     provide support to Brianne throughout the labor and birth process.

     Past       Medical history:
     medical        · not currently taking any over-the-counter medications or herbal preparations
     history        · negative history for STIs.
     (PMH)          · denies any surgeries
                    · denies any previous pregnancies
                    · denies any history of medical conditions

                Family history: Father has type 2 diabetes mellitus and mother has HTN
                Social history: Brianne and Trey live in a two-bedroom apartment on the second floor in a
                building with only a freight elevator. They have a small dog named Candy. Trey works for a
                construction company and is 40 years old. Neither Candy nor Trey smokes. Trey does drink an
                occasional beer. Brianne does not drink alcoholic beverages.
                Prenatal history
                BP range, 110-128/60-80
                Fundal height at 39 weeks, 40 cm
                Gestational diabetes (diet controlled)
                No current medications and allergy to penicillin

     Flowchart  Height: 5 ft 3 in.
                Weight at first prenatal visit: 135 lb
                Vital signs
                Admission to Labor and Birth unit
                BP, 128/74; Temp, 98.2 (F); Pulse, 84; Resp, 18

     Lab        Initial prenatal labs
     results    A negative, antibody screen negative
                Rubella nonimmune
                Negative tests for STIs at initial prenatal visit
                Urine positive for GBS
                Genetic and neural tube defect screening labs
                Screening and diagnostic tests for genetic and neural tube abnormalities negative
                28-week prenatal labs
                1-hour GCT, 150
                3-hour GTT, FBS, and 2-hour glucose levels elevated
                36-week prenatal labs
                Negative tests for STIs at 36 weeks' gestation

     Access for free at openstax.org
                        18.1 · Nursing Care During the First Stage of Labor                                               773

Diagnostic  Initial prenatal visit
tests/      Intrauterine pregnancy
imaging     Fetal heart rate 154
results     6 weeks' gestation
            20 weeks' gestation
            Ultrasound negative for congenital anomalies and showed fundal placenta
            Fetal heart rate 148
            36 weeks' gestation
            Ultrasound indicates EFW 3,150 g (7 lb)
            Fetal heart rate 148
            Vertex presentation
            Amniotic fluid index, 10

Provider's  Admit to Labor & Birth Unit for induction of labor
orders      Blood type, Rh, antibody screen
            CBC
            Start IVFs of 1,000 LR at 100 mL/hr
            Pitocin 15 units in 250 mL of LR IVPB, start at 2 milliunits/min and increase 2 milliunits/min
            every 30 minutes up to 20 milliunits/min to establish labor

1. Highlight the cues that support the purpose of Brianne's visit to the Labor and Birth Unit.

2. The nurse completes the review of Brianne's prenatal record. Indicate if the data in Brianne's prenatal
    record is or is not a risk factor for complications of the labor and birth process. Choose whether each
    prenatal data point is a risk factor or not a risk factor.

Prenatal Data                                                   Risk Factor Not a Risk Factor

Gestational diabetes

Estimated fetal weight (EFW) of 3,150 g at 36 weeks' gestation

A negative

36 years old

GBS status

BP range 118-128/64-80

Obstetric Triage

The rapid assessment and prioritization of care based on the specific obstetric and gynecologic needs, or obstetric
triage, occurs when a patient at 16 weeks' gestation, or later, arrives at a hospital for care related to the pregnancy.
When the patient presents to the hospital, they will be evaluated by health-care providers who specialize in
obstetric care to determine the urgency of the care required. While some patients present for ruling out labor or
rupture of membranes, obstetric triage also serves a primary role in evaluating for obstetric emergencies or
concerning symptoms throughout a pregnancy. The more common emergencies and symptoms include new onset
vaginal bleeding, decreased fetal movement, abdominal pain, swelling, and elevated blood pressure (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists [ACOG], 2023a). Other obstetric triage patients may be sent to another
unit, such as the emergency department, within the hospital for follow-up evaluation of non-pregnancy-related
conditions. If the patient's situation does not require observation or admission, as in false labor, the patient is
774  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     discharged with instructions and follow-up with their obstetric care provider (ACOG, 2023a).

     When a patient arrives for obstetric triage, the nurse will obtain the presenting symptoms, complete a focused
     physical assessment, and gather information about the pregnancy. The nurse will also obtain the patient's vital signs
     and fetal heart rate (FHR) and contraction patterns to prioritize the patient's need for care. This information will be
     entered into the electronic health record (EHR). The nurse will also interview the patient about their current health-
     care provider for obstetric care. If the patient's obstetric provider is on staff at the facility, the nurse will notify the
     health-care provider of the patient's arrival, presenting symptoms, and other priority information obtained during
     the triage process. If the patient's health-care provider is not on staff at the facility or if the patient does not have a
     preexisting relationship with a provider who has privileges at the facility, the nurse will notify a hospital-based
     provider (ACOG, 2023b).

     During the initial interaction with the patient, the nurse will ascertain the patient's estimated date of delivery (EDD)
     to determine the gestational age of the fetus. Based on facility-specific policies, those who are less than 20 weeks'
     pregnant are often triaged in the emergency department. Medical decisions related to the patient's complaint and
     assessment will vary based on the gestational age. In addition, the nurse needs to obtain an obstetric history for the
     patient, including the number of pregnancies, term and preterm deliveries, abortions, and current living children
     (Moudi et al., 2020). These initial interview questions are obtained with succinct questioning by the nurse while the
     initial stages of the physical assessment are being conducted.

     Initial vital signs are obtained upon arrival on the unit to detect any abnormal values that require an immediate
     report to the health-care provider. Elevated blood pressure can be indicative of a serious complication--pre-
     eclampsia or eclampsia--and require a prompt response by the health-care team. An elevated temperature along
     with an increased pulse rate can be indicative of infection.

     Initial assessment also includes assessment of the fetal heart rate. The type of fetal and uterine monitoring
     equipment is facility-specific and will vary based on the clinical situation. The nurse will perform Leopold's
     maneuvers to determine the fetal position and the placement of any external fetal monitoring equipment. Fetal
     monitoring, fetal monitoring equipment, and Leopold's maneuvers are discussed in depth in Chapter 16 Electronic
     Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring.

     Review of Prenatal Record
     When a patient arrives for obstetric triage with symptoms of labor, prior to the initial assessment, the nurse will
     review the prenatal record of the patient to obtain a baseline understanding of the patient's obstetric and medical
     history to provide a high level of individualized patient care (Moudi et al., 2020). When the prenatal record is
     available, the nurse will review the prenatal history, medical and surgical history, and labs to create a plan of care
     reflective of the findings in the patient's chart. When a prenatal record is not available, a thorough interview of the
     patient is necessary to obtain a complete history, and laboratory and diagnostic testing may be performed during
     their visit. Whether the patient has a prenatal record available or not, it is important to confirm information with the
     patient and clarify any incomplete information.

     Obstetric History
     The obstetric history of the patient may have a direct impact on the care provided, requiring a thorough assessment
     of the history through the patient's chart and personal interview. The nurse will obtain information on the patient's
     history of any previous pregnancies, including the dates, outcomes, type of delivery, and any complications (Tukisi et
     al., 2022). The nurse will also inquire about any complications with any of the previous pregnancies and the types of
     deliveries. This information is often found in the prenatal record but should always be verified with the patient. It is
     important to remember that the patient's pregnancy history is confidential and should be discussed in private. For
     more information on the complete assessment of obstetric history, see Chapter 11 Prenatal Care.

     Labor and Birth Unit Admission History and Physical Exam

     When a patient presents to the labor and birth unit in possible labor or a condition related to pregnancy requiring
     inpatient care, the nurse first performs an obstetric triage assessment (Moudi et al., 2020). Sometimes, early labor
     can be challenging to distinguish from false labor or prodromal labor. The nurse will need to use clinical judgment
     and a combination of the assessment criteria in Table 18.1 to determine whether a patient is in true labor and ready
     to be admitted for active labor management and delivery (Tukisi et al., 2022).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 18.1 · Nursing Care During the First Stage of Labor    775

Assessment              Data

Clinical assessment of      · Timing: Nurses assess the regularity and timing of contractions. In true labor,
contractions                    contractions occur at regular intervals and progressively become closer
                                together.

                            · Duration: Contractions during labor typically last between 30 and 60 seconds.
                            · Intensity: Contractions become progressively stronger and more intense.

Cervical examination    A cervical examination is performed to assess the dilation (opening) and effacement
                        (thinning) of the cervix. In true labor, the cervix typically starts to dilate and efface.

Assessment of           Nurses observe the progression of labor over time. True labor involves a progressive
progression             change in contractions, cervical dilation, and effacement.

Rupture of membranes    The presence of amniotic fluid in or leaking from the vagina can be confirmed
(amniotic sac)          through visual inspection or testing.

Bloody show             A small amount of bloody discharge or mucus plug is often expelled as the cervix
                        begins to dilate. This is known as a "bloody show" and is a common sign of labor.

Patient's pain and      The patient's description of their pain and discomfort can provide valuable
perception              information. Contractions during labor are often more painful and rhythmic
                        compared to Braxton Hicks contractions. True labor contractions also cause cervical
                        change.

Assessment of other     Nurses assess other signs, such as the urge to push, pressure in the lower back or
signs                   pelvis, and changes in bowel movements.

TABLE 18.1 Assessment and Data Obtained during Obstetric Triage

Admission History of the Person in Labor
Once the obstetric triage nurse has received the order from the health-care practitioner (HCP) to admit the laboring
person, a more thorough history will be completed per facility protocol. A thorough admission history includes the
laboring person 's medical, surgical, obstetric and gynecologic, and genetic history (Milton, 2024).

Medical History
In reviewing the prenatal history, the nurse will carefully review the list of preexisting conditions and conditions
related to the pregnancy that may impact the care of the laboring person and fetus. The nurse will review any
pertinent diagnostic tests, including ultrasound results, mainly reviewing the placental placement and fetal
positioning or abnormalities. It is important to note any medications that the laboring person is currently taking and
document the last time the medication was taken.

A series of laboratory tests are ordered as part of normal prenatal care and should be reviewed by the nurse. The
nurse should review the baseline prenatal laboratory tests and any subsequent lab results to identify trends or
changes throughout the pregnancy or during the current visit. The nurse will closely assess the laboring person 's
complete blood cell count (CBC), blood typing and antibody screen, rubella titers, hepatitis B and C, human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and sexually transmitted infection (STI) screenings for abnormal findings that require
notification to the provider. Routine prenatal monitoring for gestational diabetes (GDM) should be reviewed, and
GDM protocol initiated if the laboring person received a diagnosis during pregnancy. A full overview of prenatal care,
including lab work, is available in Chapter 11 Prenatal Care.

Surgical History
The surgical history of the laboring person is reviewed by the nurse and should specifically include any past surgical
births, surgery to the abdomen or uterus, and any previous cervical procedures that affect the cervix and create scar
776  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     tissue, such as punch and cone biopsies. The nurse should also inquire about any previous experiences or
     complications associated with anesthesia.

     Obstetric and Gynecologic History
     The nurse reviews the obstetric and gynecologic history of the laboring person. The obstetric history includes
     number of pregnancies, their outcomes, and any complications. The gynecologic history includes any history of
     cervical or vaginal cytology, gynecologic complications, such as uterine fibroids and cervical cerclage, or past or
     current STIs that could impact the labor process (Milton, 2024).

     In a laboring person with a history of an STI during the current pregnancy, the nurse investigates whether treatment
     was initiated and completed, whether all sexual partners were concurrently treated, and whether the test of cure
     was completed with negative results (Milton, 2024). Any STI diagnosed during the pregnancy, its treatment, and
     verification of the effectiveness of the treatment are reported to the health-care provider and the team assigned to
     the care of the newborn.

     Psychosocial History
     During the admission process, the nurse will review and ask questions about the psychosocial history of the laboring
     person (O'Connor, 2022). The information obtained that is related to the physical environment at home includes
     housing, transportation restrictions, access to phone, utilities, and appliances. The nurse also assesses the
     availability of support persons, preparation for labor and birth, and newborn care knowledge. Evaluation of the
     laboring person's and newborn's safety at home as well as the risk for depression are also responsibilities of the
     nurse. The nurse will enter this information into the EHR.

     Genetic History
     The nurse also reviews and confirms the genetic history of the laboring person and other biological parent of the
     fetus from the prenatal record. Prenatal screenings and diagnostics during pregnancy are optional medical tests and
     procedures performed to monitor the health of both the pregnant person and the developing fetus (ACOG, 2020b).
     These tests help identify and manage potential risks, ensure a healthy pregnancy, and enable timely interventions
     when necessary. The information is obtained directly from the laboring person and other biological parent, if
     present, when prenatal records are not available. Some genetic disorders that affect blood clotting or bleeding
     increase the risk of morbidity and mortality during labor and should be addressed during the initial admission intake.
     The medical team will need to be notified of a family history that includes birth defects, newborn screening
     disorders, or any genetic disorders that could affect the care of the laboring person or fetus (Centers for Disease
     Control and Prevention [CDC], 2023). These disorders can be inherited from one or both parents or may arise due to
     spontaneous mutations. Here are some genetic disorders that can impact pregnancy:

         · Down Syndrome (Trisomy 21): Down syndrome is a chromosomal disorder caused by an extra copy of
             chromosome 21. It can lead to intellectual disabilities and physical abnormalities in the affected child.
             Prenatal screening tests, such as noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) and amniocentesis, can detect the
             presence of an extra chromosome 21.

         · Cystic Fibrosis: Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disorder that affects the respiratory and digestive systems. Carriers
             of the cystic fibrosis gene may pass it on to their children. Prenatal carrier screening can identify couples at
             risk of having a child with cystic fibrosis.

         · Sickle Cell Disease: Sickle cell disease is a genetic blood disorder that can cause anemia, pain episodes, and
             other complications. It is more common in people of African, Mediterranean, and Middle Eastern descent.
             Prenatal genetic testing can determine if both parents carry the sickle cell trait, increasing the risk of having an
             affected child.

         · Tay-Sachs Disease: Tay-Sachs is a rare genetic disorder that affects the nervous system. It is more common in
             people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. Prenatal carrier screening can identify couples at risk of having a child
             with Tay-Sachs disease.

         · Hemophilia: Hemophilia is a genetic disorder that impairs blood clotting. It primarily affects males, and
             carriers of the gene can pass it on to their children. Genetic testing can determine the risk of having a child
             with hemophilia.

         · Neural Tube Defects: Conditions like spina bifida and anencephaly are congenital neural tube defects that can
             have genetic components. Folic acid supplementation and prenatal screening can help mitigate the risk and
             manage these conditions.

     Access for free at openstax.org
18.1 · Nursing Care During the First Stage of Labor                                                                          777

    · Congenital Heart Defects: Some congenital heart defects have a genetic basis, and a family history of heart
        problems can increase the risk of these disorders in offspring. Prenatal ultrasound and genetic testing can
        help identify these conditions.

It is important to note that advances in genetic testing and prenatal screening have improved the ability to detect
and manage many of these genetic disorders during pregnancy. Genetic counseling and testing are recommended
for couples with a family history of genetic disorders or other risk factors to assess the likelihood of having an
affected child and to make informed decisions about prenatal care and interventions (CDC, 2023).

Physical Exam of the Person in Labor
Performing a physical examination during labor is a critical aspect of obstetric care, allowing the close monitoring of
the progression of labor and the well-being of both the birthing person and the fetus. This hands-on assessment
involves a systematic evaluation of various physical parameters and vital signs to ensure a safe and healthy labor
and delivery process (Milton, 2024).

General Survey
The nurse will conduct a general survey of the laboring person upon admission. The nurse will observe the laboring
person's appearance and behavior. Deviations from the expected findings should be documented, and further action
may be required.

Heart, Lungs, and Extremities
Upon admission, the laboring person's heart, lungs, and extremities should be evaluated. The nurse should
auscultate for heart and lung sounds and report any abnormal findings to the provider. The nurse should visually
inspect the extremities for edema, bearing in mind that dependent edema can be a normal finding related to
increased fluid volume during pregnancy. Generalized edema of the face, hands, and feet may be indicative of
preeclampsia if accompanied by physical symptoms of preeclampsia (Rana et al., 2020). If the laboring person
presents with any signs of preeclampsia, including headache and visual disturbances, the nurse should perform an
assessment of the laboring person's deep tendon reflexes (DTRs) and clonus. Any abnormal findings should be
immediately reported to the provider.

Obstetric Exam
An obstetric examination, a medical assessment by a health-care provider to evaluate and monitor the health and
progress of the pregnant person and their developing fetus throughout pregnancy, will be completed upon
admission of the laboring person to the facility. The exam is relatively consistent for term and preterm labor, except
where noted (Milton, 2024). The nurse will establish the fetal heart rate and contraction pattern through
auscultation and palpation or external fetal monitoring. The status of the membranes will be assessed to determine
whether the membranes are intact or ruptured. The assessment may include the laboring person's report of a gush
or leaking of fluid before arrival, visual inspection of the vagina for pooling, or laboratory testing of the fluid for
ferning or pH. The nurse should document the time of the rupture of membranes and identify the color of the fluid
through visual inspection or patient report and assess for any odor associated with the fluid. Amniotic fluid is
expected to be clear. Green or yellow color is associated with meconium-stained fluid. Bloody fluid is associated
with placenta previa or abruption.

The nurse will then conduct a vaginal examination to determine cervical dilation, effacement, cervical position,
station, and presenting part and position of the fetus. The vaginal exam may be deferred in the preterm laboring
person to allow for additional testing, including fetal fibronectin testing. Additionally, the nurse should defer the
vaginal examination in laboring persons with vaginal bleeding, a documented placenta previa, or other factors where
a vaginal examination may result in complications. Before performing the vaginal examination, the nurse must
consider the following complications that may arise from performing the examination.

    · Infection: Frequent vaginal examinations can introduce bacteria into the birth canal, potentially increasing the
        risk of infection, especially if strict aseptic technique is not followed. This can lead to conditions like urinary
        tract infections or chorioamnionitis (infection of the fetal membranes).

    · Ruptured Membranes: Overly forceful or poorly timed vaginal examinations can cause unintended premature
        rupture of membranes (PROM) or artificial rupture of membranes (AROM), which may increase the risk of
        infection and potentially lead to complications for both the laboring person and the fetus.
778  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     · Discomfort and Pain: Vaginal examinations can be uncomfortable and painful for the laboring person, causing
        anxiety and distress. Repeated examinations may exacerbate this discomfort.

     · Cervical Edema and Bleeding: Frequent or aggressive cervical checks can cause irritation, swelling (cervical
        edema), and bleeding, potentially leading to cervical injury or hematoma formation.

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Performing a Sterile Vaginal Exam

     Explain the procedure to the patient and obtain consent using a trauma-informed approach/language with all
     patients.

     Drape a sheet to maintain the patient's privacy during the exam.

     Don a sterile glove on your dominant hand.

     Lubricate the index and middle fingers of your dominant hand.

     Inform the patient you will be inserting two fingers into the vagina, and they will feel pressure.

     After inserting your fingers into the vagina, locate the cervix.

     Check the cervix for the following:

         · Cervical Dilation: Estimate the distance between one side of the cervix and the other, documented in
             centimeters (see Figure 15.3).

         · Cervical effacement: Estimate the length of the cervix. A cervix is 0 percent effaced when it is 2 cm long and
             100 percent effaced when it is paper thin. Estimate the percentage between 2 cm and paper thin.

         · Cervical position: A cervix that "points" toward the patient's back is in a posterior position, whereas an
             anterior position is oriented toward the vaginal introitus. If the cervix is located somewhere between the two,
             it is in the midposition.

     Check the presenting part for the following:

         · Presentation: Assess the part of the fetus that is presenting in the maternal pelvis: cephalic (vertex), breech
             (frank).

         · Station: Determine the level of the presenting part in relation to the ischial spines of the pelvis.
         · Fetal Position: Palpate the relationship of the presenting fetal part (skull if cephalic and sacrum if breech) in

             relation to the maternal pelvis).

     Monitoring the Physical Response during the First Stage of Labor

     The assessment of the patient in labor includes obtaining regular maternal vital signs and monitoring the fetal heart
     rate as outlined in (Table 18.2). Hospital policies are created to reflect the guidelines for fetal monitoring and vital
     signs, based on the recommendations of professional organizations. These policies dictate the minimum frequency
     of vital signs, contraction patterns and labor progress, pain, and emotional response checks to be performed by the
     nurse (Milton, 2024). The nurse should use discretion based on the laboring person's situation and may complete
     the assessment more frequently than the minimal policy standard.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              18.1 · Nursing Care During the First Stage of Labor  779

Assessment   Early Phase of Labor                            Active Phase of Labor
Data

Vital signs  Every 1 hour                                    Every 1 hour

Contraction  Intermittently every 15-60 minutes or           Intermittently every 15 minutes or
pattern      continuously based on low- or high-risk labor   continuously based on low- or high-risk labor
             status, and documented at the same interval     status, and documented at the same interval
             as FHR (refer to Chapter 16 Electronic Fetal    as FHR (refer to Chapter 16 Electronic Fetal
             and Uterine Contraction Monitoring for both     and Uterine Contraction Monitoring for both
             intermittent and continuous monitoring)         intermittent and continuous monitoring)

FHR pattern See Table 18.3                                   See Table 18.3

Labor        As indicated based on significant changes in    As indicated based on the patient's
progress     patient behavior, uterine contraction pattern,  presentation, the feeling of pressure,
             or abnormalities in the FHR                     significant changes in patient behavior, uterine
                                                             contraction pattern, or abnormalities in the
                                                             FHR

Pain         Hourly or as needed                             Hourly or as needed

Emotional    Continuous                                      Continuous
response

TABLE 18.2 Assessment of the Laboring Person during the First Stage of Labor

Monitoring the Fetal Response to the First Stage of Labor
The Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses [AWHONN] (2018) recommends fetal heart rate
monitoring of uncomplicated pregnancies be reviewed every 15 to 30 minutes during the first stage of labor when
electronic monitoring is in place (Table 18.3). When intermittent auscultation is in place, fetal monitoring in the early
phase of labor is at the recommendation of the health-care provider and every 15 to 30 minutes in the active phase.
See Chapter 16 Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring for more information on fetal heart rate during
labor. In patients who present with or develop complications during labor, the recommendation is for a review of the
heart rate every 15 minutes during the first stage of labor. Laboring persons with risk factors should be monitored
continuously, allowing for prompt intrauterine resuscitation or delivery.

FHR Assessment Data        Early Phase of Labor       Early Phase of Labor                    Active Phase of Labor
                           (cervix < 4 cm dilated)    (cervix 4-5 cm dilated)                 (cervix  6 cm dilated)

FHR baseline               Frequency at the           Low risk without                        Low risk without
FHR variability            discretion of the midwife  oxytocin: every 30                      oxytocin: every 30
Periodic changes           or physician               minutes                                 minutes
                                                      With risk factors or                    With risk factors or
                                                      oxytocin: every 15                      oxytocin: every 15
                                                      minutes                                 minutes

TABLE 18.3 Assessment of the Fetal Heart Rate during the First Stage of Labor (AWHONN, 2018)

Monitoring for Complications of the First Stage of Labor
Consistent monitoring for complications begins during the first stage of labor and continues through the succeeding
stages of labor and into the postpartum period. During the first stage of labor, the most common complications are
related to periodic fetal heart rate changes and labor progress that deviates from normal. The nurse will regularly
assess the fetal heart rate, contraction pattern, and labor progress, and watch for any signs of complications during
the first stage of labor (Milton, 2024).
780  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     Monitoring of the fetus during the first stage of labor will depend on the phase of labor and hospital policy or
     provider order. The nurse may auscultate the fetal heart rate intermittently or apply external fetal monitors for
     continuous monitoring. If the nurse detects any abnormalities in the fetal heart rate during auscultation or
     continuous fetal monitoring, the nurse will perform interventions and notify the provider immediately. Complications
     and nursing actions are covered in more detail in Chapter 19 Complications of Labor and Birth.

     Nursing Interventions during the First Stage of Labor

     During the first stage of labor, the nurse will support and educate the laboring person and their partner on comfort
     measures, mobility, pain relief, and emotional support. These needs will be constant during labor, but the role of the
     nurse will change as the labor progresses.

     Encouraging Position Changes of the Person in Labor
     Whenever possible, the nurse should encourage the laboring person to change positions and ambulate during the
     first stage of labor. The nurse should educate the laboring person on the benefits of position change and ambulation
     and demonstrate how the partner can assist during the labor process (see Figure 15.11). The laboring person should
     be advised that lying flat on their back can result in hypotension related to the compression of the vena cava.
     Walking and upright positions have been shown to decrease the duration of the first stage of labor. Compared to
     semirecumbent or supine positions, upright positions during labor often result in shorter labors, fewer interventions,
     and decreased pain for laboring persons. In addition, upright positions allow gravity to assist in bringing the fetus
     down. No matter the position, frequent position changes create slight movement in the pelvic bones and help the
     fetus find the best fit into the pelvis (Ondeck, 2019).

     The position and station of the fetus during labor can impact the progress of labor and the comfort of the laboring
     person. Table 18.4 lists specific position changes recommended based on fetal position and station (Dhekra et al.,
     2020; Garbelli & Lira, 2021).

     Goal          Fetal Position                                        Recommended Laboring Person Positions

     Changing      Occiput anterior (OA): This is the most               Encourage the laboring person to try the following
     fetal         favorable position for labor.                         position changes to facilitate labor progress
     position                                                            (Garbelli & Lira, 2021):
     during labor
                                                                             · walking, swaying, or gently rocking during
                                                                                 contractions

                                                                             · standing and swaying or swaying on hands
                                                                                 and knees

                                                                             · lunging or lunging with a twist during
                                                                                 contractions to help encourage rotation

                                                                             · pelvic tilts and pelvic rocking exercises
                                                                                 between contractions to encourage optimal
                                                                                 fetal positioning

                            Occiput posterior (OP): The fetus's head is  Labor can be more challenging, and position
                            facing the laboring person's front.          changes can help:

     TABLE 18.4 Position Changes during Labor                                · hands and knees position, often referred to
                                                                                 as "all fours," which can encourage the fetus
                                                                                 to rotate into a more favorable position
                                                                                 (Garbelli & Lira, 2021)

                                                                             · rocking side to side on hands and knees
                                                                                 during contractions

                                                                             · rebozo "sifting" technique to encourage
                                                                                 rotation (Cohen & Thomas, 2015)

                                                                             · Swaying, or the side-lying release technique.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           18.1 · Nursing Care During the First Stage of Labor    781

Goal           Fetal Position                              Recommended Laboring Person Positions

               Occiput transverse or asynclitic: When the  Recommended position changes include (Garbelli
               fetus's head is not well aligned with the   & Lira, 2021):
               pelvis, these positions can lead to
               prolonged labor.                                · walking, swaying, or gently rocking during
                                                                   contractions

                                                               · "side-lying release" technique, where the
                                                                   laboring person lies on their side with a
                                                                   peanut ball between their legs to encourage
                                                                   rotation

                                                           Tips for asynclitic positions:
                                                               · Stay mobile and avoid lying flat on the back.
                                                                   Upright and side-lying positions can reduce
                                                                   pressure on the sacrum and encourage
                                                                   rotation.
                                                               · Consider using a rebozo, a long piece of
                                                                   cloth, to provide gentle counterpressure and
                                                                   encourage rotation during contractions
                                                                   (Cohen & Thomas. 2015).

Changing       High station (above 0 station)              When the fetus's head is high in the pelvis, position
fetal station                                              changes can help engage the head in the pelvis
during labor                                               and encourage descent (Dhekra et al., 2020):

                                                               · walking or swaying during contractions
                                                               · sitting on a birthing ball and gently bouncing

                                                                   or rotating the hips
                                                               · lunging or side-lying positions during

                                                                   contractions

               Low station (below 0 station)               If the fetus's head is low but not progressing, these
                                                           position changes can help facilitate descent
                                                           (Dhekra et al., 2020):

                                                               · squatting during contractions with support
                                                               · upright positions, such as standing,

                                                                   squatting, or using a squat bar during
                                                                   contractions
                                                               · hands and knees position with gentle rocking

Changing                                                   When the fetus's head is at the outlet (crowning),
fetal                                                      position changes focus on guiding the head
position at                                                through the birth canal (Huang et al., 2019):
the pelvic
outlet                                                         · squatting during contractions or using a
                                                                   squat bar if available

                                                               · supported or unassisted upright positions,
                                                                   such as kneeling or hands and knees

                                                               · controlled, slow, and supported pushing
                                                                   during contractions to avoid rapid descent

TABLE 18.4 Position Changes during Labor

Remember that every labor is unique, and the effectiveness of position changes may vary from person to person.
782  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     Continuous communication with the laboring person, monitoring the baby's heart rate, and working collaboratively
     with the health-care team are essential for safe and effective labor progress in different fetal positions and stations.

     Encouraging Breathing and Relaxation of the Person in Labor
     The nurse should encourage the laboring person to try to relax and breathe during the first stage of labor. Breathing
     techniques distract from pain, help in the relaxation of muscles in the pelvis to allow descent of the fetus, and
     maintain blood oxygen levels for the laboring person and fetus (Heim & Makuch, 2023). Pain management is
     discussed in detail in Chapter 17 Pain Management During Labor and Birth.

     Providing Emotional Support to the Person in Labor
     The onset of labor can be a time of excitement and anxiety for new parents. The nurse can provide emotional
     support to the laboring person and partner by answering questions that they may have. The nurse can ease the
     laboring person's anxiety by explaining the expected progression of labor and creating a plan of care with the
     laboring person and the partner. The nurse should ask the laboring person how they envision their labor and how
     their wishes can be accommodated while discussing any potential barriers to their desired birth plan. Throughout
     the labor and delivery, the nurse should discuss any changes with the laboring person and their partner and
     continually explain what is happening.

     Providing Measures for Pain Relief to the Person in Labor
     Pain management during the first stage of labor varies based on the patient's preferences. The nurse is an integral
     part of the laboring person's pain management plan. Some laboring persons may opt for nonpharmacologic pain
     management strategies in which the nurse will provide support with positioning, room ambiance, and management
     of staff and visitors (Heim & Makuch, 2023). When a laboring person desires analgesia, the nurse may provide
     options for the laboring person, obtain an order from the provider, administer the medication, and monitor the
     laboring person following administration. Many facilities offer epidural anesthesia for persons in labor. The nurse will
     assist the laboring person in proper positioning and will support and monitor the laboring person following the
     initiation of the epidural. For a more detailed comparison of pain management options, benefits, and risks, refer to
     Chapter 17 Pain Management During Labor and Birth.

     Assisting with Amniotomy
     The nurse's role during an amniotomy, known as breaking of water or artificial rupture of membranes (AROM), is to
     assist the laboring person and the health-care provider. The nurse's duties take place before, during, and after the
     procedure.

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Assisting during an Amniotomy

     Informed Consent: The nurse witnesses that the procedure, as well as the reasons for the amniotomy, potential
     benefits, risks, and alternatives, has been explained to the patient.

     Preparation: The nurse ensures that all necessary supplies and equipment are readily available. Such items include
     sterile gloves, a sterile amniotomy hook or instrument, sterile drapes, and a waterproof pad or absorbent materials
     to manage amniotic fluid.

     Positioning: The patient is positioned comfortably in bed, typically in the lithotomy position (lying on the back with
     knees bent and feet in stirrups) or another position that allows easy access to the perineal area.

     Assisting the Provider: The nurse assists the health-care provider (usually an obstetrician or midwife) during a
     vaginal examination in which the provider evaluates the cervix's position, dilation, and effacement.

     Performing the Amniotomy: The health-care provider uses a sterile amniotomy hook or instrument to puncture a
     small opening in the amniotic sac, causing the slow release of amniotic fluid. The nurse may assist by holding the
     drape or offering support to the patient during the procedure.

     Assessing Amniotic Fluid: After the amniotomy, the nurse monitors the characteristics of the amniotic fluid,
     including color, odor, and the presence of meconium (fetal stool). Any abnormal findings are reported to the health-

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           18.1 · Nursing Care During the First Stage of Labor        783

care provider.

Monitoring Contractions and Fetal Heart Rate: The nurse closely monitors the patient's uterine contractions and
fetal heart rate patterns before and after the amniotomy. Changes in these patterns may indicate the need for
further intervention or adjustments in labor management.

Comfort and Emotional Support: Throughout the procedure and in the postamniotomy period, the nurse provides
emotional support to the patient, addressing any concerns or questions.

Documentation: Accurate and detailed documentation of the procedure, including the date, time, provider's name,
amniotic fluid characteristics, and maternal and fetal assessments, is essential in the patient's medical record.

Postamniotomy Care: The nurse continues to monitor the patient's progress, ensuring they remain comfortable and
well hydrated. Frequent assessments of vital signs, contractions, and fetal well-being are maintained.

Education during the First Stage of Labor
The nurse should be a continual resource for educating the patient during labor. The laboring person should be
encouraged to ask questions to clarify any information presented by the nurse or health-care team (Milton, 2024).
To ease the stress of labor, the nurse should always explain what is happening to the laboring person and their
partner and immediately notify them of changes or concerns about the plan of care.

When the nurse applies the external fetal monitoring equipment or auscultates the fetal heart rate, the nurse should
educate the laboring person and their partner on the importance of and reason for fetal monitoring during labor
(AWHONN, 2018). The nurse can give a brief description of what the health-care team is looking for on the fetal
monitor and assure the laboring person that the monitoring is being continually watched so that the health-care
team will respond immediately when necessary.

Upon admission, the nurse should discuss the process of labor and birth. The laboring person and their partner
should understand the first stage of labor begins with early dilation and ends at full dilation and effacement. The
nurse should educate the laboring person on what pain management options are available during the first stage, the
value of position changes and rest and relaxation, and the importance of being hydrated during labor. The laboring
person should be educated on the differences in pain medication and pushing during the second stage, complete
dilation to delivery, when and how pushing will occur, and the team members who will be present for the delivery
(Milton, 2024).

Nursing care plays a crucial role in decreasing the cesarean birth rate by promoting and supporting safe and healthy
vaginal births. Table 18.5 lists ways in which nursing care can contribute to reducing the cesarean birth rate, with
references to evidence-based practices and guidelines.

Nursing      Nursing           Specific Details of the Intervention
Care         Intervention

Labor        Continuous labor  Nurses will provide continuous emotional support, comfort measures, and
support and  support           encouragement to laboring persons (ACOG, 2019).
education

Frequent     Encourage         Nurses can encourage laboring persons to change positions frequently,
position     mobility          such as walking, swaying, or using a birthing ball. ACOG recommends
changes and                    movement and position changes during labor to reduce the risk of
movement                       cesarean births (ACOG, 2024).

TABLE 18.5 Nursing Care to Reduce the Cesarean Birth Rate
784  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     Nursing      Nursing             Specific Details of the Intervention
     Care         Intervention

     Pain         Nonpharmacologic    Nurses can offer nonpharmacologic pain relief methods, including
     management   pain relief         relaxation techniques, massage, warm compresses, and hydrotherapy, to
     and comfort                      help manage pain and discomfort during labor. Effective pain management
     measures                         can reduce the need for epidurals and other interventions associated with
                                      cesarean births.

     Monitoring   Intermittent        Nurses can use intermittent auscultation or continuous electronic fetal
     fetal well-  auscultation and    monitoring (EFM) to assess fetal well-being during labor. Appropriate and
     being        continuous fetal    judicious use of EFM can help detect and address fetal distress promptly,
                  monitoring          potentially avoiding unnecessary cesarean births (AWHONN, 2018).

     Labor        Regular cervical    Nurses can perform cervical examinations at appropriate intervals to
     progress     examinations        assess labor progress. However, they should avoid unnecessary or
     assessment                       frequent cervical checks, as they can increase the risk of infection and
                                      interventions (ACOG, 2021).

     Supporting   Promotion of        Nurses can advocate for and support physiologic birth, including
     physiologic  physiologic birth   spontaneous labor onset and the avoidance of unnecessary interventions.
     birth                            ACOG emphasizes the importance of supporting low-intervention births
                                      when appropriate (ACOG, 2019).

     TABLE 18.5 Nursing Care to Reduce the Cesarean Birth Rate

     By implementing evidence-based nursing care practices and promoting physiologic birth, nurses can contribute to
     reducing the cesarean birth rate and ensuring safe and positive birthing experiences for laboring persons.

             LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

     Adoption

     A patient may present for delivery with a legal adoption plan or may decide upon arrival to place their newborn up
     for adoption. The decision to place a newborn for adoption is a personal one, and the patient may change their mind
     multiple times during the labor and birth. The nurse should support the patient through decisions and emotional
     changes during their stay. When a patient presents with a prearranged adoption plan, the nurse should discuss the
     plan with the patient and any intended parents who are present. It is important to have a clear understanding ahead
     of time of whether adopting parents will be present in the room/hospital at the time of delivery, whether the patient
     wants to see or hold the newborn, skin-to-skin, whether any of that should be offered after delivery according to
     patient desire, and so forth. If a patient does not have a prearranged legal plan or decides during their stay to
     surrender the newborn, legal arrangements can be initiated. The nurse should consult a social worker to provide
     resources to the patient and arrange for postdelivery care of the newborn.

     18.2 Nursing Care During the Second Stage of Labor

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Obtain assessment data on the birthing person and fetus during the second stage of labor
         · Discuss nursing interventions during the second stage of labor
         · Explain the nursing actions when monitoring the fetus during the second stage of labor
         · Explain the nursing actions when monitoring the birthing person for complications during the second

             stage of labor
         · Explain the nursing actions when preparing for a vaginal delivery

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         18.2 · Nursing Care During the Second Stage of Labor          785

Nursing care during the second stage of labor involves assisting the birthing person with pain management,
positioning, and efforts to bear down during the contractions and birth. The laboring person is now completely
dilated and feeling the urge to push. Successful coordination of the person's bearing-down efforts and contraction
pattern is an essential part of the nurse's role during the second stage of labor. At the same time, the nurse also
continues to monitor the birthing person's progress, emotional and physical response, and fetal adaptation while
preparing for the birth of the newborn.

Assessment of the Laboring Person and Fetus during the Second Stage of Labor

During the second stage of labor, nursing care is focused on providing essential support for both the laboring person
and the fetus. The nurse will closely monitor the progression of contractions, the descent of the fetus through the
birth canal, and the fetal heart rate. The nurse is a source of encouragement and guidance through the second stage
and supports the birthing person with pain management. Ensuring the birthing person's and support person's
comfort, safety, and informed decision making remains a priority for the nurse, as the health-care team readies for
the safe delivery of the baby. Continuous assessment, communication, and collaboration are key components during
the second stage of labor.

Monitoring the Physical Response of the Person during the Second Stage of Labor
Maternal vital signs are routinely assessed at least every 30 minutes during the second stage of labor unless
otherwise determined by order or protocol (Table 18.6). The nurse should assist the patient into a position of the
birthing person's choosing and provide support and encouragement, or guidance with pushing. If the birthing person
desires, the nurse may provide the birthing person with sips of water or ice chips (Milton, 2024).

Assessment Data Second Stage of Labor

Vital signs  Every 30 minutes
             Temperature

                 · Every 4 hours--intact membranes
                 · Every 1 hour--ruptured membranes
                 · Every 1 hour--if febrile (high risk)

Contraction pattern Intermittently or continuously every 15 minutes, documented at the same interval as FHR

Progress in descent As indicated based on pressure, perineal bulging or crowning, abnormalities in the FHR

Pain         Hourly, or more frequently as needed

Emotional response Continuous

  Intake and output Continuous

TABLE 18.6 Assessment of the Birthing Person during the Second Stage of Labor (Milton, 2024)

The nurse continues to monitor contraction strength and frequency during the second stage of labor. The
contraction pattern is typically assessed every 15 minutes. During the strongest part of the contractions, the nurse
coaches the birthing person through the bearing down efforts and monitors for fatigue. If necessary, additional
instructions for bearing down are provided between contractions when indicated.

The nurse also monitors the descent of the fetus through the pelvis by assessing the fetal station and presence of
crowning. As the fetus descends, the nurse provides updates to the birthing person and their support persons.
These updates aid in keeping the birthing person motivated to keep the bearing-down efforts most effective (Milton,
2024).

Monitoring the Fetal Response to the Second Stage of Labor
The fetal heart rate is monitored during the second stage of labor, assessing for patterns that can indicate fetal
compromise (Table 18.7). Abnormal patterns are associated with hypoxemia. which may lead to hypoxia, resulting
786  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     in metabolic acidosis. The type and frequency of fetal monitoring are determined by provider order, protocol, and
     clinical situation (AWHONN, 2018). Fetal monitoring may be done intermittently, continuously with an external fetal
     monitor, or internally with a fetal scalp electrode. The nurse should be in regular contact with the provider, relaying
     critical information about the fetal monitoring findings and implementing interventions when compromise is
     identified.

     Fetal Assessment Data Second Stage of Labor

                                      Low risk without oxytocin With risk factors or oxytocin

     FHR baseline                     Every 5-15 minutes         Every 5-15 minutes
     FHR variability
     Periodic changes

     TABLE 18.7 Assessment of the Fetus Fetal Heart Rate during the Second Stage of Labor
     (AWHONN, 2018)

     Nursing Interventions during the Second Stage of Labor

     In many cases, the nurse is at the bedside frequently during the second stage of labor and exclusively during
     pushing. The role of the nurse during the second stage of labor is to assess the labor progress, monitor the fetal
     heart rate and contraction patterns, guide and support the birthing person, and aid the provider.

     Encouraging Bearing-Down Efforts during the Second Stage of Labor
     The direct contact of the fetus on the pelvic floor usually initiates the maternal urge to push. This sensation may be
     dulled when the birthing person has an epidural in place. The role of the nurse during this stage of labor is to provide
     motivation and encouragement for the birthing person. The strategies implemented may include emphasizing to the
     birthing person the benefits of relaxation of the perineum or coordinating bearing-down efforts with the contraction
     pattern via the tocodynamometer in a birthing person with an epidural. The nurse will coach the birthing person to
     maximize pushing efforts and coordinate pushing and breathing efforts. The nurse will also provide feedback to the
     birthing person about their pushing efforts and maintain continuous communication with the provider about the
     pushing progress.

     In open glottis pushing, the laboring person follows their body's spontaneous, natural urges to push without
     specific instructions or holding their breath or can be directed to bear down while exhaling. Directed open glottis
     pushing contrasts with the traditional closed glottis or Valsalva pushing technique, in which the laboring person is
     instructed to hold their breath and push forcefully for a specified duration during each contraction (Barasinski et al.,
     2020). During open glottis pushing, the laboring person continues to breathe normally. They take deep breaths in
     and exhale naturally as they feel the urge to bear down and push. There is no forced breath-holding. Open glottis
     pushing allows for more natural pushing efforts. Studies suggest that there is no difference in the incidence of
     perineal lacerations between open and closed glottis pushing (Barasinski et al., 2020).

     Changing positions during labor can be highly beneficial in aiding the descent of the fetus through the birth canal
     (Huang et al., 2019). Different positions can help optimize the alignment of the fetal head with the pelvis, facilitate
     uterine contractions, and reduce pressure on specific areas, potentially making the labor process more efficient and
     comfortable. It's important to note that the effectiveness of positions may vary for each laboring person, and the
     choice of position should be based on comfort and what feels most effective during labor. Continuous
     communication with the health-care team and a supportive birthing environment are essential to ensure safety and
     to optimize the labor process.

     Promoting Relaxation and Rest during the Second Stage of Labor
     The role of the nurse in promoting relaxation and rest during the second stage of labor may vary based on the pain
     control decisions of the birthing person. For a birthing person who has an epidural, the nurse can assist the person
     with positioning and creating a calm, quiet environment. For a birthing person who has chosen analgesia or
     nonpharmacologic methods, the nurse can support the person with positioning, bearing down, and breathing
     techniques (Heim & Makuch, 2023).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                18.2 · Nursing Care During the Second Stage of Labor  787

Providing Comfort Measures during the Second Stage of Labor
The second stage of labor can bring discomfort that the nurse can assist in alleviating. Warm compresses may be
applied to the perineum or lower back, and the nurse or support person may apply pressure to or massage the lower
back. Cool cloths can also be applied to the birthing person's forehead or neck. To encourage family-centered care,
the nurse can teach the family or friends of the birthing person to apply these techniques.

Monitoring for Complications during the Second Stage of Labor
The second stage of labor brings about the potential for complications that may affect the laboring person or the
fetus. The nurse continues to monitor maternal vital signs, discomfort, and pain while supporting pushing. The nurse
should continually assess for complications of the laboring person, including bladder distention, perineal tears,
excessive bleeding, and slow or lack of progress in descent (Milton, 2024). These complications are outlined in
(Table 18.8). (Please see further discussion of shoulder dystocia in Chapter 19 Complications of Labor and Birth.)

Complication       Nursing Assessment

Prolonged second   Assess cervical dilation and descent of the fetus.
stage              Monitor uterine contractions for frequency and strength.

                   Evaluate the laboring person's pushing efforts.

                   Observe the fetal heart rate for signs of distress.

                   Assess for signs of exhaustion or distress in the laboring person.

                   Assess for distended bladder.

Fetal distress     Continuously monitor the fetal heart rate.

                   Document heart rate patterns (e.g., decelerations).

                   Evaluate maternal vital signs for signs of infection or fever.

                   Assess amniotic fluid color, odor, and meconium presence.

                   Notify the health-care provider of the presence and associated symptoms.

Shoulder dystocia  Assist with maneuvers such as McRoberts and suprapubic pressure, as directed by the
                   health-care provider.

                   Document the time of occurrence and actions taken.

                   Assist with the evaluation for maternal and fetal injuries.

Rapid delivery     Notify the health-care provider.

                   Support the baby's head and guide the shoulders if the health-care provider is not
                   present.

                   Ensure a safe and controlled birth process.

                                 Document the time of birth and any complications.

TABLE 18.8 Complications and Nursing Actions during the Second Stage of Labor
788  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     The second stage of labor is a time of increased stress on the fetus. The nurse must monitor the fetal heart rate to
     ensure the safe delivery of the newborn. The nurse should monitor for an abnormal fetal heart rate with pushing and
     notify the health provider when indicated. The nurse must also monitor the birthing person's progress for any risk of
     shoulder dystocia, a situation in which the head of the newborn is delivered but a shoulder is trapped behind the
     birthing person's pubic bone during the delivery. If a shoulder dystocia does occur, the nurse must be prepared to
     react and assist the provider in repositioning maneuvers, or cesarean birth, to deliver the newborn (Milton, 2024).
     (Please see further discussion of shoulder dystocia in Chapter 19 Complications of Labor and Birth.)

     Communication with the Health-Care Provider
     Communication with a health-care provider who is not at the bedside should continue regularly and consistently
     throughout the second stage of labor and during pushing. The nurse is responsible for the continued assessment of
     the birthing person and the fetal heart rate pattern and descent of the fetus through the pelvis. The provider should
     be aware of any potential maternal complications, abnormal fetal heart rate patterns, progress of the second stage,
     and pushing efforts. Any changes in maternal or fetal status should be reported immediately to the health-care
     provider.

     Perineal Hygiene
     Perineal hygiene is recommended during the second stage. Hygiene includes keeping the perineum clean using
     warm water poured over the perineum or using wet washcloths (Figure 18.2). The standardized method of perineal
     hygiene requires the nurse to cleanse the perineum from the pubic hair line to the anus (front to back). The nurse
     should be aware of any hospital policies for perineal cleansing and will assist the provider when appropriate and
     required.

     FIGURE 18.2 Perineal Hygiene Keeping the perineum clean during the second stage of labor maintains perineal hygiene and decreases the
     risk for infection. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)
     Perineal Cleansing

     Perineal cleansing during delivery is an important aspect of hygiene and infection prevention. Here are the steps for
     perineal cleansing:

         · Gather supplies: Ensure that you have all the necessary supplies ready, including clean gloves, warm water,
             mild soap or antiseptic solution (per facility policy), clean washcloths or sterile sponges, and a clean towel.

         · Verify if the patient has any allergies.

     Access for free at openstax.org
18.2 · Nursing Care During the Second Stage of Labor                                                                                      789

    · Hand hygiene: Perform proper hand hygiene by washing your hands thoroughly with soap and water and
        drying them with a clean towel or disposable paper towels. Don sterile gloves to maintain aseptic technique.

    · Position the patient: Assist the laboring person into a comfortable position for perineal cleansing, such as a
        lithotomy position (lying on the back with knees bent and feet in stirrups) or a position of their choice that
        allows easy access to the perineal area.

    · Privacy and consent: Ensure the patient's privacy and obtain their consent for the procedure.
    · Warm water: Using warm water, wet a clean washcloth or sterile sponge. Squeeze out excess water to avoid

        excessive dripping.
    · Cleansing motion: Gently cleanse the perineal area from front to back, starting with the pubic hair line and

        moving toward the rectal area. Use a separate area of the washcloth or sponge for each stroke, maintaining a
        one-way cleaning motion to prevent contamination from the rectum to the vaginal area.
    · Pay attention to folds: Pay special attention to the folds and creases in the perineal area, ensuring thorough
        cleansing. Avoid excessive scrubbing or irritation, as the perineal area may be sensitive during labor.
    · Rinse: After cleansing, use a clean, damp washcloth or sponge to ensure the area is clean and any soap or
        antiseptic solution is removed from the perineum. Again, use a front-to-back motion.
    · Pat dry: Gently pat the perineal area dry with a clean towel or sterile gauze. Avoid rubbing, as this can irritate
        the skin.
    · Dispose of supplies: Properly dispose of any used supplies, such as gloves and disposable washcloths, in
        accordance with health-care facility protocols.
    · Reassure and comfort: Throughout the procedure, provide emotional support, reassurance, and explanations
        to the patient, maintaining open communication and addressing any concerns.

Perineal cleansing is essential for maintaining hygiene and preventing infection during labor and delivery. It is also
an opportunity to provide comfort and support to the laboring person. Nurses and health-care providers should
follow facility policies and guidelines while performing perineal cleansing to ensure safe and effective care.

Nursing Actions to Prepare for the Birth and the Time of Birth

During the second stage of labor, the nurse will begin to prepare for the birth of the newborn. A delivery table is
usually set up in the labor and birth suite before the onset of the second stage of labor (Milton, 2024). The delivery
table will contain sterile drapes, delivery equipment used by the provider, and instruments to complete repairs to
the perineum if necessary (Figure 18.3). The contents of the delivery table will vary based on hospital and provider
preferences.

FIGURE 18.3 Vaginal Delivery Table The nurse is responsible for making sure the table is set up for a vaginal delivery during the active
phase of the first stage of labor. Note the presence of the bulb syringe, cord clamp, sponges, syringe for local anesthesia, and drapes.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The infant warmer should be available during delivery, allowing the rapid initiation of resuscitation of the neonate if
necessary. The warmer should be stocked before the birthing person is placed in the room, and its contents should
be verified by the nurse before delivery (Ahmed et al., 2018). (See Table 18.9 for a list of equipment and supplies to
have ready for delivery in the warmer.) The warmer should be turned on by the nursing staff before delivery, allowing
enough time for the warmer to preheat to the desired temperature (Figure 18.4). The labor nurse should also make
790  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     sure oxygen and suction are set up and working. The nurse will communicate with other nursing staff, the nursery
     nurse, and the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) to coordinate and prepare for delivery/resuscitation as needed
     (Ahmed et al., 2018).

     Type                             Equipment

     Resuscitation equipment          Neonatal resuscitation bag and mask

                                      Suction bulb or catheter

                                      Endotracheal tubes (various sizes)

                                      Laryngoscope with blades (sizes 0 and 1)

                                      Stylet for endotracheal tube

                                      Meconium aspirator (if indicated)

     Oxygen equipment                 Oxygen source (wall outlet or portable)

                                      Oxygen mask and tubing (neonatal sizes)

     Thermoregulation                 Radiant warmer or heat lamp

                                      Prewarmed blankets or towels

                                      Hat and warm clothing for the newborn

     Monitoring and assessment Neonatal stethoscope

                                      Blood pressure cuff (neonatal size)

                                      Pulse oximeter with neonatal probe

                                      Thermometer (preferably electronic)

                                      Apgar scoring materials (Apgar score sheet)

                                      Clock or timer for timing interventions

     Umbilical cord care              Sterile umbilical cord clamps or ties

                                      Sterile scissors

                                      Antiseptic solution (e.g., chlorhexidine) for cord care

     Suction and oral care            Bulb syringe or mechanical suction device

                                      Sterile saline solution for suctioning

                                                Oral suction catheters (if indicated)

     TABLE 18.9 Equipment and Supplies to Have Ready for Delivery in the Warmer

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                      18.2 · Nursing Care During the Second Stage of Labor                                             791

Type                 Equipment

Emergency equipment  Neonatal bag-valve-mask (BVM) resuscitator

                     Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) board or firm surface

                     Emergency medications (e.g., epinephrine, naloxone) and syringes

Miscellaneous        Newborn diapers

                     Identification bands for parents and baby

                                           Baby blanket or swaddle

TABLE 18.9 Equipment and Supplies to Have Ready for Delivery in the Warmer

FIGURE 18.4 Newborn Warmer The nurse takes the footprints of a newborn in the warmer after performing the assessment. (credit: "First
Footprints" by Robyn Alvarez/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

The delivery of the newborn results in the collaboration of multiple health-care providers, which may be
overwhelming to the birthing person and their family (Weiseth, 2022). The nurse should discuss the need for each
member of the team and their role with the birthing person. In addition to the primary nurse assigned to the laboring
person and the delivery provider, an additional nurse should attend the delivery solely to support the newborn,
complete a newborn assessment, and initiate resuscitation with the neonatal resuscitation team when warranted. It
would not be uncommon to find at least two nurses, the primary provider, a respiratory therapist (per facility policy),
and support staff at the bedside during the delivery, all available for the safe delivery and support of the birthing
person and newborn during the initial moments following birth (Weiseth, 2022).
792  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     18.3 Nursing Care During the Third Stage of Labor

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Obtain assessment data on the birthing person during the third stage of labor
         · Explain the nursing actions when caring for the birthing person during the third stage of labor

     The third stage of labor begins with the birth of the newborn and ends with the separation and expulsion of the
     placenta. Following the delivery of the newborn, the infant may be placed on the birthing person's abdomen and
     then chest to initiate skin-to-skin contact. Initial skin-to-skin contact has been shown to promote bonding and aid in
     the newborn's transition to extrauterine life (Bigelow & Power, 2020). While the newborn is on the birthing person's
     chest and before the expulsion of the placenta, the umbilical cord is clamped by the health-care provider and cut by
     the support person or health-care provider. Waiting 30 to 60 seconds for delayed cord clamping in newborns is
     associated with significant benefits to the newborn, including increased hemoglobin levels and improved circulation,
     among others (ACOG, 2020a). If the newborn is compromised or if skin-to-skin contact or delayed cord clamping is
     not appropriate for any reason, the newborn may be taken to the infant warmer for additional support, observation,
     or resuscitation.

     Following the birth of the newborn, the uterus reduces in size, creating a decrease in the placental site and causing
     it to separate from the placental wall. The separation and expulsion of the placenta may be active or passive,
     including the use of uterotonics, early cord clamping, or gentle cord traction. Promotion of endogenous oxytocin to
     aid in the expulsion of the placenta may also be facilitated by encouraging skin-to-skin contact and early efforts to
     latch the baby to the maternal breast. Placenta delivery time of more than 30 minutes after delivery of the infant is
     associated with a higher risk of postpartum hemorrhage (PPH) or the need for manual removal of the placenta
     (Hutchison et al., 2023). Immediately after the birth of the placenta, most health-care providers order intravenous
     oxytocin to be administered by the nurse.

     Assessment during the Third Stage of Labor

     During the third stage of labor, the nurse's responsibilities include the assessment of the patient (Table 18.10) and
     newborn (Table 18.11). The nurse should continually complete the following patient assessments throughout the
     duration of the third stage of labor:

         · assessment of vital signs
         · assessment of the fundus for height, firmness, and tone to ensure uterine contraction and decrease the risk of

             postpartum hemorrhage
         · assessment of pain and discomfort
         · assessment of the bladder for any distention that may increase the risk of postpartum hemorrhage
         · assessment of the amount and type of vaginal bleeding

     Assessment Data Third Stage of Labor

     Vital signs                      Every 15 minutes
                                      Temperature
                                      Every 1 hour

     Contraction pattern Manually by palpation, usually by the health-care provider

     Labor progress                   As indicated based on signs of placental separation

     Pain                             As needed

       Emotional response Continuous

     TABLE 18.10 Assessment of the Birthing Person during the Third Stage of Labor

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                18.3 · Nursing Care During the Third Stage of Labor                     793

Assessment Data                                 First 30 Minutes after Birth

Apgar Score                                     1 and 5 minutes
(see Chapter 22 Immediate Care of the Newborn)  (10 minutes when newborn is in distress)

Temperature                                     Within first 15 minutes

Apical pulse                                    Low-risk: every 30 minutes after Apgar scoring
                                                With risk factors: every 5 minutes

Respiratory rate and quality                    Low-risk: every 30 minutes after Apgar scoring
                                                With risk factors: every 1-5 minutes

TABLE 18.11 Assessment of the Newborn during the Third Stage of Labor

Vital Signs
Vitals signs during the third stage of labor should be obtained at a minimum of every 15 minutes in stable birthing
persons. Blood pressure should be closely monitored during the third stage, as a drop in blood pressure could
indicate excessive blood loss or other life-threatening complication. The birthing person's pulse rate should be
monitored, and a rapid or weak pulse should be reported immediately, as it could indicate a potential hemorrhage.
Respiratory rate and oxygen saturation should be included in the assessment of vital signs during the third stage of
labor. Any abnormal findings or changes in trends in the vital signs of the birthing person should be reported to the
provider immediately (Hutchison et al., 2023).

The newborn's temperature should be taken as soon after birth as possible, especially with prolonged rupture of the
membranes or increased maternal temperature during the first or second stages of labor. Newborn temperatures
below 96.8° F (36° C) or above 100.4° F (38° C) are considered abnormal and should be reported by the nurse to
the health-care provider and neonatal team (Lubkowska et al., 2019).

Signs of Placental Separation
The reduction in uterine size, contractions, and cord traction contribute to the separation of the placenta from the
uterine wall (Figure 18.5). Separation of the placenta from the uterus results in the following three hallmark signs
(Milton, 2024):

· The shape of the uterus changes to a spherical or round shape.
· A gush of blood from behind the placenta appears in the vagina.
· The umbilical cord lengthens as the placenta detaches and moves into the introitus.

Spontaneous delivery of the placenta occurs following the separation from the uterus. If the placenta is not
delivered spontaneously, the health-care provider may manually extract the placenta from the uterine wall. Manual
extraction increases the risk of infection and postpartum hemorrhage (PPH). Following spontaneous or manual
expulsion of the placenta, the health-care provider inspects that the placenta is intact. Any piece of the placenta
that remains inside the uterus or attached to the uterine wall interferes with the effective contraction of the uterus
and increases the risk of PPH (Agrawal et al., 2018).
794  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     FIGURE 18.5 Separation of the Placenta (a) The uterus becomes smaller after the birth of the newborn. (b) The uterus continues to
     contract, causing the placenta to dehisce (separate) from the wall of the uterus. (c) After placental separation, uterine contractions expel
     the placenta, causing the uterus to rise and change shape. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Vaginal Bleeding
     Following placental separation from the uterus, contractions cause the expulsion of the placenta. Once the placenta
     is expelled, uterine massage is performed by the health-care provider, ensuring the uterus is firm to aid in the
     constriction of uterine blood vessels. Median blood loss in a vaginal birth is approximately 125 mL, with up to 500
     mL considered acceptable, while in a cesarean birth, blood loss may measure up to 1,000 mL (Rabie et al, 2018).
     Any blood loss greater than 1,000 mL or causing symptoms in the birthing person is considered a postpartum
     hemorrhage (PPH). A PPH is an obstetric emergency and requires interventions to reduce risks associated with
     morbidity and mortality. Careful monitoring by direct measurement of the blood loss (quantitative blood loss) has
     been shown to be more accurate than a visual estimation (EBL) of the blood loss during the process of labor and
     birth (ACOG, 2022).

             LINK TO LEARNING

     The Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses (AWHONN) provides guidelines for quantifying
     blood loss during childbirth. Accurate measurement of blood loss is crucial for identifying postpartum hemorrhage
     and ensuring timely interventions. This video describes how to accurately quantify blood (https://openstax.org/r/
     77bloodloss) loss.

     Nursing Interventions during the Third Stage of Labor

     Nursing care during the third stage of labor focuses on the initial assessment of the newborn, the administration of
     uterotonics, assessment of the uterus and lochia, and promotion of parent-newborn bonding. During this time, the
     nurse may assist the health-care provider while caring for the mother and newborn.

     Monitoring the Physical Response during the Third Stage of Labor
     The nurse will assess the birthing person's vital signs, including blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate, and pain
     while awaiting the delivery of the placenta. The uterus continues to contract following the birth of the newborn,
     which may result in the birthing person experiencing mild to moderate pain. The nurse may need to administer pain
     medication to the birthing person or guide them in nonpharmacologic pain management techniques. (See the full
     discussion in Chapter 17 Pain Management During Labor and Birth.) The nurse may guide the birthing person in
     bearing down to aid in the delivery of the placenta. After the placenta is delivered, the nurse will assess the vaginal
     bleeding for color, consistency, and amount, and the uterus for firmness, location, and tone (Milton, 2024).

     Promoting Relaxation and Rest during the Third Stage of Labor
     With the birth of a newborn comes many emotions. The birthing person may experience joy, sadness, or excitement.
     The nurse can support the birthing person through these emotions and promote rest and relaxation. Promoting
     relaxation during the third stage of labor can be done in many ways, including the following:

     Access for free at openstax.org
18.3 · Nursing Care During the Third Stage of Labor                                                                          795

    · encouraging deep breathing
    · providing a calm, quiet environment
    · offering warm blankets
    · gently massaging the birthing person's abdomen
    · encouraging the birthing person to close their eyes and use imagery to relax
    · offering emotional support
    · offering reassurance

Providing a relaxed environment during the third stage of labor can help provide a safe and healthy delivery
experience for the birthing person and their partner.

Administering Uterotonics
Active management of the third stage of labor is aimed at preventing postpartum hemorrhage (PPH). Medications
that increase the tone and contractility of the uterus, called uterotonics, are administered immediately following the
birth of the newborn or delivery of the placenta. The first-choice oxytocic medication for the prevention of PPH is
oxytocin (Pitocin). Administered through intravenous or intramuscular routes, prophylactic use of oxytocin during
the third stage of labor reduces maternal blood loss and the need for additional oxytocic medications (Salati et al.,
2019). When the use of additional uterotonics is required, a provider may opt to administer misoprostol (Cytotec),
methylergonovine (Methergine), carboprost (Hemabate), or tranexamic acid (Lysteda) to decrease the complications
of PPH.

Perineal Cleansing
After the delivery of the placenta, the health-care provider may perform perineal cleansing to view the vagina and
perineum for lacerations. Nursing actions include providing the health-care provider with sponges and cleansing
solutions. Perineal cleansing practices may vary based on the health-care provider's preference and the birthing
person's need. During this time, the health-care team will count the used blades and needles, sponges, and vaginal
packing, if used, to ensure that no foreign bodies are retained.

Monitoring the Newborn
Immediately upon birth, assessment of the newborn begins and will continue until the newborn is discharged. Initial
observation allows the health-care providers to monitor for any distress or complications. At 1 and 5 minutes of life,
an Apgar score is assigned to the newborn; five specific parameters are assessed to evaluate the physiologic state of
the newborn, starting with (1) heart rate, (2) respiratory effort, (3) muscle tone, (4) response to irritating stimuli, and
(5) color. For a full discussion of Apgar scoring, refer to Chapter 22 Immediate Care of the Newborn.

Monitoring and maintaining the newborn's body temperature is essential to the transition to extrauterine life. At
birth, the fetal body temperature is dependent on the maternal temperature. The delivery room temperature and
the evaporation of fluid from the newborn's skin result in a rapid drop in temperature (approximately 2o C or 2o to 3o
F) following birth and during the first half hour of life. Immediately following the birth, the nurse will dry the
newborn, place them skin-to-skin, cover their head with a cap, and cover them with warm blankets (Lubkowska et
al., 2019).

Promoting Parental Attachment to the Newborn
To promote bonding, skin-to-skin contact is initiated by placing the newborn directly on the skin of a parent. In
many cases, the newborn is placed on the abdomen of the birthing person immediately after birth. After the cord is
clamped, the newborn is moved up to the birthing person's chest to continue skin-to-skin contact. This immediate
contact has significant benefits for the newborn and the birthing person. One of the most important needs of the
newborn, temperature regulation, is promoted through early skin-to-skin contact with the parent. Physiologic and
metabolic adaptation and maintenance of glucose blood levels are positively impacted when the newborn is placed
immediately skin-to-skin and continues there for their first hour of life (Safari et al., 2018). In cases where skin-to-
skin is not feasible or possible, the newborn will be moved to a radiant warmer for further assessment, observation,
and interventions, if needed.

In addition to the benefits of skin-to-skin for the transitioning newborn, skin-to-skin has positive effects on the third
stage of labor. The skin contact of the baby with the birthing person induces the maternal secretion of endogenous
oxytocin, resulting in increased levels of oxytocin and uterine contractions. Skin-to-skin contact between the
796  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     birthing person and newborn decreases the duration of the third stage of labor (Karimi et al., 2019).

             REAL RN STORIES

     Nurse: Andrea S., MSN, CNS, RNC-OB, C-EFM, C-IAP
     Clinical setting: perinatal clinic at a large hospital
     Geographic location: California

     When I transitioned from being a labor and delivery nurse to being a perinatal clinical nurse specialist, my first big
     practice change for our department was to move to a couplet care model and to promote skin-to-skin contact
     immediately after delivery and beyond. We wanted to move our normal newborns out of the nursery and back into
     the rooms with their mothers and other family members, where they could benefit from feeding the baby on
     demand, or on cue, as soon as the baby showed early signs of hunger. Promoting exclusive breast-feeding in a
     family-centered care approach was going to improve the health and well-being of our patients.

     At the time I helped to implement this practice change, it was clearly visible in the literature the many benefits of
     doing skin-to-skin contact immediately after birth. Something nature always has known was finally an intellectual
     body of evidence that was growing and popular. The importance of skin-to-skin contact not only had to be taught to
     the nurses but also had to be relayed to the parents because they had to buy into the process for it to be successful.

     After teaching the importance of couplet care and skin-to-skin to the nurses in my department, I wanted to design a
     tool that the parents could use as well. After getting input from bedside staff and leadership, it was decided that a
     poster to display in all our labor and delivery rooms and couplet care rooms would be the best and easiest tool to
     use on a regular basis. I worked to include both the benefits and the goals of skin-to-skin contact on a poster written
     simply enough for most to understand. The following points are included on the poster:

     Skin-to-Skin Helps Your Baby!

         · Increases comfort
         · Relaxation and breathing
         · Better temperature control
         · Supports the immune system
         · Stabilizes the blood sugar

     Goals

         · Baby skin-to-skin with birthing parent immediately after birth
         · Uninterrupted bonding time until completion of first breast-feeding
         · Continued skin-to-skin in the postpartum period facilitates bonding and the initiation of feedings

     Since the creation of the original poster, it has been reformatted into our hospital system's official formatting and
     color scheme with logos and is available to order at our print shop. Our exclusive breast-feeding rates increased,
     and they remain higher than they were prior to implementing couplet care and skin-to-skin. Other areas of change
     have included promotion of skin-to-skin in the operating rooms and also in the NICU. I am very proud to have been
     involved with this evidence-based practice change that has completely changed the culture in our department and
     has helped to put the focus back on the patient, family, and parent-infant dyad where the most benefit exists.

     Monitoring for Complications during the Third Stage of Labor
     Nursing care of the birthing person during the third stage of labor requires thorough assessment and active
     management of the third stage of labor.

     Lacerations
     Soft tissue trauma during the third stage of labor is common and can vary in severity. It is not uncommon for a
     birthing person to experience edema or ecchymosis of the soft tissue. Some birthing persons may experience
     significant lacerations to the cervical, vaginal, and perineal tissues that require repair. Perineal and vaginal
     lacerations are described as first, second, third, or fourth degree (Figure 18.6). A first-degree laceration of the labia
     and perineum affects the skin and subcutaneous tissue. A second-degree laceration affects the skin, subcutaneous

     Access for free at openstax.org
18.3 · Nursing Care During the Third Stage of Labor                                                                                        797

tissue, and muscle of the perineum as well as the vagina. When a perineal tear extends to or through the anal
sphincter, this designates a third-degree laceration. A fourth-degree laceration includes damage to the pelvic
floor and surrounding anal and rectal mucosa (Ramar & Grimes, 2023). Specific suture needles for perineal repair
may be requested by the provider, depending upon the degree of laceration and provider preference.

FIGURE 18.6 Degrees of Perineal Lacerations A first-degree laceration affects the skin and subcutaneous tissue. A second-degree
laceration affects the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and muscle of the perineum and vagina. A third-degree laceration also affects the anal
sphincter. A fourth-degree laceration includes damage to the pelvic floor and surrounding anal and rectal mucosa. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Retained Placenta
A retained placenta after vaginal birth, a complication responsible for obstetric morbidity in 1 percent to 3 percent
of deliveries, is diagnosed when the placenta fails to spontaneously separate from the uterus during the third stage
of labor within 30 minutes after birth. Excessive bleeding in the absence of placental separation or placental tissue
that remains after the placenta is delivered can lead to maternal complications such as postpartum hemorrhage and
uterine infection (Perlman & Carusi, 2019). A retained placenta is the second leading cause of PPH, and the nurse
must recognize risk factors as well as signs and symptoms and understand the management of the condition.
Sometimes, only a small portion (single cotyledon) of the placenta is retained. This is why the placenta is inspected
by the health-care provider after delivery. (For a full discussion, see Chapter 21 Postpartum Complications.)

Postpartum Hemorrhage
Annually, approximately 14 million birthing persons worldwide experience postpartum hemorrhage (PPH), or
severe bleeding following childbirth, which is postpartum bleeding that exceeds 500 mL for a vaginal delivery and
1,000 mL for a cesarean birth. Of these birthing persons, about 70,000 die (World Health Organization [WHO],
2022). PPH requires active management to prevent complications. Prevention of PPH during the third stage should
target multiple aspects, including the administration of uterotonics after delivery, controlled cord traction, and
uterine massage after delivery of the placenta (Masuzawa et al, 2018). The nurse at the bedside during the third
stage of labor should be prepared to administer uterotonics, provide uterine massage, monitor vital signs, and
continually assess the need for further interventions in the case of PPH. (For a full discussion, see Chapter 21
Postpartum Complications.)
798  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     Uterotonics

     Uterotonics are medications that increase the tone and contractility of the uterus. Different uterotonics can be
     prescribed for cervical ripening, induction and augmentation of labor, and postpartum hemorrhage. Uterotonics
     used after birth and in the postpartum period include oxytocin, misoprostol, methylergonovine, and carboprost.
     Tranexamic acid does not increase uterine tone, but it is prescribed to assist blood clotting in the event of a
     postpartum hemorrhage.

     Oxytocin (Pitocin)

         · Indication: prevention and treatment of postpartum uterine atony and hemorrhage
         · Mechanism of Action: acts on the receptors in the myometrial cells, causing rhythmic contractions of the

             uterus
         · Adverse Effects: uterine hyperstimulation (most common), nausea, vomiting, dysrhythmias
         · Contraindications: hypersensitivity
         · Patient Education: Oxytocin reduces the bleeding from postpartum hemorrhage by making the uterus

             contract. It is administered intravenously or intramuscularly. Side effects include nausea, vomiting, and
             abdominal cramping. Adverse effects include irregular heart rate.
         · Classification: oxytocic
         · Dose: IV: 10 to 40 units (diluted for continuous infusion); IM: 10 units

     Misoprostol (Cytotec)

         · Indication: treatment of postpartum uterine atony and hemorrhage
         · Mechanism of Action: acts on prostaglandin receptors to increase uterine tone to decrease postpartum

             bleeding
         · Adverse Effects: shivering/chills, diarrhea, abdominal pain, hyperthermia, nausea and/or vomiting,

             flatulence, headache, increased blood pressure
         · Contraindications: hypersensitivity, active cardiac, pulmonary, renal, or hepatic disease; use with caution in

             patients with asthma
         · Patient Education: Misoprostol reduces the bleeding from postpartum hemorrhage by making the uterus

             contract. It is administered rectally. Side effects include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and flatulence. Adverse
             effects include shivering/chills, abdominal cramping, fever, headache, and increase in blood pressure.
         · Classification: prostaglandin
         · Dose: 400 to 1,000 mcg per rectum

     Methylergonovine (Methergine)

         · Indication: prevention and treatment of postpartum uterine atony and hemorrhage
         · Mechanism of Action: acts on smooth muscle of the uterus (via dopamine, -adrenergic, and 5-HT3 receptors

             stimulating a constant contraction of the uterus)
         · Adverse Effects: pain, sweating, vomiting, headache, increased blood pressure, stroke, tingling or numbness

             in the hands or feet, tachycardia, cardiac dysrhythmia
         · Contraindications: hypersensitivity, hypertension, cardiovascular disease
         · Patient Education: Methylergonovine reduces the bleeding from postpartum hemorrhage by making the

             uterus firmly contract. It is administered intramuscularly. Side effects include pain, sweating, vomiting, and
             headache. Adverse effects include increased blood pressure, stroke, tingling or numbness in the hands or feet,
             tachycardia, and cardiac dysrhythmia.
         · Classification: ergot alkaloid
         · Dose: IM: 0.2 mg every 2 to 6 hours

     Carboprost (Hemabate)

         · Indication: treatment of postpartum uterine atony and hemorrhage

     Access for free at openstax.org
18.4 · Nursing Care During the Fourth Stage of Labor                                                                        799

    · Mechanism of Action: acts on prostaglandin receptor sites in the uterine muscle to stimulate uterine
        contractions

    · Adverse Effects: nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps and pain, temperature increase greater than
        2° F (1.1° C), flushing

    · Contraindications: hypersensitivity, asthma or active cardiac, pulmonary, renal, or hepatic disease
    · Patient Education: Carboprost reduces the bleeding from postpartum hemorrhage by making the uterus

        contract. It is administered intramuscularly. Side effects include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and flushing.
        Adverse effects include abdominal cramping and fever.
    · Classification: prostaglandin
    · Dose: IM: 0.25 mg (may be administered directly into the uterus by the health-care provider)

Tranexamic acid (TXA) (Lysteda)

    · Indication: prevention and treatment of postpartum hemorrhage
    · Mechanism of Action: reduces blood loss by inhibiting the breakdown of fibrin by enzymes
    · Adverse Effects: anxiety, confusion, headache, visual changes, back pain, abdominal pain, dizziness, deep

        vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolus, seizures, fatigue
    · Contraindications: hypersensitivity, seizure disorder, high risk of venous or arterial thrombosis, or preexisting

        coagulopathy or oral anticoagulant treatment
    · Patient Education: TXA reduces the bleeding from postpartum hemorrhage by making sure the blood clots. It

        is administered intravenously. Side effects include fatigue, headaches, visual changes, confusion, and anxiety.
        Adverse effects include blood clots in the leg or lung and seizures.
    · Classification: antifibrinolytic
    · Dose: IV: 1 g

(Brenner et al., 2019; Drew & Carvalho, 2022; Vallerand & Sanoski, 2022)

18.4 Nursing Care During the Fourth Stage of Labor

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Obtain assessment data on the person who has completed the first three stages of labor and birth
    · Explain the nursing actions when caring for a person during the fourth stage of labor
    · Monitor parent-newborn attachment
    · Provide education to the person who has given birth and the family related to the fourth stage of labor

Assessment during the Fourth Stage of Labor

The delivery of the placenta initiates the fourth stage of labor. This stage ends after 1 to 4 hours or until the birthing
person is clinically stable. During this stage, the nurse will closely monitor the birthing person's vital signs, uterine
tone, lochia, and recovery from any anesthesia for complications and encourage parent-newborn bonding and
breast-feeding. The nurse will also assist the health-care provider during the repair of any lacerations.

Vital Signs
During the first hour following delivery, the nurse will monitor the birthing person's vital signs every 15 minutes,
followed by every 30 minutes during the second hour (Table 18.12) summarizes the assessment data to be
collected. The nurse should compare the vital signs to predelivery vital signs and look for subtle changes to report to
the physician (Hutchison et al., 2023).
800  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     Assessment Data Fourth Stage of Labor                        Expected Findings

     Vital signs    Every 15 minutes for the first hour, every    Vital signs will return to baseline following
                    30 minutes for the second hour, every hour    the 1-hour recovery.
                    for the third and fourth hours
                    Temperature
                    Within the first hour of delivery, as needed
                    after the first hour

     Uterus         Monitor location, size, and consistency       The uterus will remain firm, midline, and
                    every 15 minutes for the first hour, every    approximately at the level of the umbilicus.
                    30 minutes for the second hour, every hour
                    for the third and fourth hours

     Lochia         Monitor amount, color, and consistency        The lochia will remain rubra in color, will
                    every 15 minutes for the first hour, every    not contain large clots, and will remain
                    30 minutes for the second hour, every hour    consistent or decreased in quantity.
                    for the third and fourth hours

     Perineum       Monitor for edema, ecchymoses, and            The perineum will remain free from
                    discomfort every 15 minutes for the first     infection.
                    hour, every 30 minutes for the second
                    hour, every hour for the third and fourth
                    hours

     Pain           Hourly, or more frequently as needed          Pain will be managed with pain

                                                                  medications when required.

     Recovery from  Monitor every 15 minutes for a return of      Birthing person will return to normal
     anesthesia     sensation and movement in the lower           sensation and movement.
                    extremities

     Emotional response Continuous                                Birthing person will discuss feelings and
                                                                  concerns with health-care providers and
                                                                  family.

     TABLE 18.12 Assessment of the Birthing Person in the Fourth Stage of Labor (Milton, 2024)

     Involution
     During the fourth stage of labor, it is critical for the nurse to assess uterine tone, size, and location, as well as any
     vaginal bleeding. The nurse should assess and monitor for uterine involution, the process by which the uterus
     begins to return to its prepregnant size, using regular fundal massage (Milton, 2024). Involution follows a
     predictable rate. During the first hours after childbirth, the fundus should be at the level of the umbilicus, and that
     level should not rise over the first couple of hours following delivery. A rise in uterine height warrants further
     assessment and notification of the provider.

     The vaginal discharge composed of blood, mucus, and tissue during the postpartum period is called lochia.
     Assessing lochia is a critical aspect of postpartum care for people who have recently given birth. Monitoring its
     characteristics helps health-care providers to ensure that the birthing person's recovery is progressing normally and
     to identify any potential complications.

     Assessing lochia provides valuable information about the birthing person's postpartum recovery. By closely
     monitoring and promptly reporting any abnormal findings, nurses can ensure the birthing person's well-being and
     address any potential issues as they arise. This assessment is an essential component of postpartum care and helps
     in promoting a safe and healthy recovery for the new parent.

     Access for free at openstax.org
18.4 · Nursing Care During the Fourth Stage of Labor                                                                        801

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

How to Assess Lochia

  1. Frequency: Lochia is assessed at regular intervals (sample protocol: every 15 minutes in the first hour of the
        fourth stage of labor, hourly for the next 1 to 4 hours, then every 4 hours for 24 to 48 hours.

  2. Explanation and privacy: Explain the assessment procedure to the birthing person, ensuring they understand
        what to expect. Maintain the birthing person's privacy and dignity throughout the assessment, using drapes or
        blankets as needed.

  3. Position: Ensure the birthing person is in a comfortable and appropriate position (legs apart and knees bent)
        for assessment, such as lying on their back or sitting up at less than 45 degrees.

  4. Use gloves: Wear disposable gloves to minimize the risk of infection when handling lochia.
  5. Inspection: Inspect the perineal pad, underpad, or any material used to collect lochia.

        Note the color, amount, consistency, and odor of the discharge.
        a. Color: Lochia progresses through different color phases:

               i. Lochia rubra: This is the initial discharge and is typically bright red, resembling menstrual blood.
                    Lochia rubra is expected for the first 4 days.

               ii. Lochia serosa: This is the second phase and is typically pink or brownish in color. Lochia serosa is
                    expected for up to another 10 days.

              iii. Lochia alba: This is the third phase and is typically whitish or yellowish and may continue for several
                    weeks.

              iv. The transition from rubra to serosa to alba indicates the normal healing process of the site where the
                    placenta was attached in the uterus.

        b. Amount:
               i. Visually estimate the amount of lochia by assessing whether it is:
                      (a) Scant: A small amount, less than 1 inch on a perineal pad.
                      (b) Light: Approximately 1 to 4 inches on a pad.
                      (c) Moderate: Approximately 4 to 6 inches on a pad.
                      (d) Heavy: Saturating a pad within 1 hour or less.
               ii. Weigh the lochia on all materials (quantification of blood loss* [QBL])
                      (a) Using a scale, weigh the soiled perineal pads, underpads, and linen.
                      (b) Subtract the dry weight of all materials (perineal pad, underpad, and linen) from the soiled
                    weight. This equals the weight of the lochia in grams.
                      (c) Convert the weight in grams to milliliters (1 g = 1 mL).
                      (d) Add the mL of lochia to the QBL at the delivery (and any previous lochia in the postpartum
                    period).

              *Continuous computation of the QBL monitors blood loss more accurately, leading to earlier recognition of
              significant blood loss. This decreases morbidity and mortality in the postpartum person from PPH.
         c. Consistency: Note the consistency of lochia; it should be similar to that of mucus or watery. Clots may be
              present but should not be larger than a quarter.
        d. Odor: Assess the odor of lochia. Lochia typically has a mild, musky odor. Any foul or unpleasant smell may
              indicate infection.
  6. Abnormal findings: Report any abnormal findings, such as heavy bleeding (hemorrhage), foul odor, or large
        clots, to the health-care provider immediately, as these can be signs of complications.
  7. Documentation: Document the findings of the lochia assessment accurately in the birthing person's medical
        record, including color, amount, consistency, and odor.

Perineum
The delivery of the newborn may result in lacerations or edema of the perineum. Lacerations are repaired by the
provider, ensuring skin approximation. The nurse will assess the perineum for edema, bruising, laceration
approximation, and pain when assessing vital signs and when indicated (Milton, 2024). Excessive pain may indicate
the development of a hematoma. (See Chapter 20 Postpartum Care and Chapter 21 Postpartum Complications for
more information.)
802  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     Nursing Actions in the Fourth Stage of Labor

     In addition to assessing the patient who just delivered, nursing care during the fourth stage of labor includes
     assisting the health-care provider, monitoring the physiologic and psychologic responses of the birthing person, and
     assisting with breast-feeding. During this period, the nurse also continues to monitor the birthing person for
     complications.

     Assisting the Health-Care Provider
     During the fourth stage of labor, the nurse assists the health-care provider as needed and provides updates on any
     deviations from normal. Nursing actions may include cleaning the perineum, massaging the fundus, and providing
     any assistance and supplies for perineal repairs (Milton, 2024). The nurse also informs the HCP of any deviations
     from normal.

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     Lidocaine

     Patients requiring suturing for a perineal laceration or repair of an episiotomy may require lidocaine. Lidocaine is a
     local anesthetic that is administered under the skin and to the area under the wound edge to relieve the pain
     associated with the repair. Lidocaine temporarily numbs the area and allows the health-care provider time to
     complete the repair while the patient remains comfortable.

     Lidocaine (Xylocaine)

         · Indications: pain relief during repair of postpartum perineal tears
         · Mechanism of Action: Lidocaine provides local anesthesia by nerve blockade at various sites in the body by

             stabilizing the neuronal membrane by inhibiting the ionic fluxes required for the initiation and conduction of
             impulses, thereby effecting local anesthetic action.
         · Adverse Effects: dizziness, tinnitus, confusion, tachycardia, anxiety, chest pain, dyspnea, hives
         · Contraindications:

               known hypersensitivity to lidocaine or other local anesthetics of the amide type
               complete heart block
               hypovolemia
         · Patient Education:
         · Classification: Local anesthetics
         · Route/Dosage: 10 to 15 mL of lidocaine 1 percent along the edges of the perineal tear or episiotomy

     (Vallerand & Sanoski, 2002)

     Monitoring the Physical Response during the Fourth Stage of Labor
     Following the delivery of the newborn, the nurse should obtain vital signs of the birthing person every 15 minutes for
     the first hour and every 30 minutes for the second hour. During this period, the nurse will also assess the birthing
     person's fundus, ensuring that it is contracting and that the birthing person's lochia is small to moderate. The nurse
     also monitors the birthing person's bladder immediately after delivery because of any IV fluid intake during labor. A
     full bladder interferes with uterine involution, increasing the risk of PPH (Milton, 2024). The nurse will need to assist
     the birthing person to void when needed. It is important for the nurse to monitor the birthing person's level of pain
     and to provide comfort measures or analgesia.

     Monitoring the Emotional Response during the Fourth Stage of Labor
     The emotional changes that occur for the birthing person during the fourth stage of labor reflect the physical
     challenges and changes that the birthing person's body has undergone. Immediately following birth, some birthing
     persons may feel shocked or disconnected from reality; others may feel wide awake and euphoric. As the intensity
     of labor wears off, the birthing person may become exhausted and interested in sleeping or resting. The role of the
     nurse is to support the emotional needs of the birthing person and reassure them that their feelings are normal, all
     while encouraging bonding with the newborn (Milton, 2024).

     Access for free at openstax.org
18.4 · Nursing Care During the Fourth Stage of Labor                                                                                           803

Promoting Breast-Feeding
In most cases, the newborn will be placed skin-to-skin with the birthing person. This allows for bonding between
the birthing person and the newborn and the initiation of early breast-feeding. Following the birth of the newborn,
the nurse may need to educate the birthing person on the importance of breast-feeding and the newborn's feeding
cues. The nurse can support the birthing person by keeping the newborn at the bedside for physical and emotional
closeness, and to recognize feeding cues more easily (WHO, 2024). The nurse can assist the birthing person with
proper positioning of the infant and attaining a proper latch during feeding. Early assistance with breast-feeding can
increase the success of long-term breast-feeding (Couto, 2020). (See Chapter 22 Immediate Care of the Newborn
for more information on breast-feeding.)

        LINK TO LEARNING

Toronto Metropolitan Maternity Series: Labor and Delivery (https://openstax.org/r/77TorontoMetro) includes four
games that examine the role of the nurse in preconception and prenatal care. These games promote the application
of knowledge and skills related to assessment and intervention, highlight the important components of a
comprehensive postpartum assessment, and introduce the nurse to the care of the newborn.

Monitoring for Complications during the Fourth Stage of Labor
The nurse should perform frequent assessments of the uterine fundus, including tone, location, and position. The
fundus should be firm and well contracted, with the uterus located midline. Initially, the fundus will be located
between the umbilicus and the symphysis pubis, slowly rising to the level of the umbilicus during the first hour after
birth.

Fundal massage is performed at regular intervals to assess and maintain the firmness of the uterus. If the uterus
becomes boggy at any point, additional fundal massage may be warranted. Any deviation of the fundus to the right
or left of the midline requires further assessment and may require additional interventions to promote involution of
the uterus. The nurse must continually assess for bladder distention, a common contributor to uterine atony, lack of
muscle tone in the uterus following birth, a leading cause of postpartum hemorrhage.

The birthing person's lochia should be frequently assessed during the fourth stage (Figure 18.7). An increase in
lochia is one of the hallmark signs of potential postpartum hemorrhage. When observed, the cause should be
investigated and corrected immediately. As previously mentioned, quantitative measurements of blood loss should
be obtained, and treatment of postpartum hemorrhage should be a priority for nurses following every delivery
(Milton, 2024).

FIGURE 18.7 Monitoring Lochia for Signs of Hemorrhage The four peripads shown illustrate progressively increasing amounts of lochia
in the postpartum period: (a) scant; (b) small; (c) moderate; and (d) heavy. Nurses instruct the postpartum person to place their used
peripads in a specific location so that the nurse can weigh each peripad. This allows the nurse to measure quantitative blood loss during the
postpartum hospital stay. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Monitoring Parent-Newborn Attachment

The nurse can continue to encourage skin-to-skin contact between the newborn and the birthing person and
support person throughout the fourth stage of labor. The nurse educates the birthing person and support person on
804  18 · Nursing Care and Interventions During Labor and Birth

     the importance of skin-to-skin. The nurse evaluates the interactions between the birthing person and newborn and
     the support person and newborn. Lack of parental interaction, such as minimal holding, touching, and discussing the
     infant, has been linked with an increase in risk for abuse and neglect of the newborn (Safari et al., 2022).

     Patient Education during the Fourth Stage of Labor

     The fourth stage of labor is a time of great importance for patient teaching. The nurse should include teaching about
     care of the birthing person and the newborn. Fundal massage can be very uncomfortable, and birthing persons may
     push the nurse away. Educating the birthing person on the importance and need for fundal massage, including a
     decreased risk of PPH, can improve the birthing person's acceptance of the intervention. The nurse should educate
     the birthing person and their partner or support person on the benefits of early skin-to-skin contact with the
     newborn (Safari et al., 2022) by mentioning how it

         · promotes calm and relaxation for both parent and newborn;
         · regulates the newborn's heart rate and breathing, helping with the transition to extrauterine life;
         · stimulates digestion and an interest in feeding;
         · regulates the newborn's temperature;
         · protects against infection via colonization of the newborn's skin with the birthing person's bacteria; and
         · stimulates maternal hormones to support breast-feeding and parenting.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Cultural Considerations about Privacy

     The needs and expectations when having a baby vary based on the patient's social, religious, and cultural
     background. The health-care team should make every effort to understand, respect, and implement the cultural
     requests of the patient when appropriate. Privacy among cultures may vary, with some patients requesting no male
     providers or staff at the bedside. The nurse should notify the health-care team of the patient's requests and provide
     staff that meet the patient's needs. When it is not possible to meet the privacy needs of the patient, the nurse
     should have a discussion with the patient on how to maximize the patient's privacy.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              18 · Summary 805

Summary

18.1 Nursing Care During the First Stage of Labor

Starting at the time the laboring person arrives in the obstetric triage unit, the nurse establishes a relationship with
the person during this first stage in the process of becoming a parent. The nurse's role throughout the first stage of
labor can be a simple task, such as obtaining ice chips for dry mucous membranes, or more complex, such as
facilitating epidural anesthesia for pain control measures. Whether the care is as simple as getting ice chips or as
complicated as fetal monitor interpretation, the nurse is the care provider at the bedside. Knowledge of the process
of labor and birth, pain management techniques, fetal and contraction monitoring, and monitoring for complications
is applied by the nurse caring for a person throughout the first stage of labor.

18.2 Nursing Care During the Second Stage of Labor

The second stage of labor is an exciting time for families. The birthing person is now fully dilated, and the birth of the
newborn is near. When it is time for pushing, the nurse will be available to direct the birthing person with pushing
efforts when necessary. During the second stage, the nurse will also assist the birthing person with pain
management, positioning, and the birth itself while monitoring the fetus and birthing person continuously.

18.3 Nursing Care During the Third Stage of Labor

The third stage of labor starts immediately after the delivery of the newborn and ends with the delivery of the
placenta. Nursing care during the third stage of labor includes assessment of the birthing person and newborn. The
nurse will need to assess the birthing person's vital signs, pain or discomfort, bleeding, uterus, and bladder. For the
newborn, the nurse will assess vital signs, assign an Apgar score, and monitor the newborn's temperature
throughout the third stage of labor. The nurse may also initiate skin-to-skin contact between the newborn and the
birthing person, while also coordinating clamping of the umbilical cord. The nurse must be aware of potential
complications during the third stage of labor related to placental separation and expulsion, such as postpartum
hemorrhage.

18.4 Nursing Care During the Fourth Stage of Labor

The fourth stage of labor is a vital time for the nurse to prevent complications while promoting family bonding. Skin-
to-skin contact between the newborn and parent can promote bonding and breast-feeding. The nurse will continue
to monitor for postpartum bleeding and other postdelivery complications. Patient education is also important during
this time, as the birthing person and their partner are learning about their newborn and may be new to parenting.
The nurse must provide clinical and emotional support for the birthing person and their family, keeping in mind
cultural and personal preferences.

Key Terms

amniotomy procedure performed during labor and delivery in which a health-care provider intentionally breaks
    the amniotic sac or amniotic membrane; known as the artificial rupture of membranes (AROM)

delayed cord clamping allowing extra time for blood in the cord and placenta to flow to the baby by waiting to
    clamp the cord, usually for 1 minute after birth

first-degree laceration tear of the labia and perineum that affects the skin and subcutaneous tissue
fourth-degree laceration tear that extends through the skin, subcuticular tissue, muscles of the perineum, and

    anal sphincter into the rectal mucosa; includes damage to the pelvic floor and surrounding anal and rectal
    mucosa
involution process by which the uterus begins to return to its prepregnant size
lochia vaginal discharge composed of blood, mucus, and tissue during the postpartum period
obstetric examination medical assessment conducted by a health-care provider to evaluate and monitor the
    health and progress of the pregnant person and their developing fetus throughout pregnancy
obstetric triage rapid assessment and prioritization of care based on the specific obstetric and gynecologic needs
open glottis pushing spontaneous or natural pushing, a technique used during the second stage of labor
postpartum hemorrhage postpartum bleeding that exceeds 500 mL for a vaginal delivery and 1,000 mL for a
    cesarean birth
retained placenta when the placenta fails to spontaneously separate from the uterus during the third stage of
806 18 · Assessments

    labor within 30 minutes after birth
second-degree laceration tear that affects the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and muscle of the perineum as well as

    the vagina
shoulder dystocia condition presenting during delivery in which the head of the newborn is delivered but a

    shoulder is trapped behind the birthing person's pubic bone
skin-to-skin contact placing of the newborn directly on the skin of a parent to promote bonding
third-degree laceration perineal tear that extends to or through the anal sphincter
uterine atony lack of muscle tone in the uterus following birth
uterotonics medications that increase the tone and contractility of the uterus
vaginal examination medical assessment conducted by a health-care provider to evaluate and monitor the health

    and progress of the pregnant person during labor, to include cervical dilation, effacement, cervical position,
    station, and presenting part and position of the fetus

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. What procedure might the nurse perform to determine the presentation of the fetus?
           a. vaginal exam
           b. ultrasound
           c. palpation of contractions
           d. laboring person interview

    2. During the first stage of labor, what is the primary goal of nursing care in the early phase?
           a. Administer pain medication.
           b. Monitor fetal heart rate continuously.
           c. Promote relaxation and provide comfort measures.
           d. Prepare for imminent delivery.

    3. What assessment findings are essential components of obstetric triage? Select all that apply.

           a. history and physical
           b. fetal monitoring
           c. EDD
           d. 24-hour diet recall

    4. A pregnant person in the first stage of labor experiences rupture of membranes. What is the nurse's priority
        action?
           a. Administer an epidural for pain relief.
           b. Start an IV line and administer antibiotics.
           c. Document the FHR and time and characteristics of the amniotic fluid.
           d. Prepare for immediate delivery.

    5. What assessment data are collected to assess progress during the second stage of labor?
           a. fetal heart rate
           b. fetal descent
           c. bearing-down effort
           d. contraction strength

    6. In a low-risk laboring person who is not receiving oxytocin, how often should the nurse assess the fetal heart
        rate during the second stage of labor?
           a. every 5 minutes with contractions
           b. at least every 30 minutes
           c. every 5-15 minutes
           d. only when the physician orders assessment

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      18 · Assessments 807

 7. A laboring person on oxytocin for induction of labor should have continuous monitoring of the fetal heart rate.
      How often should the nurse assess the fetal heart rate?
         a. every 30 minutes
         b. every 15 minutes
         c. every 5 minutes
         d. every 1 hour

 8. What is the primary goal of fetal heart rate monitoring during the second stage of labor?
         a. to predict when to bear down during contractions
         b. to determine the strength of the uterine contractions
         c. to evaluate fetal well-being
         d. to monitor vital signs of the birthing person

 9. During open glottis pushing, what is the laboring person instructed to do?
         a. hold their breath and push for 10 seconds during each contraction
         b. push spontaneously while exhaling during contractions
         c. exhale slowly during contractions without pushing
         d. perform deep breathing exercises between contractions

10. Which statement accurately describes the importance of birthing person position changes during the second
      stage of labor?
         a. Position changes have an impact on fetal descent.
         b. Position changes can lead to support person stress.
         c. Fetal descent is solely determined by uterine contractions.
         d. Maintaining a supine position is the safest option.

11. How long should clamping of the cord be delayed in an uncomplicated delivery to increase the newborn's
      hemoglobin levels and improve circulation?
         a. 30-60 seconds
         b. 15-30 seconds
         c. 30 seconds
         d. Delayed cord clamping is not recommended.

12. A birthing person who delivered a newborn vaginally is receiving care in the labor and birth unit. The health-
      care provider diagnosed a retained placenta. What is the primary risk associated with a retained placenta?
         a. neonatal jaundice
         b. postpartum hemorrhage
         c. delayed bonding
         d. postpartum anemia

13. A nurse is assisting with a vaginal birth and is monitoring for signs of placental separation. What is the most
      reliable clinical indicator that the placenta has separated?
         a. a gush of clear amniotic fluid
         b. uterine contractions every 2 to 3 minutes
         c. lengthening of the umbilical cord
         d. maternal report of intense pain

14. During a vaginal birth, a birthing person experienced a second-degree perineal laceration. What is a
      characteristic of a second-degree laceration?
         a. It involves only the vaginal mucosa.
         b. It extends through the vaginal and perineal muscles.
         c. It is the least severe type of laceration.
         d. It does not require suturing.
808 18 · Assessments

  15. A nurse is administering an uterotonic medication to a birthing person who has just delivered the placenta.
        Which uterotonic medication is commonly used to prevent postpartum hemorrhage and promote uterine
        contractions?
           a. oxytocin (Pitocin)
           b. fentanyl (Sublimaze)
           c. epinephrine (Adrenaline)
           d. lorazepam (Ativan)

  16. During the postpartum period, a nurse is caring for a birthing person who is receiving uterotonic medications.
        The nurse's assessment reveals a boggy and enlarged uterus. What is the nurse's immediate action?
           a. Document the findings as normal.
           b. Continue to administer the uterotonic medication.
           c. Perform fundal massage to promote uterine firmness.
           d. Administer an analgesic for the birthing person's pain.

  17. How often should the nurse assess the blood pressure, pulse, and respirations of the birthing person during
        the first hour of the fourth stage of labor?
           a. every 15 minutes
           b. every 30 minutes
           c. not until after the first hour
           d. once, then hourly

  18. In what ways can the nurse support involution of the uterus in the fourth stage of labor? Select all that apply.

           a. uterotonics
           b. encouraging the birthing person to urinate
           c. fundal massage
           d. providing the baby a bottle so that the birthing person can rest
           e. delaying breast-feeding

  19. A nurse is educating a birthing person about the benefits of skin-to-skin contact with their newborn
        immediately after birth. The nurse explains that this practice has numerous advantages. Which of the
        following benefits is NOT typically associated with skin-to-skin contact?
           a. improved bonding between parent and baby
           b. enhanced thermoregulation for the newborn
           c. decreased risk of neonatal infections
           d. accelerated uterine involution for the birthing person

  20. During the fourth stage of labor, a nurse assesses the perineum of a birthing person who had a vaginal birth.
        What is the primary purpose of this assessment?
           a. to evaluate the birthing person's readiness for discharge
           b. to ensure the birthing person can ambulate safely
           c. to detect any signs of perineal trauma
           d. to assess the status of cervical dilation

  21. A nurse is caring for a postpartum person during the fourth stage of labor. The nurse is assessing uterine
        involution to ensure that the uterus is returning to its prepregnancy size and position. Which finding is
        indicative of normal uterine involution during this stage?
           a. Uterus is palpable at the level of the umbilicus.
           b. Uterine fundus is firm, at the level of the umbilicus.
           c. Uterus is displaced to the right side of the abdomen.
           d. Uterine fundus is above the level of the umbilicus.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            18 · References 809

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. When a patient presents for labor, what information is important to obtain from the prenatal chart and why?

    2. Why is it important to know the EDD?

    3. What instruments may be included on a delivery table?

    4. Why should the delivery team consist of a nurse for the birthing person and a nurse for the newborn?

    5. What are the three signs of placental separation?

    6. When assessing a laceration, describe the difference between first-, second-, third- and fourth-degree
        lacerations.

    7. What are the benefits of early skin-to-skin contact, and how can the nurse support it?

    8. As a postpartum nurse, you are responsible for assessing the lochia of a birthing person during the fourth
        stage of labor. During your assessment, you find that the lochia is bright red and the pad was saturated within
        30 minutes. The birthing person has no other signs of distress or abnormal vital signs. What is your immediate
        nursing action, and what does this finding suggest?

Reflection Questions

    1. In what nonpharmaceutical ways can the nurse support the laboring person with pain management?

Critical-Thinking Questions about Case Studies

    1. Refer to Labor and Delivery: Part 1.
        Using the information on assessing risk factors, list the data that demonstrates that Brianne's labor is at risk.
        Provide rationales to support your answer.

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. Describe the key nursing actions and considerations when providing care to pregnant persons in the obstetric
        triage unit.

    2. Describe the nursing actions and considerations involved in assisting a health-care provider during an
        amniotomy procedure.

    3. You are providing perineal hygiene to a birthing person in the second stage of labor. Describe the key steps
        you would take to ensure effective perineal cleaning while maintaining infection control practices and
        ensuring the comfort of the birthing person.

    4. You are providing care to a birthing person in the fourth stage of labor. Describe the key steps you would take
        to assess the person's lochia.

References

Agrawal, T., Kalra, R., & Suryavanshi, A. (2018). Evaluation of complications during third stage of labour among
   women delivering at tertiary care center. International Journal of Reproduction, Contraception, Obstetrics and
   Gynecology, 7(7), 2706-2713. https://doi.org/10.18203/2320-1770.ijrcog20182867

Ahmed, N., Mohasib, S., & Emam, E. (2018). Effect of applying standards for labor and delivery nursing care on
   performance of nurses. Minia Scientific Nursing Journal, 003(1), 24-33. https://doi.org/10.21608/
    msnj.2018.187729

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019, reaffirmed 2021b). Practice Bulletin No. 766:
   Approaches to limit intervention during labor and birth. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/
    committee-opinion/articles/2019/02/approaches-to-limit-intervention-during-labor-and-birth

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020a). ACOG Committee Opinion No. 814: Delayed
   umbilical cord clamping after birth. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 136(6). https://doi.org/10.1097/
810 18 · References

    aog.0000000000004167

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020b). Practice Bulletin No. 266: Screening for fetal
   chromosomal abnormalities. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practice-bulletin/articles/2020/10/
    screening-for-fetal-chromosomal-abnormalities

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021). Practice Bulletin No. 230: Obesity in pregnancy.
    https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practice-bulletin/articles/2021/06/obesity-in-pregnancy

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022). Committee Opinion No. 794: Quantitative blood loss
   in obstetric hemorrhage. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-opinion/articles/2019/12/
    quantitative-blood-loss-in-obstetric-hemorrhage

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023a). Committee Opinion No. 667: Hospital-based triage
   of obstetric patients. https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-opinion/articles/2016/07/
    hospital-based-triage-of-obstetric-patients

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2023b). ReVITALize: Obstetrics data definitions.
    https://www.acog.org/practice-management/health-it-and-clinical-informatics/revitalize-obstetrics-data-
    definitions

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2024). Clinical Practice Guideline No. 8. First and second
   stage labor management. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 143(1), 144-162. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000005447

Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses. (2018). AWHONN position statement: Fetal heart
   rate monitoring. Journal of Obstetrical Gynecological and Neonatal Nursing, 47(6), 874-877. https//doi.org/
    10.1016/j.jogn.2018.09.007

Barasinski, C., Debost-Legrand, A., & Vendittelli, F. (2020). Is directed open-glottis pushing more effective than
    directed closed-glottis pushing during the second stage of labor? A pragmatic randomized trial--the EOLE study.
   Midwifery, 91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.midw.2020.102843

Bigelow, A. E., & Power, M. (2020). Mother-infant skin-to-skin contact: Short- and long-term effects for mothers and
   their children born full-term. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, article 1921. https://doi.org/10.3389/
    fpsyg.2020.01921

Brenner, A., Ker, K., Shakur-Still, H., & Roberts, I. (2019). Tranexamic acid for post-partum haemorrhage: What, who
   and when. Best Practice & Research Clinical Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 61, 66-74. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.bpobgyn.2019.04.005

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023, May 5). Family health history and planning for pregnancy.
    https://www.cdc.gov/genomics/famhistory/famhist_plan_pregnancy.htm

Cnattingius, S., Johansson, S., & Razaz, N. (2020). Apgar score and risk of neonatal death among preterm infants.
   New England Journal of Medicine, 383(1), 49-57.

Cohen, S. R., & Thomas, C. R. (2015). Rebozo technique for fetal malposition in labor. Journal of Midwifery &
   Women's Health, 60(4), 445-451. https://doi.org/10.1111/jmwh.12352

Couto, G. R., Dias, V., & de Oliveira, I. (2020). Benefits of exclusive breastfeeding: An integrative review. Nursing
   Practice Today, 7(4), 245-254. https://doi.org/10.18502/npt.v7i4.4034

Dhekra, T., Soumaya, K., Ahmed, H., Ahmed, Z., & Haifa, B. (2020). The advantage of maternal mobility during labor:
   A prospective study about 120 cases in Mandia, India. Journal of Gynaecology and Womens Healthcare, 2, 205.
    Retrieved from https://article.scholarena.com/The-Advantage-of-Maternal-Mobility-during-Labor-A-Prospective-
    Study-about-120-Cases-in-Mahdia.pdf

Drew, T., & Carvalho, J. C. A. (2022). Major obstetric haemorrhage. BJA Education, 22(6), 238-244. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.bjae.2022.01.002

Heim, M. A., & Makuch, M. Y. (2023). Breathing techniques during labor: A multinational narrative review of efficacy.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            18 · References 811

   The Journal of Perinatal Education, 32(1), 23-34. https://doi.org/10.1891/JPE-2021-0029

Hofmeyr, G. J., & Singata-Madliki, M. (2020). The second stage of labor. Best Practice & Research Clinical Obstetrics
   & Gynaecology, 67, 53-64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2020.03.012

Huang, J., Zang, Y., Ren, L. H., Li, F. J., & Lu, H. (2019). A review and comparison of common maternal positions
   during the second-stage of labor. International Journal of Nursing Sciences, 6(4), 460-467. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.ijnss.2019.06.007

Hutchison, J., Mahdy, H., & Hutchison, J. (2023). Stages of labor. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK544290/

Karimi, F. Z., Heidarian Miri, H., Salehian, M., Khadivzadeh, T., & Bakhshi, M. (2019). The effect of mother-infant skin
   to skin contact after birth on third stage of labor: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Iranian Journal of
   Public Health, 48(4), 612-620. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6500522/pdf/IJPH-48-612.pdf

Lubkowska, A., Szymaski, S., & Chudecka, M. (2019). Surface body temperature of full-term healthy newborns
   immediately after birth--Pilot study. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 16(8),
    1312. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16081312

Masuzawa, Y., Kataoka, Y., Fujii, K., & Inoue, S. (2018). Prophylactic management of postpartum haemorrhage in the
   third stage of labour: An overview of systematic reviews. Systematic Reviews, 7(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s13643-018-0817-3

Milton, S. H. (2024, February 23). Normal labor and delivery. https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/
    260036-overview

Moudi, A., Iravani, M., Najafian, M., Zareiyan, A., Forouzan, A., & Mirghafourvand, M. (2020). Exploring the concept
   and structure of obstetric triage: A qualitative content analysis. BMC Emergency Medicine, 20(1), 74.
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s12873-020-00369-0

O'Connor, A., Shand, A. W., Schneuer, F. J., Nassar, N., & Austin, M. P. (2022). Assessing the relationship between
    psychosocial risk and pregnancy outcomes using the perinatal integrated psychosocial assessment (PIPA) tool.
   Birth, 49(4), 648-660. https://doi.org/10.1111/birt.12631

Ondeck M. (2019). Healthy birth practice #2: Walk, move around, and change positions throughout labor. Journal of
   Perinatal Education, 28(2), 81-87. https://doi.org/10.1891/1058-1243.28.2.81

Perlman, N. C., & Carusi, D. A. (2019). Retained placenta after vaginal delivery: Risk factors and management.
   International Journal of Women's Health, 11, 527-534. https://doi.org/10.2147/IJWH.S218933

Rabie, N. Z., Ounpraseuth, S., Hughes, D., Lang, P., Wiegel, M., & Magann, E. F. (2018). Association of the length of
   the third stage of labor and blood loss following vaginal delivery. Southern Medical Journal, 111(3), 178-182.
    https://doi.org/10.14423/SMJ.0000000000000778

Ramar, C., & Grimes, W. R. (2023). Perineal lacerations. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK559068/

Rana, S., Lemoine, E., Granger, J. P., & Karumanchi, S. A. (2020). Correction to: Preeclampsia: Pathophysiology,
   challenges, and perspectives. Circulation Research, 126(1). https://doi.org/10.1161/res.0000000000000315

Safari, K., Saeed, A. A., Hasan, S. S., & Moghaddam-Banaem, L. (2018). The effect of mother and newborn early
    skin-to-skin contact on initiation of breastfeeding, newborn temperature and duration of third stage of labor.
   International Breastfeeding Journal, 13(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13006-018-0174-9

Salati, J. A., Leathersich, S. J., Williams, M. J., Cuthbert, A., & Tolosa, J. E. (2019). Prophylactic oxytocin for the third
   stage of labour to prevent postpartum haemorrhage. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 4(4),
    CD001808. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001808.pub3

Tukisi, K. P., Temane, A., & Nolte, A. (2022). The midwives' experiences of the use of obstetric triage and obstetric
   triage tool during labour in Bojanala district. Health SA Gesondheid (Online), 27, 1-9. https://dx.doi.org/10.4102/
    hsag.v27i0.1758
812 18 · References

Vallerand, A. H., & Sanoski, C. A. (2022). Davis's drug guide for nurses (18th ed.). F. A. Davis.
Weiseth, A., Plough, A., Aggarwal, R., Galvin, G., Rucker, A., Henrich, N., Miller, K., Subramanian, L., Hawrusik, R.,

    Berry, W., Gullo, S., Spigel, L., Dever, K., Loveless, D., Graham, K., Paek, B., & Shah, N. T. (2022). Improving
   communication and teamwork during labor: A feasibility, acceptability, and safety study. Birth, 49(4), 637-647.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/birt.12630
World Health Organization. (2022, September 29). WHO Postpartum Haemorrhage (PPH) summit.
    https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/who-postpartum-haemorrhage-(pph)-summit
World Health Organization. (2024). 10 steps to successful breastfeeding. https://www.who.int/teams/nutrition-and-
    food-safety/food-and-nutrition-actions-in-health-systems/ten-steps-to-successful-breastfeeding
Wright, A., Nassar, A. H., Visser, G., Ramasauskaite, D., Theron, G., & FIGO Safe Motherhood and Newborn Health
   Committee. (2021). FIGO good clinical practice paper: Management of the second stage of labor. International
   Journal of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, 152(2), 172-181. https://doi.org/10.1002/ijgo.13552

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 19

Complications of Labor and Birth

FIGURE 19.1 Support for High-Risk Birth. This care team is prepared for the high-risk delivery. (credit: "Surrogate parents attending
birth" by Staff Sgt. Delia Martinez/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
19.1 Labor Dystocia
19.2 Medical Interventions During Labor
19.3 Obstetrical Conditions Affecting Labor and Birth
19.4 Preexisting Conditions of the Pregnant Person Placing the Delivery at Risk
19.5 Interventions During Birth
19.6 Cesarean Section
19.7 Obstetrical Emergencies
19.8 Complications of the Second Stage of Labor
19.9 Complications in the Third Stage of Labor
19.10 Monitoring the Person in Labor for Complications Developing During the Process of Labor and Birth

INTRODUCTION The majority of labors and births are uncomplicated. However, specific complications can occur at
any stage. The pregnant person could have a preexisting condition or develop a condition during the pregnancy.
Labor could also become complicated at any point, even after an uncomplicated pregnancy. The nurse is aware of
common complications that can arise and is ready to intervene when necessary. Complications can occur that affect
the pregnant person and the fetus. Ensuring adequate oxygenation of the fetus and the well-being of the pregnant
person is of highest priority. The safety of both laboring person and fetus is the responsibility of the health-care
team.
814  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     19.1 Labor Dystocia

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the uterine causes of dystocia during labor and birth
         · Explain the pelvic causes of dystocia during labor and birth
         · Explain the fetal causes of dystocia during labor and birth

     Lack of progress during labor, which could make it prolonged or difficult is called dystocia is defined as difficult
     labor. The types of dystocia are uterine, pelvic, and fetal. Table 19.1 lists the most common risk factors for labor
     dystocia. Uterine dystocia is caused by lack of power, meaning that uterine contractions or the maternal pushing
     effort is inadequate to progress to birth. Pelvic dystocia is a problem of the passage, meaning that the pelvic outlet
     does not allow the passage of the fetus for birth. Fetal dystocia is a problem of the passenger, meaning that the
     fetus is unable to maneuver through the pelvis to descend and birth. These three types of dystocia create long,
     difficult labors. The common factors associated with labor dystocia are the following:

         · power: uterine contractions and laboring person's pushing effort
         · passenger: fetal malposition or malpresentation
         · passage: inadequate pelvis inlet, midpelvis, or outlet
         · psyche: laboring person's preparedness and anxiety regarding the labor and birth process
         · position of the laboring person

     Cause                                  Risk Factor

     Power                                  · induction of labor
                                            · prelabor rupture of membranes
                                            · preterm labor
                                            · prolonged latent phase
                                            · protracted active phase
                                            · prolonged second stage
                                            · epidural anesthesia
                                            · chorioamnionitis
                                            · postterm pregnancy
                                            · polyhydramnios
                                            · maternal fatigue
                                            · multiple gestation
                                            · uterine anomalies
                                            · grand multiparity

     Passenger                              · estimated fetal weight large for gestational age
                                            · mispositioning or malpresentation of the fetus

     Passage                                · age of laboring person (< 16 and > 40)
                                            · obesity
                                            · short stature
                                            · shape and size of pelvis
                                            · nulliparity

     TABLE 19.1 The Most Common Risk Factors Associated with Labor Dystocia
     (Mohammed & El-Chaar, 2022)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        19.1 · Labor Dystocia                             815

Cause     Risk Factor
Psyche
              · anxiety
              · knowledge deficit
              · lack of support

Position  · head of bed elevated < 30 degrees
          · laboring person lying on back

TABLE 19.1 The Most Common Risk Factors Associated with Labor Dystocia
(Mohammed & El-Chaar, 2022)

        LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

Labor Dystocia Increases with Age

Advanced maternal age (AMA) is a risk factor for uterine dystocia. The finding that uterine dystocia occurs more
often in AMA persons is true; however, studies have shown that the risk of labor dystocia increases with maternal
age (Waldenstrom & Ekeus, 2017). After age 25, the risk of labor dystocia increases continuously regardless of
parity. Therefore, labor dystocia risk can occur prior to age 35. Labor dystocia increasing with age is related to a
continuous decline in uterine performance after age 25.

Uterine Dystocia

The labor complication in which lack of cervical dilation occurs due to insufficient contraction strength, frequency, or
duration is uterine dystocia (Wu et al., 2017).

Figure 19.2 shows monitor tracings associated with uterine dystocia. In a normal contraction pattern, the upper
uterine muscles shorten during the contraction to elongate the lower uterine segment, which causes dilation,
effacement, and descent of the fetal head. (Figure 19.3) shows how the muscle fibers of the uterus work together.
816  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     FIGURE 19.2 Fetal Monitor Tracings of Uterine Contraction Patterns These monitor tracings represent the common uterine contraction
     patterns seen in labor over 15 minutes. Tracing 1 represents an inadequate pattern, with too few contractions. Tracing 2 represents a
     tachysystole pattern, with too many contractions that lack strength and duration. Tracing 3 represents a normal contraction pattern, with
     five contractions. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.1 · Labor Dystocia                                                                                                                         817

FIGURE 19.3 Uterine Muscle Structure The muscle structure of the uterus enables contractions to shorten the upper uterine segment and
stretch the cervix open. This is demonstrated by the white lines in the picture. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY 4.0 license)

Multiple factors cause inadequate uterine contraction activity. Causes related to the pregnant person are
chorioamnionitis, dehydration and malnutrition, exhaustion, and emotional stress. Chorioamnionitis can cause the
uterine muscle to inadequately contract due to the inflammatory process of infection. Pregnant persons with long
labors who are allowed little to eat or drink can become exhausted, hypoglycemic, and dehydrated, preventing the
uterine muscles from contracting properly. Emotional stress occurs when fear, pain, or inability to relax releases
stress hormones, such as cortisol, that inhibit proper oxytocin production (Aristizabal, 2019). A fetal cause of
inadequate contraction patterns can be malposition. The fetus presenting in the occiput-posterior or occiput
transverse position creates a larger diameter to pass through the pelvic inlet, making labor progression difficult. The
role of the nurse is to encourage hydration, assist with frequent movement and position changes, and provide
emotional support to alleviate fear and stress in the laboring person.

Multiple gestation, large for gestational age, and polyhydramnios (an excessive amount of amniotic fluid) distend the
uterus and decrease the strength of the contractions, causing uterine dystocia. Grand multiparity and prolonged
labor are associated with a uterus too tired or overstretched to contract efficiently. Uterine anomalies, such as
bicornuate and unicornuate uteri, are associated with uterine muscle dysfunction. Epidural anesthesia may
decrease uterine contraction strength and frequency and has been linked to a nonengaged fetal head (Penuela et
al., 2019).

Uterine dystocia can also occur in second stage labor. When the cervix is fully dilated and the fetal head has
descended, most laboring persons feel an overwhelming urge to push. The fetus is born by the expulsive strength of
the uterine contractions and the maternal pushing effort. Dystocia may occur because epidural anesthesia reduces
the urge to push. Second stage dystocia can also result from the same risk factors that cause first stage uterine
dystocia. New guidelines for second stage labor recommend that a nulliparous person push at least 3 hours and a
multiparous person push at least 2 hours prior to diagnosing dystocia (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists [ACOG], 2024). The guidelines do not specify any difference in length with or without an epidural. The
role of the nurse during the second stage, especially during dystocia, is to provide support and assist in the pushing
process.

Pelvic Dystocia

A labor complication that occurs when the size of the fetal head is larger than the size of the maternal pelvis due to a
small capacity of the pelvic inlet, midpelvis, or pelvic outlet is called pelvic dystocia. In a normal labor, the fetal
head descends and engages in the pelvic inlet. As the fetus passes through the pelvis, the head flexes and rotates to
the occiput-anterior (OA) position in the midpelvis. The fetal head enters the pelvic outlet in a flexed OA position and
is born by the extension of the fetal head. If any part of the pelvis is too small for the fetal head, these cardinal
movements cannot occur. At times, the power of the contractions can be adequate, but because of the inability of
the fetal head to descend, cervical dilation and effacement stall (Cohen & Friedman, 2023).
818  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

             LIFE-STAGE CONTEXT

     Pelvic Dystocia in Teens

     Prior to the current study, adolescents were thought to have increased risk of pelvic dystocia because of the
     immaturity of their pelvis and thus were at higher risk for cesarean birth. Recent studies, however, have not
     confirmed this assumption.

     A study was conducted of 43,537 nulliparous persons less than 25 years of age. The study examining adverse
     maternal and neonatal outcomes included 1,189 adolescents less than 16 years of age; 14,703 older adolescents
     ages 16 to 19; and 27,645 young adults ages 20 to 24. Study results found that younger adolescents had increased
     anemia, preterm delivery, postpartum hemorrhage, and preeclampsia. Older adolescents had increased anemia,
     preterm delivery, and blood transfusions.

     Study results found that younger and older adolescents had decreased risk of cesarean birth. Older adolescents
     were less likely to have a cesarean birth due to failure to progress or cephalopelvic disproportion. For adolescents
     who spontaneously went into labor, the study showed their second stage of labor was shorter.

     This study challenged the assumption of increased incidence of pelvic dystocia in younger adolescents. However,
     research on this population is limited, and the topic requires further study.

     (Kawakita et al., 2016)

     The normal pelvic inlet should allow the passage of a fetal head diameter of approximately 9.5 centimeters (cm)
     (Figure 19.4). Therefore, if the pelvic inlet is less than 10 cm, it could cause inability of the fetal head to engage and
     pass through the inlet.

     FIGURE 19.4 Pelvic Inlet The pelvic inlet must be adequate for the fetal head to enter and pass through to avoid pelvic dystocia.
     (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Midpelvis dystocia is more common than pelvic inlet dystocia. The midpelvis is measured by the distance between
     the ischial spines and should average more than 9 cm (Figure 19.5). When the nurse is performing a cervical exam
     during labor, the ischial spines are the landmark for determining station. If the ischial spines are encroaching and
     prominent, the nurse is aware that a midpelvis dystocia could occur. With a smaller midpelvis, the fetal head
     engages but is unable to flex or rotate anteriorly. Molding and caput succedaneum are seen with this dystocia.

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.1 · Labor Dystocia                                                                                                                    819

FIGURE 19.5 Midpelvis A midpelvis dystocia occurs when the ischial spines are prominent and encroaching. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Pelvic outlet dystocia is seen when the ischial tuberosity distance is less than 8 cm (Figure 19.6). When the pelvic
outlet is contracted or too small, the fetal head can become malpositioned as the fetus attempts to turn the head to
find the path of least resistance to progress through the pelvis. Extreme caput succedaneum can occur. Pelvic outlet
dystocia can lead to prolonged pushing, forceps birth, or cesarean birth.

FIGURE 19.6 Pelvic Outlet A pelvic-outlet dystocia occurs when the ischial tuberosities are encroaching and not allowing descent of the
fetal head. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Fetal Dystocia

The labor complication in which the fetal head is unable to navigate through the pelvis is fetal dystocia. Reasons for
fetal dystocia can be a persistent occiput posterior or transverse, face, or brow presentation. Occiput posterior or
transverse positions can stall cervical dilation due to lack of even pressure exerted on the cervix. These positions
can also lead to failure of the presenting part to descend. A face presentation occurs when the neck is
hyperextended and the chin, also called the mentum, is presenting. This presentation, occurring in only 0.1 percent
of births, is caused by prematurity, pendulous maternal abdomen, fetal malformations (anencephaly), and
polyhydramnios (Mohammed & El-Chaar, 2022). Some face and brow presentations are seen with large fetuses and
contracted pelvis inlets. A vaginal delivery is possible if the chin is directed at the maternal symphysis pubis
(mentum anterior) (see Figure 15.8). It is impossible for a fetus to navigate the pelvis if the chin remains posterior
and pointing toward the maternal back (mentum posterior); a cesarean birth is necessary (Mohammed & El-Chaar,
2022). The role of the nurse is to support and educate the laboring person and family regarding the possible
changes in birth plan to a forceps or cesarean birth.
820  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     19.2 Medical Interventions During Labor

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Understand the role of oxytocin in uterine contractions
         · Explain the reasons for and nursing actions for augmentation of labor
         · Explain the reasons for and nursing actions for induction of labor
         · Explain the reasons for and nursing actions for amnioinfusion

     When labor dystocia has been diagnosed and uterine dystocia is the cause, the nurse understands that interventions
     must be done to increase the strength, frequency, and duration of uterine contractions. At other times, fetal or
     maternal complications require the nurse to induce contractions for labor induction when the pregnant person has a
     medical reason that necessitates delivery of the fetus. Oxytocin (Pitocin) is the medication primarily used to
     augment and induce labor. The nurse administers the oxytocin and monitors the uterine contractions, fetal heart
     rate, and labor progress.

     Factors that improve success of labor induction and augmentation include younger age, body mass index < 30,
     favorable cervix, and estimated fetal weight less than 3,500 grams. Failure of induction is higher in cases of an
     unfavorable cervix. In some cases, preinduction cervical ripening can be initiated.

     Role of Oxytocin in Uterine Contractions

     The physiologic influences on uterine contractions are multifactorial. Research has yet to determine the exact
     biochemical substances that initiate labor; however, once labor is initiated, maternal oxytocin is released in pulses,
     causing the involuntary activation of uterine smooth muscle fibers. While most patients have adequate contractions
     that allow for the progression of labor, some may have contractions that are inadequate. In these cases, labor
     augmentation with intravenous oxytocin is used. The nurse titrates the oxytocin to induce adequate contractions for
     progression of labor while allowing for uterine relaxation between contractions and fetal oxygenation.

     Oxytocin binds to receptors in the uterine muscle to stimulate contractions. The response to oxytocin depends on
     many factors (Uvnäs-Moberg, 2023). If a pregnancy is not yet considered term, the uterus has fewer oxytocin
     receptors and does not respond to intravenous oxytocin in the same way as a term uterus. Other factors affecting
     oxytocin response are individual biological differences, length of labor, cervical status, and preexisting uterine
     activity.

     Insufficient Contraction Frequency and Strength
     Adequate contraction patterns are defined as uterine contractions with enough duration, strength, and frequency to
     cause progressive cervical dilation and fetal descent (Rosen & Yogev, 2023). Insufficient contraction patterns lead
     to insufficient cervical dilation, fetal descent, and labor dystocia. The frequency of uterine contractions is
     determined by measuring the minutes from the beginning of one contraction to the beginning of the next
     contraction. Coupling or tripling of contractions can occur and is most often associated with dysfunctional labor,
     cephalopelvic disproportion, or the occiput posterior position. Figure 19.7 shows a monitor tracing that indicates
     uterine contraction coupling. The nurse can estimate uterine contraction strength using palpation or can calculate
     exact uterine contraction strength in Montevideo units using an intrauterine pressure catheter. The nurse uses these
     techniques to help determine adequacy of the contractions. For a full discussion of Montevideo units, see Chapter
     16 Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring.

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.2 · Medical Interventions During Labor                                                                                                    821

FIGURE 19.7 Coupling of Uterine Contractions Uterine contraction coupling is seen with an occiput posterior presentation, labor
dystocia, or cephalopelvic disproportion. This type of contraction pattern can be inadequate for labor progression. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Uterine Tachysystole
More than five contractions occurring in 10 minutes averaged over 30 minutes is called uterine tachysystole.
Uterine tachysystole does not allow enough time between contractions for placental perfusion and fetal
reoxygenation. If allowed to continue, this can lead to fetal hypoxia or uterine rupture. Figure 19.8 illustrates uterine
tachysystole on a fetal monitor tracing. The typical uterine contraction pattern is three to five contractions in 10
minutes. Common causes of tachysystole are administration of cervical ripening and inductive medications. Other
causes can be maternal dehydration, preeclampsia, placental abruption, and chorioamnionitis (Leathersich et al.,
2018). Additionally, partial placental abruption allows blood to seep into the uterine muscle, causing uterine
irritability and eventual tachysystole (Sukumaran et al., 2021). Uterine tachysystole can lead to fetal hypoxia
because of the diminished blood flow while the uterus is contracting.

FIGURE 19.8 Uterine Tachysystole The monitor tracing shows contractions with little rest between them and rising uterine baseline.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)
Management of Uterine Tachysystole

Uterine tachysystole is defined as more than five contractions in 10 minutes averaged over 30 minutes. When
administering oxytocin for induction or augmentation of labor, uterine tachysystole is a risk factor. The following
interventions should be used when uterine tachysystole is diagnosed.
For uterine tachysystole with nonreassuring fetal heart rate pattern:

  1. Discontinue oxytocin.
  2. Turn laboring patient to lateral position.
822  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

       3. Administer 500 mL intravenous (IV) bolus (unless contraindicated).
       4. Administer 0.25 mg terbutaline subcutaneously (SQ) (when ordered).

     For uterine tachysystole with reassuring fetal heart rate pattern:

       1. Reposition laboring patient (left or right lateral position).
       2. Administer 500 mL IV bolus (unless fluid restricted).
       3. If uterine activity does not return to the expected normal pattern within 10 minutes, follow institution protocol

             for decreasing or discontinuing intravenous oxytocin.
       4. Have terbutaline 0.25 mg SQ readily available.

     (Lyndon & Wisner, 2022)

     Augmentation of Labor

     The enhancement of uterine contractions that have failed to cause cervical dilation, effacement, or fetal descent is
     called labor augmentation. Amniotomy is often used to augment labor. The fetal head must be engaged in the
     pelvis prior to an amniotomy to reduce the risk of a prolapsed cord. ACOG (2019c) found that amniotomy alone
     during normal, spontaneous labor did not decrease the time to delivery or affect the incidence of cesarean birth.
     When amniotomy was performed for labor augmentation in combination with oxytocin administration, labor was
     shown to be expedited by 1 to 1.5 hours. Oxytocin alone is another method of labor augmentation. The nurse starts
     oxytocin and increases or decreases the rate according to the uterine contraction pattern, fetal tolerability to the
     contractions, and health-care provider orders. Table 19.2 lists the indications and contraindications for
     augmentation of labor.

     Augmentation of Labor Reason

     Indications                            · dysfunctional labor
                                            · insufficient uterine contraction pattern

     Contraindications                      · placenta or vasa previa
                                            · fetal malposition
                                            · umbilical cord presentation
                                            · prior classical uterine incision
                                            · active genital herpes infection
                                            · pelvic structure deformities
                                            · invasive cervical cancer

                                     TABLE 19.2 Indications and Contraindications for Augmentation of Labor

     The goal of augmentation with intravenous oxytocin is to produce uterine contractions that are strong and frequent
     enough to cause cervical change while also allowing for sufficient fetal oxygenation. Oxytocin is administered using
     an infusion pump and infused in milliunits per minute. Typically, oxytocin infusion begins at 1 to 2 milliunits per
     minute and increases 1 to 2 milliunits per minute every 15 to 30 minutes until an adequate contraction pattern is
     obtained. The typical time for the uterus to respond to the initiation of the infusion is 3 to 5 minutes. When an
     oxytocin infusion is stopped, the amount of oxytocin in the plasma rapidly declines due to the drug's 3- to 5-minute
     half-life (U.S. Food and Drug Administration (USFDA), n.d.). The maximum dose of oxytocin is usually determined by
     hospital protocols or individual health-care providers. The nurse discontinues the oxytocin infusion in the presence
     of tachysystole, nonreassuring fetal heart rate pattern, and suspected uterine abruption or rupture, and notifies the
     health-care provider immediately.

     Adverse effects of oxytocin use include fetal distress, water intoxication, and, in rare situations, uterine rupture and
     urinary retention. Fetal distress occurs when contraction frequency does not allow for adequate fetal recovery and
     oxygenation. Water intoxication can occur because oxytocin has an antidiuretic action. Uterine rupture is rare in an
     unscarred uterus. The uterus that has been scarred from a cesarean birth or myomectomy is at higher risk of rupture
     with oxytocin use.

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.2 · Medical Interventions During Labor                                                                                 823

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Oxytocin (Pitocin)

The labor and delivery nurse administers oxytocin for induction or augmentation of labor, as well as during the third
stage of labor to control postpartum bleeding. Oxytocin can also be used as one of several medications for the
treatment of postpartum hemorrhage.

    · Generic Name: oxytocin
    · Trade Name: Pitocin
    · Class: uterotonic
    · Mechanism of Action: binds to oxytocin receptors in the myometrium, increasing intracellular calcium and

        stimulating uterine contractions
    · Indications: labor induction or augmentation, postpartum hemorrhage, abortion adjunct
    · Contraindications: fetal distress, uterine hyperactivity/hypertonicity, cord prolapse, placenta previa,

        unfavorable fetal position
    · Route: intravenous, intramuscular
    · Dose: 0.5 to 2 milliunits/minute, increasing 1 to 2 milliunits/minute for induction or augmentation of labor; 10

        to 20 units intramuscularly (IM) after delivery of the anterior fetal shoulder or after delivery of the placenta
        until the uterus is firmly contracted
    · Black Box Warning: Pitocin is listed as a high-risk medication by the FDA.

(Davis's Drug Guide for Nurses, 2021)

Induction of Labor

The stimulation of uterine contractions prior to the spontaneous onset of labor is induction of labor. When
determining the appropriateness of labor induction, the benefits to the pregnant person or fetus must outweigh the
risk of continuing the pregnancy. Table 19.3 reviews the criteria, indications, and contraindications of labor
induction.
824  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

        Induction of Labor Factors

        Criteria                            · accurate or confirmed dating
                                            · evidence of fetal maturity
                                            · absence of cephalopelvic disproportion
                                            · engaged fetal head in longitudinal lie
                                            · high Bishop score (>6)
                                            · risks and benefits discussed

        Indications                         · oligohydramnios
                                            · postterm (>41 weeks)
                                            · preeclampsia/hypertension (HTN)
                                            · diabetes mellitus
                                            · prelabor rupture of membranes
                                            · intrauterine growth restriction
                                            · nonreassuring fetal testing
                                            · fetal anomaly
                                            · fetal demise

        Contraindications                   · placenta previa
                                            · vasa previa
                                            · fetal malpresentation
                                            · umbilical cord prolapse
                                            · previous classical cesarean birth
                                            · active herpes infection
                                            · pelvic structure abnormality
                                            · invasive cervical cancer
                                            · gestation < 39 weeks

                                         TABLE 19.3 Criteria, Indications, and Contraindications for Induction of Labor
                                         (ACOG, 2009b)

     Prior to labor induction, the cervix is evaluated to determine if it is ready for labor. This is called a "ripe" or
     "favorable" cervix. The Bishop score is a tool used to determine if the cervix is favorable. Table 19.4 presents the
     components of the Bishop score. The higher the Bishop score, the more favorable the cervix. A labor induction is
     more successful with a higher Bishop score. If the score is low, the nurse anticipates using a cervical ripening agent
     to prepare the cervix for labor (Kuba et al., 2023).

     Score Dilation Position of Cervix Effacement Station Cervical Consistency

     0  Closed Posterior                    0-30%   -3     Firm

     1  1-2 cm Mid position                 40-50%  -2     Medium

     2  3-4 cm Anterior                     60-70%  -1, 0  Soft

     3  5-6 cm --                           80%     +1, +2 --

     TABLE 19.4 Bishop Score (ACOG, 2009b)

     Cervical ripening agents can be prostaglandins inserted near the cervix, oral prostaglandins, or mechanical devices
     such as a Foley or double balloon catheter that manually softens and dilates the cervix. These ripening agents are
     used prior to induction medications. Misoprostol (Cytotec) and dinoprostone (Cervidil) absorb systemically. If

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.2 · Medical Interventions During Labor                                                                                       825

tachysystole occurs, dinoprostone can be removed from the vagina. Misoprostol cannot be removed from the
patient's system; therefore, a tocolytic can be administered if tachysystole occurs.

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Cervical Ripening Medications: Misoprostol and Dinoprostone

Cervical ripening medications come in tablets, gel, suppositories, and tampon-like inserts. Misoprostol and
dinoprostone are both prostaglandins used for cervical ripening. They are very similar in their mechanisms of action
but differ in administration routes.

Misoprostol (Cytotec)

    · Class/Action: prostaglandin
    · Route/Dosage: oral: 50 mcg every 4 to 6 hours; vaginal: 25 to 50 mcg every 4 to 6 hours
    · High Alert/Black Box Warning: Use in pregnant women can cause birth defects, abortion, premature birth, or

        uterine rupture.
    · Indications: cervical ripening, labor induction/augmentation
    · Mechanism of Action: prostaglandin E1; relaxes cervical smooth muscle; stimulates uterine contractions
    · Contraindications: history of uterine surgery, cephalopelvic disproportion suspected, fetal distress,

        unexplained vaginal bleeding, fetal malpresentation
    · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: uterine tachysystole, abdominal or stomach cramps, fever, chills, vomiting,

        diarrhea
    · Storage: stable at room temperature
    · Cost: inexpensive
    · Nursing Implications: The nurse will ensure fetal well-being prior to administration of medication.
    · Parent/Family Education: The nurse will educate the person on the administration of the medication and

        expected results of cervical ripening or active contractions.

Dinoprostone (Cervidil, Prepidil)

    · Class/Action: prostaglandin
    · Route/Dosage: vaginal: suppository/tampon-like insert: 10 mg for up to 12 hours; gel: 0.5 mg per applicator

        every 6 hours for 2 doses
    · High Alert/Black Box Warning: none
    · Indications: cervical ripening
    · Mechanism of Action: prostaglandin E2; relaxes cervical smooth muscle; stimulates uterine contractions
    · Contraindications: history of uterine surgery, cephalopelvic disproportion suspected, fetal distress,

        unexplained vaginal bleeding, fetal malpresentation
    · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: Uterine tachysystole, abdominal or stomach cramps, fever, chills, vomiting,

        diarrhea
    · Storage: must be refrigerated
    · Cost: expensive
    · Nursing Implications: The nurse will ensure fetal well-being prior to administration of medication.
    · Parent/Family Education: The nurse will educate the person on the administration of the medication and

        expected results of cervical ripening or active contractions.

(Nadar & Sirisha, 2018)

When the health-care provider inserts a Foley catheter for mechanical cervical ripening, a catheter with a 25- to
50-milliliter balloon is inserted through the cervical canal. The balloon is inflated with sterile saline or water. The
balloon puts pressure on the internal cervical os. The balloon is usually in place for 8 to 12 hours. When using a
double balloon catheter with two balloons, the catheter is inserted through the cervical canal. The balloon at the
internal cervical os is inflated with 30 to 60 milliliters of sterile saline or water. The balloon at the outer cervical os is
then inflated. The catheter remains in place between 12 and 24 hours. The role of the nurse is to educate the
laboring person and assist the health-care provider during insertion. Figure 19.9 shows these two mechanical
826  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     cervical ripening agents.

     FIGURE 19.9 Foley Catheter and Double Balloon Catheter for Mechanical Cervical Ripening (a) The Foley catheter is inserted into the
     cervical canal, and the bulb is inflated with normal saline or sterile water. (b) The double balloon catheter is inserted into the cervical canal
     with one bulb inflated on the internal cervical os and the other inflated on the external cervical os. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
     OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Oxytocin is the most commonly used medication for labor induction. When oxytocin is administered for the
     induction of labor, the nurse prepares the pregnant person by explaining the purpose of oxytocin use.

         · Oxytocin is mixed in different combinations. The nurse must be aware of the amount of oxytocin per milliliter
             of fluid.

         · Oxytocin is infused via a pump.
         · Starting dose is usually 0.5 to 2 milliunits/minute.
         · The dose is increased according to institution protocol, most frequently by 1 to 2 milliunits/minute every 30

             minutes until an adequate contraction pattern is obtained.
         · The maximum oxytocin dose is usually determined by the health-care provider or hospital protocol.

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     Terbutaline

     The nurse caring for laboring persons will at times administer terbutaline to relax the uterus, as in cases of fetal
     bradycardia, tachysystole, Category III tracings, and preterm labor. Terbutaline can be used in antepartum and
     intrapartum situations.

         · Generic Name: terbutaline
         · Trade Name: none
         · Class: tocolytic
         · Mechanism of Action: selectively stimulates beta-2 adrenergic receptors, relaxing smooth muscle
         · Indications: bronchospasm, tocolysis (preterm labor, tachysystole, prolonged deceleration)
         · Contraindications: hypersensitivity to drug, ischemic heart disease, hypertension, arrhythmia, diabetes

             mellitus, seizure disorder, hyperthyroidism, tachycardia (>120)
         · Route: subcutaneous injection
         · Dose: 0.25 mg every 20 to 30 minutes, maximum of 1 mg per 4 hours
         · Black Box Warning: Injectable terbutaline not approved for prolonged tocolysis greater than 48 to 72 hours.

             Serious adverse effects include increased heart rate, transient hyperglycemia, hypokalemia, cardiac
             arrhythmias, pulmonary edema, myocardial infarction, and death reported after use in pregnant persons;
             increased fetal heart rate and neonatal hypoglycemia may also occur.

     (Davis's Drug Guide for Nurses, 2021)

     Amnioinfusion

     The process of replacing amniotic fluid by adding fluid back to the uterus is amnioinfusion. The technique is done

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.3 · Obstetrical Conditions Affecting Labor and Birth                                                                   827

through the port on the intrauterine pressure catheter. A bag of normal saline or lactated Ringer solution is
connected to the catheter port and infused as a bolus or at a continuous rate. Indications for amnioinfusion are
umbilical cord compression. The extra fluid allows more space for the umbilical cord and can relieve cord
compression. Prelabor rupture of membranes can cause umbilical cord compression or malposition of the fetal
head.

Amnioinfusion can help lower the risk for cesarean birth or vacuum or forceps use; can dilute meconium; and can
improve Apgar scores (Narbhavi et al., 2020). Amnioinfusion is contraindicated during fetal distress, active genital
herpes infection, placenta previa, placental abruption, or fetal malpresentation. Complications can occur during
amnioinfusion. The most common complications are chorioamnionitis, umbilical cord prolapse, prolonged labor, and
perforated uterus. The nurse will monitor the pressure of the uterus during the amnioinfusion to avoid
overdistention.

19.3 Obstetrical Conditions Affecting Labor and Birth

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Explain the amniotic membranes and fluid conditions placing the fetus and person at risk during labor
        and birth

    · Explain the fetal conditions placing the fetus and person at risk during labor and birth
    · Explain specific conditions associated with the person in labor placing the fetus and person at risk during

        labor and birth

During labor, complications can occur that involve the amniotic fluid, such as oligohydramnios or polyhydramnios,
meconium passage, precipitous labor, and infection. Complications can occur because of fetal issues such as
multiple gestation, intrauterine fetal demise, malpresentation, and fetal anomalies. The pregnant person can also
develop complications during pregnancy that affect labor, such as preterm or postterm pregnancy, preeclampsia,
and gestational diabetes. The nurse caring for such persons must understand the nursing interventions associated
with these complications.

Conditions Associated with the Amniotic Membranes and Fluid

The amniotic sac, also called the bag of waters, consists of the amnion and chorion. The amnion is the inner layer
and the chorion the outer layer. They lie so closely together that sometimes they cannot be separated. The bag is
filled with amniotic fluid. The purpose of the amniotic fluid is to provide cushioning to protect the fetus, to maintain
an appropriate temperature, and to allow the fetus to move and grow unrestricted.

Complications surrounding the amniotic fluid consist of meconium-stained fluid, oligohydramnios, polyhydramnios,
and chorioamnionitis. These complications can affect the quality of labor and pose risks to the fetus and laboring
person. Oligohydramnios and polyhydramnios are more likely to be diagnosed prior to labor, while meconium-
stained fluid and chorioamnionitis will likely be diagnosed during labor.

Meconium-Stained Amniotic Fluid
The brown or green staining of amniotic fluid due to the fetal passage of meconium is called meconium-stained
amniotic fluid (MSF). Meconium passage can be attributed to normal gastrointestinal function, fetal response to
hypoxia, and vagal response to umbilical cord compression. Two risk factors for MSF are postterm pregnancy and
fetal distress (Mitchell & Chandraharan, 2018). Meconium aspiration is the most common complication related to
MSF and can lead to neonatal pneumonia. The diagnosis of meconium aspiration is by observation of symptoms and
chest x-ray.

Treatment of MSF in labor consists of amnioinfusion and preparation for resuscitation. The nurse calls the neonatal
intensive care unit (NICU) team to be present at the birth. The neonatal team is prepared for resuscitation if needed.
If the newborn is vigorous at delivery, no suctioning is necessary. If the newborn is not vigorous, the neonatal team
will initiate the steps of neonatal resuscitation. The newborn would most likely go to the NICU for continued
observation.

Oligohydramnios
Oligohydramnios is the lack of sufficient amniotic fluid. This amount is usually measured during ultrasound
828  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     examination. Causes of oligohydramnios can be fetal or maternal. Identifying the causative agent is important to
     determine treatment. Indomethacin (Indocin), a medication used to treat preterm labor, has been associated with
     oligohydramnios. Fetal kidney and bladder disturbances and anomalies also lead to oligohydramnios. Table 19.5
     reviews the diagnosis, causes, and symptoms of oligohydramnios.

     Characteristic                         Examples

     Diagnosis (via ultrasound)             · amniotic fluid index (AFI) < 5 cm
                                            · amniotic fluid volume < 500 mL
                                            · maximum fluid pocket < 2 cm

     Causes                                 · ruptured membranes
                                            · placental insufficiency
                                            · fetal anomalies
                                            · maternal medication use
                                            · abnormalities associated with multiple gestation
                                            · chromosomal abnormalities
                                            · idiopathic

     Symptoms                               · fluid leaking from the vagina
                                            · poor or lack of uterine growth
                                            · decreased fetal movements

                            TABLE 19.5 Characteristics of Oligohydramnios (Bianchi et al., 2010)

     Complications of oligohydramnios during pregnancy can be fetal growth restriction and fetal malformations. In
     cases of severe oligohydramnios, induction of labor is warranted. Complications during labor consist of
     nonreassuring FHR tracings, such as variable and prolonged decelerations due to cord compression during uterine
     activity. Amnioinfusion can replace fluid in the uterus to relieve umbilical cord compression during labor (Narbhavi
     et al., 2020).

     Polyhydramnios
     An increase in amniotic fluid amount, or polyhydramnios, may be caused by fetal abnormalities or genetic
     syndromes and conditions of the pregnant person. Two common reasons for polyhydramnios are fetal anomalies
     and diabetes in the pregnant person. See Chapter 12 Pregnancy at Risk for a complete discussion of
     polyhydramnios. Table 19.6 reviews the diagnosis, causes, complications, and associated discomfort of
     polyhydramnios.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                      19.3 · Obstetrical Conditions Affecting Labor and Birth                            829

Characteristic              Examples

Diagnosis (via ultrasound)  · mild: AFI 25-29 cm
                            · moderate: AFI 30-34 cm
                            · severe: AFI 35 cm

Causes                      · anencephaly
                            · cleft lip/palate
                            · diaphragmatic hernia
                            · esophageal atresia
                            · heart arrhythmias
                            · fetal urinary obstruction
                            · fetal anemia
                            · diabetes mellitus

Complications               · preterm labor
                            · prelabor rupture of membranes
                            · placental abruption
                            · fetal malpresentation
                            · umbilical cord prolapse
                            · uterine atony
                            · postpartum hemorrhage

Associated discomfort       · shortness of breath
                            · edema in lower extremities and abdomen
                            · uterine discomfort or contractions

                             TABLE 19.6 Characteristics of Polyhydramnios (Dashe et al., 2018)

Complications include premature labor, prelabor rupture of membranes, and postpartum hemorrhage because the
uterine muscle is stretched more than with normal amniotic fluid levels; umbilical cord prolapse because the fetus
does not descend into the maternal pelvis, allowing the umbilical cord to lie below the fetal presenting part; and
stillbirth due to the increased risk of congenital anomalies and antepartum placental abruption. Placental abruption
can occur after rupture of membranes due to the decompression of the uterus. Treatment depends on the etiology
and gestational age. Labor induction can be initiated because of polyhydramnios. The nurse is aware of the
increased risks of prolapsed cord and postpartum hemorrhage and is prepared for these complications.
Polyhydramnios has been associated with fetal anomalies. Amniocentesis is sometimes used to remove excess
amniotic fluid to relieve discomfort and prevent preterm birth; additionally, this fluid can also be used to test fetal
chromosomes for abnormalities (Content Engine, 2023).

Chorioamnionitis
Chorioamnionitis, also known as intraamniotic infection and inflammation, is the infection and inflammation of the
amniotic fluid, placenta, fetus, fetal membranes, or decidua (ACOG, 2017b). Chorioamnionitis is caused by different
types of bacteria present in the vagina that ascend into the amniotic area. Risk factors during labor include
prolonged labor, multiple vaginal exams, use of internal fetal monitors, meconium-stained fluid, and genital tract
bacteria (ACOG, 2017b). Complications associated with chorioamnionitis are neonatal morbidity from pneumonia,
meningitis, sepsis, and death. Complications in the laboring person consist of dysfunctional labor, postpartum atony,
postpartum hemorrhage, endometritis, sepsis, and, rarely, death (ACOG, 2017b). Table 19.7 lists other
characteristics of chorioamnionitis.
830  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     Characteristic Examples

     Risk factors                           · prolonged labor
                                            · prolonged rupture of membranes
                                            · bacterial vaginosis
                                            · group B streptococcal colonization
                                            · meconium-stained fluid
                                            · internal fetal monitors
                                            · epidural anesthesia

     Complications                          · prelabor rupture of membranes
                                            · preterm labor
                                            · fever
                                            · tender uterus
                                            · foul-smelling discharge
                                            · fetal tachycardia
                                            · nonreassuring FHR

     Treatment                              IV antibiotics:
                                                · ampicillin 2 g IV every 6 hours
                                                · gentamicin (Garamycin) 1.5 mg/kg every 8 hours

                                            If birth by cesarean, add:
                                                · clindamycin (Cleocin) 900 mg every 8 hours or
                                                · metronidazole (Flagyl) 500 mg every 8 hours

                                     TABLE 19.7 Characteristics of Chorioamnionitis (ACOG, 2017b)

     Symptoms of chorioamnionitis are tachycardia in the laboring person and/or fetus, uterine tenderness, foul-smelling
     amniotic fluid, and purulent cervical discharge. Culture of the fluid would be the best diagnostic tool; however, the
     laboring person does not have the time to wait on culture results. Therefore, diagnosis is determined by clinical
     presentation. The person is treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics (Conde-Agudelo et al., 2020). The antibiotic
     regimen is usually continued until after the birth. The role of the nurse is to treat the symptoms according to the
     health-care provider's orders, monitor for distress in the laboring person and fetus, and explain the purpose of the
     medications being administered.

     CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

     Recognize Cues of Chorioamnionitis

     The nurse must be aware that chorioamnionitis can lead to sepsis (Zhao et al., 2020). Therefore, recognizing the
     early signs of infection will allow the laboring person to be treated prior to sepsis developing. The nurse will
     observe for these signs of infection:

         · tender uterus,
         · foul-smelling discharge,
         · fetal tachycardia, and
         · nonreassuring FHR.

     If the chorioamnionitis has progressed, the nurse will recognize these cues of sepsis:

         · hypotension,
         · confusion,
         · diarrhea,

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                19.3 · Obstetrical Conditions Affecting Labor and Birth                   831

· vomiting, and
· diaphoresis.

Conditions Associated with the Fetus

The fetuses of a multiple gestation are at higher risk for complications during labor and birth. The complications
include cord entrapment and disproportionate distribution of oxygen and nutrients to one fetus. Malpresentation
can cause complications such as descent of the fetal head in labor or prolapsed cord. A postterm pregnancy poses a
threat for fetal growth restriction due to lack of perfusion of oxygen and nutrients associated with an aging placenta.
Because of this lack of oxygenation and nutrition, the fetus moves less to conserve energy, slows or stops growth,
and uses fat as energy. Conditions such as fetal anomalies are known prior to labor in the majority of cases.
However, some conditions are missed or not evaluated for, and the fetus can be at risk due to lack of preparation for
the anomaly. Finally, when the fetus has experienced a traumatic event in utero and cannot compensate, the fetus
does not survive. The term for a fetus at greater than 20 weeks' gestation that is not living but still in the uterus is
intrauterine fetal demise (IUFD).

Multiple Gestation
Multiple gestations are prevalent because of the various assisted reproductive techniques available. In 2018, the
rate of twin pregnancies was 32.6 twins per 1,000 total births (ACOG, 2021). Multiple gestation pregnancies rarely
progress to 40 weeks. Recommendations for delivery in a normal twin pregnancy is delivery within the 38th week
(ACOG, 2021). Delivery of a complicated twin pregnancy is determined according to the complication and degree of
prematurity.

Complications of multiple gestation during labor and birth include uterine labor dystocia, abnormal fetal
presentation, umbilical cord prolapse, placental abruption, emergent operative delivery, and postpartum
hemorrhage (ACOG, 2021). Therefore, safety measures are instituted to prepare for complications. The nurse
maintains continuous fetal monitoring for both FHRs, ensures blood is readily available, and has a sonography
machine in the room to evaluate the presentation of the fetuses during labor. The labor and delivery surgical suite is
available for delivery of twins or an emergency cesarean birth. Each newborn will have a separate pediatric team
with two of all equipment.

Intrauterine Fetal Demise
Intrauterine fetal demise (IUFD) occurs in 1 in 160 births and is normally caused by fetal hypoxia. Sometimes,
however, the cause is unknown (Metz et al., 2020). One cause of IUFD can be placental insufficiency due to disease,
postterm pregnancy, or placental infarcts (Fadel & Mashally, 2022). Placental abruption is a risk factor for IUFD.
Umbilical cord accidents such as knots, loops, or prolapse can cause IUFD. During labor, IUFD can occur due to
malpresentation, prolonged labor, cord accidents, and hypoxia. Table 19.8 lists the causes and incidences of IUFD.

                 Causes of IUFD          Incidence out of 1000 births

                 Diabetes                6-10

                 Hypertensive disorders  6-51

                 Growth restriction      10-47

                 Multiple gestation      12-34

                 Oligohydramnios         14

                 Previous stillbirth     9-20

                 Advanced maternal age   11-21

                 TABLE 19.8 Causes and Incidence of IUFD (Metz et al., 2020)
832  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     Causes of IUFD                         Incidence out of 1000 births

     Body mass index (BMI) >30 13-18

                                          Smoking >10 cigarettes/day 10-15

                                               TABLE 19.8 Causes and Incidence of IUFD (Metz et al., 2020)

     Many risk factors for IUFD have been identified, but most of these risk factors cannot be used to predict or prevent
     stillbirth. However, a history of prior stillbirth greatly increases the risk of repeat stillbirth. Nulliparity, advanced
     maternal age, obesity, preexisting diabetes, chronic hypertension, multiple gestation, smoking, and use of alcohol
     during pregnancy have been associated with IUFD (Metz et al., 2020). Autopsy and DNA testing can be performed
     with parental consent to determine the cause of death in hopes of preventing another demise. The role of the nurse
     is to discuss options with the laboring person and family regarding holding the baby, taking pictures, and spending
     time with the baby. The nurse plays a large role in emotionally supporting the person and family. This can be
     emotionally difficult for the nurse, and many labor and delivery units have access to support groups, social workers,
     or counselors that help the nurse as well as train nurses in assisting with perinatal bereavement.

     Malpresentation of the Fetus
     When the fetus is in a malpresentation, labor is more difficult for the fetus and the laboring person. The fetal head
     presents in the pelvis for 95 percent of labors and is breech in 3 to 4 percent of labors (Mohammed & El-Chaar,
     2022). Risk factors for fetal malpresentation are unstable fetal lie, contracted pelvis, pendulous abdomen, uterine
     anomalies, and abnormal placenta location. The fetal risk factors include large infant, abnormal internal rotation,
     fetal extension, multiple gestation, and polyhydramnios.

     Malpresentation can cause higher rates of operative deliveries. Prolonged labor or labor dystocia is common. Many
     times, the cervix will dilate or efface slowly because the fetal head is not compressing the cervix. Fetuses in an
     abnormal lie will have more molding and caput succedaneum, and they might also have lower Apgar scores due to
     long, difficult labors.

     The most common malpresentation is the occiput posterior presentation. This occurs in 15 to 30 percent of cephalic
     presentations (Mohammed & El-Chaar, 2022). Figure 19.10 illustrates the occiput posterior position. The cause of
     this and many malpresentations is cephalopelvic disproportion. The nurse can help place the laboring person in
     hands-and-knees, forward-leaning, or side-lying positions to encourage rotation of the fetal occiput. If this
     presentation does not resolve, it is called a persistent occiput posterior position. Although vaginal delivery does
     occur in persistent posterior positions, the incidence of labor dystocia and fetal distress is significantly higher than
     in fetal occiput anterior positions.

     FIGURE 19.10 Occiput Posterior Position The occiput posterior position occurs when the occiput is against the sacrum of the pregnant
     person. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.3 · Obstetrical Conditions Affecting Labor and Birth                                                                                   833

Brow presentation occurs when the forehead of the fetus is presenting and is slightly extended. Because the
diameter of the brow presentation is larger than the occiput presentation, this can cause cephalopelvic
disproportion. Often the fetus rotates out of this position and either flexes to a vertex presentation or extends to a
face presentation. Face presentation increases the risk of cesarean birth. See Figure 15.8 for illustrations of brow
and face presentations.

Face presentation is similar to brow; however, in this presentation, the fetal head is totally extended. The presenting
part is the face, and the position is determined by the chin, or mentum. The mentum anterior position allows for
passage through the pelvic outlet. The mentum posterior position can cause the fetal head to become wedged. If
the position is mentum posterior, cesarean birth is recommended. The nurse is aware that the newborn birthed in
the face presentation will have edema and bruising of the face and prepares the parents for the newborn's
appearance.

Breech presentation occurs when the fetal sacrum is leading into the pelvis. Three to 4 percent of births are breech
at term. The preterm fetus has the highest incidence of breech presentation. Most fetuses will position to cephalic
by 34 weeks' gestation. Maternal factors that increase the incidence of breech presentation include relaxed uterine
muscles of a high-parity person, polyhydramnios, uterine anomalies, uterine masses, and contracted pelvis (Elfazari
& El-Chaar, 2022). Placental factors include implantation at the fundal region of the uterus and placenta previa.
Fetal factors include multiple gestation, hydrocephaly, anencephaly, chromosomal anomalies, and IUFD.

Breech presentation can be classified as frank, incomplete (footling), or complete, as shown in (Figure 19.11). Frank
breech is the most common type of breech. Complications of vaginal breech birth are prolapsed cord, fetal asphyxia,
and fetal injury. Double footling breech poses the highest risk for prolapsed cord, while frank poses the lowest risk.
Footling breech maneuvers easily through the pelvis but allows less dilation for the fetal head to pass. Frank is the
largest of the breech presentations, allowing the largest degree of dilation and making more room for the fetal head
to birth (Elfazari & El-Chaar, 2022). In a breech position, the fetal head does not mold but remains round. This
increases the risk of head entrapment and head trauma. Intracranial hemorrhage is a major concern for breech birth
and fetal mortality (Elfazari & El-Chaar, 2022).

FIGURE 19.11 Breech Positions Breech presentation can occur in several positions. (a) Frank breech occurs when the buttocks and hips
are presenting. (b) Complete breech occurs when the buttocks and hips present with the legs crossed. (c) Footling breech occurs when the
presenting part is the foot or feet. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Birth of the breech fetus can be either vaginal or cesarean. Research has shown markedly reduced cases of fetal
death during delivery with elective cesarean births (Elfazari & El-Chaar, 2022). Providers must be skilled at
performing a breech cesarean birth because of the placement of the incision and ability to deliver the fetal head.
The pregnant person with a large fetus, oligohydramnios, contracted pelvis, or prior cesarean should consider an
elective cesarean birth.
834  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

             LINK TO LEARNING

     This video from PROMPT Maternity Foundation (https://openstax.org/r/77breechbirth) provides training on the art of
     assisting the vaginal breech birth.

     Postterm Pregnancy
     A pregnancy extending past 42 weeks and 0 days is considered postterm (ACOG, 2014). Risk factors for postterm
     birth are unclear; however, nulliparity, prior postterm pregnancy, male fetus, anencephaly, and maternal obesity
     have been suggested (ACOG, 2014). Some research suggests the placenta has limited capacity and leads to
     postmaturity syndrome when the pregnancy progresses past term (Patel & Rathod, 2022). Table 19.9 lists the
     adverse outcomes of postterm birth.

                                      Person Affected Possible Outcomes

                                      Pregnant person  Fetal macrosomia
                                                       Oligohydramnios
                                                       Preeclampsia
                                                       Cesarean birth
                                                       Labor dystocia
                                                       Fetal jeopardy
                                                       Shoulder dystocia
                                                       Postpartum hemorrhage
                                                       Forceps delivery
                                                       Perineal lacerations

                                      Fetus/child      Stillbirth
                                                       Postmaturity syndrome
                                                       NICU admission
                                                       Meconium aspiration syndrome
                                                       Neonatal convulsions
                                                       Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
                                                       Brain injuries
                                                       Infection
                                                       Childhood obesity

                                      TABLE 19.9 Adverse Outcomes of Postterm Birth (Wennerholm et
                                      al., 2020)

     Characteristics of postterm syndrome are a newborn with wrinkled, patchy, peeling skin; a wasted-looking body, and
     an old appearance. Skin of the hands and feet are wrinkled and peeling due to lack of vernix caseosa. The nails are
     also long. Postmature newborns can have brown or green-tinged skin from meconium-stained fluid. During labor,
     the postterm fetus is at risk for uteroplacental insufficiency and oligohydramnios and the risk factors associated
     with both. The nurse will recognize FHR late decelerations because of uteroplacental insufficiency and variable
     decelerations because of cord compression. Amnioinfusion can help replace fluid to prevent cord compression. The
     postterm newborn is at risk for meconium aspiration.

     Known and Undetected Fetal Anomalies
     Some fetal anomalies are diagnosed during pregnancy, and preparations are made to address the anomaly during
     labor and birth. Other anomalies can be unexpected and require nursing interventions. One example is
     gastroschisis, an abdominal wall defect allowing the bowel to herniate into the amniotic sac.

     Another condition that needs attention after birth is spina bifida, which can occur anywhere on the spine. Spina
     bifida is a neural tube defect that can occur in different types:

     · spina bifida occulta: the mildest form; defect is a small dimple in the spine without outpouching of a sac

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.3 · Obstetrical Conditions Affecting Labor and Birth                                                                 835

    · meningocele: a protrusion of a sac filled with spinal fluid; no spinal cord involvement
    · myelomeningocele: the most severe form; a protrusion of a sac containing spinal fluid and part of the spinal

        cord and nerves (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2020).

After birth, the infant is placed prone to avoid putting pressure on the herniation. The herniated sac is at risk for
infection. The nurse protects the sac by covering it with a moist sterile dressing.

Fetal Distress
Fetal distress occurs when the fetus is not receiving sufficient oxygenation. Uteroplacental insufficiency is the most
common reason for fetal distress. Causes of uteroplacental insufficiency can be the use of uterotonics causing
tachysystole, maternal hypotension, prolonged umbilical cord compression, and aged placenta. Refer to Chapter 16
Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring for fetal monitor tracings associated with fetal distress. The
following are causes of fetal distress necessitating immediate birth:

    · ruptured uterus
    · severe placental abruption
    · umbilical cord prolapse
    · amniotic fluid embolus
    · vasa previa causing fetal exsanguination (ACOG, 2014)

Complicating Conditions Associated with the Person in Labor

Unexpected complications can occur during the process of labor and birth, and the complications can occur rapidly.
Preterm labor can occur with preterm rupture of membranes or because of an infection of the uterus. Precipitous
labor is very rapidly progressing labor. Preeclampsia can progress through pregnancy and quickly worsen,
necessitating labor induction. Diabetes mellitus can age the placenta, causing uteroplacental insufficiency. All of
these complications come with risks for the fetus and laboring person. The nurse is aware of assessments and
interventions to diagnose and address these problems.

Preterm Labor
Any labor occurring from 20 to 36 6/7 weeks' gestation is considered preterm labor. Preterm birth can occur
spontaneously through preterm labor or preterm prelabor rupture of membranes. Spontaneous preterm labor is
caused by many factors, among them, premature cervical dilation or cervical insufficiency, uterine fundal
abnormalities, infection, and fetal anomalies (CDC, 2023). Uterine distention, the result of multiple gestation and
polyhydramnios, also causes preterm labor.

Preterm prelabor rupture of membranes (PPROM) refers to rupture of membranes prior to the 37th completed week
of gestation and before spontaneous labor. The most common causes of PPROM are low socioeconomic status,
smoking, multiple gestations, polyhydramnios, gestational hypertension, and diabetes (Danei et al., 2022). Risk
factors for preterm labor are prior preterm birth, early pregnancy threatened abortion, birth defects, young and
advanced maternal age, and maternal use of cigarettes and illicit drugs. Periodontal disease has also been
associated with preterm labor.

Precipitous Labor
Labor and delivery that is extremely rapid, usually less than 3 hours from start of the contractions to birth, is
considered precipitous labor. The labor and birth may happen at home, in a birth center, or in the hospital. Pregnant
persons may describe their labor as contractions that are very close together without a break between contractions,
strong contractions without a slow build, or having a sudden urge to push. The true cause of precipitous labor is
unknown; however, several risk factors have been associated with it, such as a small fetus, previous precipitous
birth, cocaine use, or high blood pressure. Precipitous birth can lower 1-minute Apgar scores and increase the risk
for postpartum hemorrhage, newborn respiratory distress, third- or fourth-degree lacerations, and placental
abruption (Aiken et al., 2017; Suzuki, 2015).
836  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Emergency Vaginal Delivery by the Nurse

       1. Call for help.
       2. Gather warm blankets.
       3. Assist the newborn to birth.
       4. Suction mouth and nose if newborn is not crying or if mucus is noted.
       5. Place the infant on the birthing person's chest skin-to-skin.
       6. Dry the newborn and keep warm.
       7. Clamp and cut the cord.
       8. Do not pull on the cord but allow the placenta to deliver spontaneously.

     In precipitous labor occurring in the hospital, the nurse focuses on promoting the well-being of the laboring person
     and the fetus. Patients may have increased anxiety or panic due to the rapid progression. The nurse should speak in
     a calm manner, explaining what to expect and reassuring the person they are safe. In preparing for the upcoming
     delivery, the nurse is expected to call the health-care provider and ensure medications to treat postpartum
     hemorrhage are readily available. If the fetus is born prior to the health-care provider's arrival, the nurse will gently
     assist the delivery of the infant, dry the infant, cut the umbilical cord, and place the infant on the birthing person's
     chest skin-to-skin. The greatest priority is keeping the infant warm. The pediatric team should be in the room in case
     the infant does not begin breathing spontaneously after the rapid descent and birth. The nurse should refrain from
     assisting the delivery of the placenta and allow the placenta to deliver spontaneously. If the placenta delivers
     spontaneously before the health-care provider is present in the labor and birthing suite, the nurse should be
     prepared to administer oxytocin per institution protocols to decrease the risk of postpartum hemorrhage.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Hospital laborists, also called OB/GYN hospitalists, are obstetricians or certified nurse-midwives who work on site
     on the labor and delivery floor. A laborist is available to care for pregnant persons until their health-care provider
     arrives or to care for those who do not have a health-care provider. Read ACOG's Committee Opinion on obstetric
     and gynecologist hospitalists (https://openstax.org/r/77hospitalists) for more information.

     Preeclampsia
     According to ACOG, "Preeclampsia is a disorder of pregnancy associated with new-onset hypertension, which
     occurs most often after 20 weeks of gestation and frequently near term" (2020b, p. e237). Pregnant patients with a
     blood pressure (BP) of greater than 140/90 mm Hg are hypertensive. The increased BP requires the nurse to assess
     the laboring person for other signs of preeclampsia, such as proteinuria, presence of a headache, and visual
     disturbances. See Chapter 12 Pregnancy at Risk for a full discussion of preeclampsia in pregnancy. When caring for
     patients diagnosed with preeclampsia, the nurse monitors the laboring person's vital signs and symptoms more
     frequently than those of a low-risk patient.

     Complications of preeclampsia can occur during labor and postpartum. It is important for the nurse caring for the
     laboring person diagnosed with preeclampsia to have a thorough understanding of possible complications and
     nursing interventions. Complications during labor can be seizure, fetal distress due to uteroplacental insufficiency,
     and stroke. Headaches, visual disturbances, and hyperreflexia can occur before an eclamptic seizure. Therefore, the
     nurse explains to the laboring person the importance of reporting headache, epigastric pain, or visual disturbances.
     The nurse also assesses deep tendon reflexes to determine hyperreflexia. Uteroplacental insufficiency can occur
     because of the rapid aging of the placenta due to hypertension. Therefore, the nurse monitors for signs of fetal
     distress during labor. HELLP (Hemolysis, Elevated Liver enzymes, and Low Platelet count) syndrome, discussed in
     Chapter 12 Pregnancy at Risk, can cause bleeding issues during labor and postpartum. The nurse reviews the lab
     work to monitor for signs of HELLP syndrome. Stroke can occur when the blood pressure is critically high (160/110
     mm Hg or higher). The nurse explains the importance of monitoring the blood pressure and administering
     antihypertensives per protocol to avoid stroke. The nurse also encourages the laboring person to rest and keeps

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                       19.3 · Obstetrical Conditions Affecting Labor and Birth                         837

stimulus to a minimum, such as keeping the lights low, limiting visitors, and keeping the room quiet. Severe
increases in BP are rechecked and reported to the health-care provider.

Preeclampsia affects the entire body. The kidneys can be affected and cause edema in the extremities and lungs.
Strict monitoring of the preeclamptic laboring person's intake and output (I&O) is essential. The nurse should assess
for pedal and facial edema during labor. The nurse also assesses the lungs for signs of pulmonary edema, such as
crackles, wheezes, and dyspnea. If the kidneys are affected by preeclampsia, the nurse will limit IV fluids per
health-care provider orders. A urine dipstick test for protein might also be ordered. The nurse assesses for
epigastric pain, knowing that the laboring person might experience this when the liver is affected.

Medical management of preeclampsia could include antihypertensives and magnesium sulfate. It is important for
the nurse to be familiar with the administration, side effects, adverse reactions, and nursing interventions
associated with these medications. Nursing assessments for adverse reactions to magnesium sulfate are performed
often, and many times the nursing care ratio is one-to-one. See Chapter 12 Pregnancy at Risk for a thorough
discussion of antihypertensives and magnesium sulfate.

Diabetes Mellitus
Gestational diabetes is a condition causing intolerance to carbohydrates and insulin resistance leading to
hyperglycemia in pregnancy. Patients with gestational diabetes are at increased risk for preeclampsia, cesarean
birth, and development of diabetes mellitus (DM) later in life (ACOG, 2018a). See Chapter 12 Pregnancy at Risk for a
full discussion of pregnancy and diabetes mellitus.

Persons with type 1 DM must have close monitoring of their blood glucose during labor. The fetus is affected by the
laboring person's glucose level. High maternal blood glucose during labor and birth places the newborn at risk for
hypoglycemia. High energy expenditure and limited calorie intake put the laboring person at risk for hypoglycemia
as well. The health-care provider will order the frequency of blood glucose checks and insulin infusion. Hourly blood
glucose checks are common. Intravenous insulin and glucose must be titrated to keep the person normoglycemic;
the goal is to prevent hyperglycemia. Ideal glucose levels in labor are less than 110 mg/dL (ACOG, 2018c).

Gestational diabetes is associated with prelabor rupture of membranes, induction of labor, operative delivery,
cesarean birth, and shoulder dystocia. Birth injury to the fetus occurs more often in cases of gestational diabetes,
especially with macrosomic infants (over 4,000 g). Newborn injuries include nerve damage, fractures, and
cephalohematoma. To reduce risks to the fetus and pregnant person, induction of labor is recommended between
38- and 39-weeks' gestation (ACOG, 2018a). During labor, the nurse will monitor the laboring person for signs of
hypoglycemia. After birth, the newborn will be assessed for hypoglycemia, and glucose will be monitored per facility
protocol. The postpartum person is encouraged to breast-feed or bottle-feed often.

UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Labor and Delivery: Part 2

See Labor and Delivery: Part 1 for a review of the patient data.

Brianne started having contractions 3 hours after the oxytocin infusion was started to induce labor. Brianne
received an epidural for labor discomfort when she was 3 cm dilated, 6 hours after the infusion was started.
Brianne has received antibiotics for the group B streptococcus (GBS) status per protocol.

The nurse is reviewing the labor data.

Labor Data           Data Obtained 4 Hours Previously Current Data

Cervical dilation    6.5 cm            7 cm

Cervical effacement  100%              100%

Fetal presentation/station Vertex/ -1  Vertex/ -1
838  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     Labor Data                             Data Obtained 4 Hours Previously Current Data

     Membrane status                        Intact                        Intact

     FHR baseline                           140                           145

     FHR variability                        Moderate                      Moderate

     FHR periodic changes                   Accelerations present         Accelerations absent

     Uterine contraction interval Every 3-4 minutes                       Every 3-4 minutes

     Uterine contraction length 45-60 seconds                             50-60 seconds

     Uterine contraction strength Moderate to strong                      Moderate to strong

     Maternal BP; TPR                       120/64; 98.4° F, 76, 20       124/68; 99.8° F, 80, 20

     1. Using the labor data, choose the correct answer for each option.

     The nurse identifies the priority problem at this time as OPTION 1 supported by OPTION 2.
     Option 1:

       a. prolonged (protracted) active phase
       b. failure to descend
        c. increased risk for postpartum hemorrhage

     Option 2:
       a. current contraction pattern
       b. current fetal heart rate pattern
        c. cervical dilation pattern

     2. The nurse informs the health-care provider of the patient data over the past 4 hours of labor. The nurse

     receives orders from the health-care provider. Based on the patient data, indicate if each order is

     anticipated, not indicated, or contraindicated.

                                            HCP Order  AnticipatedNot IndicatedContraindicated

     Increase IVF of LR to 125 mL/hr

     Regular diet

     Discontinue Pitocin infusion

     Start magnesium sulfate 40 g/liter at 2 g/hr

     Oxygen at 6 L/min via face mask

     Insert fetal scalp electrode now

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.4 · Preexisting Conditions of the Pregnant Person Placing the Delivery at Risk                                       839

Prepare patient for amniotomy

Prepare patient for insertion of
intrauterine pressure catheter

19.4 Preexisting Conditions of the Pregnant Person Placing the Delivery at
Risk

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Explain the pathophysiology of cardiovascular preexisting conditions placing the birth at risk
    · Explain the pathophysiology of endocrine preexisting conditions placing the birth at risk
    · Explain the pathophysiology of musculoskeletal preexisting conditions placing the birth at risk
    · Explain the pathophysiology of nutritional preexisting conditions placing the birth at risk

Preexisting conditions of the pregnant person can cause increased risk at the time of birth. Some conditions cause
birth to be expedited by induction of labor. Other conditions require increased surveillance during pregnancy and
birth. Conditions such as heart disease, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus can cause uteroplacental insufficiency
and morbidity and mortality of the pregnant person. Musculoskeletal and nutritional complications can cause
difficulty during labor for the laboring person or fetus. Knowledge of these preexisting conditions and their effects
on the patient and fetus is integral to the nurse monitoring for and managing complications during labor and birth.

Cardiovascular Conditions

Cardiovascular disease in pregnancy accounts for a large percentage of maternal morbidity and mortality in the
United States every year (ACOG, 2019c). Cardiovascular disease includes congenital and acquired heart disease,
with acquired being on the rise. (See Chapter 12 Pregnancy at Risk for further discussion of cardiac disease and
pregnancy.) People with heart disease should labor at an appropriate-level hospital with a care team consisting of
an obstetrician, maternal-fetal medicine specialist, cardiologist, and anesthesiologist prepared for any
complications.

During labor, preexisting hypertension puts the laboring person at risk for stroke and myocardial infarction;
hypertension puts the fetus at risk for uteroplacental insufficiency and fetal distress. Blood pressure must be
monitored more closely to determine if antihypertensive medications are necessary during labor. Fetal monitor
tracings must be evaluated often to ensure proper fetal oxygenation.

Heart Disease
Heart disease is also linked to maternal mortality. Some cardiac conditions require alternative plans for labor and
birth. Persons with stable heart disease can safely give birth vaginally at 39 weeks' gestation. Pregnant persons on
anticoagulant therapy for cardiac disease will discontinue those medications approximately 12 hours prior to a
scheduled induction or cesarean birth (ACOG, 2019c). Pulmonary edema and cardiac arrhythmias require cardiac
monitoring during labor. Strict fluid balance is required for prevention of pulmonary edema. Antibiotics could be
required during labor to prevent endocarditis. Epidural anesthesia for labor pain can reduce the risk of cardiac
arrhythmias (ACOG, 2019c).

The mode of delivery should be discussed with the pregnant person and a multidisciplinary team. People with
severe heart failure and acute or chronic aortic dissection should give birth via cesarean birth (Ruys et al., 2013).
Marfan syndrome can cause an enlarged aortic root that increases the risk for aortic dissection. If the aortic root is
greater than 40 mm, the person should give birth via cesarean birth (Canobbio et al., 2017). People with aortic
stenosis and pulmonary hypertension can birth only by passive delivery, meaning avoiding pushing using the
Valsalva maneuver (Canobbio et al., 2017). Forceps- or vacuum-assisted delivery is required. Nursing interventions
include monitoring vital signs, turning the laboring person to the lateral recumbent position, cardiac monitoring, and
closely monitoring fluid input and output (Canobbio et al., 2017).
840  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     Hypertension
     Preexisting hypertension is the elevation of blood pressure related to peripheral vascular resistance and/or
     increased cardiac output prior to 20 weeks' gestation. See Chapter 12 Pregnancy at Risk for a full discussion of
     preexisting hypertension in pregnancy.

     Preexisting hypertension creates complications during labor by causing uteroplacental insufficiency leading to fetal
     distress. Severe preexisting hypertension can lead to stroke, cardiovascular disease, and death. Emergency
     antihypertensive medications should be ordered by the health-care provider when severe hypertension is noted
     during labor, birth, or the postpartum period.

     Diabetes Mellitus
     Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a metabolic disorder causing elevated blood glucose due to dysfunction in insulin
     secretion or insulin action (Banday et al., 2020). Diabetes mellitus can be classified as type 1 DM, type 2 DM, or
     gestational DM. Type 1 DM has been called juvenile-onset diabetes and is caused by an autoimmune disorder that
     destroys the beta cells of the pancreas and requires insulin. Type 2 DM has also been called non-insulin-dependent
     diabetes. Type 2 DM is characterized by insulin resistance and beta cell dysfunction (Banday et al., 2020).
     Preexisting diabetes can cause complications during labor and birth. The most common complication is neonatal
     hypoglycemia. If the glucose of the laboring person is well controlled, risk for neonatal hypoglycemia is reduced.
     Other risk factors include cesarean birth, macrosomia, and preterm labor or birth. Shoulder dystocia of the infant is
     a risk for persons with diabetes. The nurse communicates with the health-care team to be prepared for a possible
     shoulder dystocia (see 19.7 Obstetrical Emergencies). The nurse will also monitor the laboring person for hyper-
     and hypoglycemia.

     Musculoskeletal Conditions

     Several musculoskeletal conditions can affect pregnancy and birth. Muscular dystrophy, a genetic neuromuscular
     disease that causes weakness and breakdown of skeletal muscles, can lead to preterm birth, intrauterine growth
     restriction, and congenital malformation (Petrangelo, 2018). Persons with cerebral palsy, a permanent disorder of
     movement caused by a lesion in the developing brain, are at higher risk for preterm birth, small-for-gestational-age
     infants, and low 5-minute Apgar scores (Sundelin et al., 2020). Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disorder
     causing muscular weakness that worsens with movement (Roche & Bouhour, 2021). Vaginal operative birth and
     cesarean birth are more common in those with myasthenia gravis. Epidural anesthesia is appropriate; however,
     opiates and general anesthetics should be avoided (Roche & Bouhour, 2021). Persons with musculoskeletal issues
     such as cerebral palsy or an amputation might need special equipment during labor and birth. The role of the nurse
     is to support the laboring person and assist with ambulation, position changes, and use of special equipment.

     Nutritional Status

     Nutrition can positively or negatively affect the pregnant person and fetus. Pregnant persons with inflammatory
     bowel disease, pancreatitis, and intestinal parasites have increased malabsorption (Rahimian, 2019). Malnutrition
     and malabsorption of nutrients may cause intrauterine growth restriction. The growth-restricted fetus can have
     increased complications during labor due to uteroplacental insufficiency and lack of fetal reserve. Eating disorders
     such as anorexia or bulimia can affect absorption of nutrients in the pregnant person and fetus, leading to growth
     restriction and fetal anomalies (Sebastiani et al., 2020). The most common fetal complications associated with
     eating disorders are being small for gestational age, fetal growth restriction, microcephaly, and intraventricular
     hemorrhage. The role of the nurse is to assess the laboring person's nutritional status upon admission. If
     malnutrition or malabsorption is suspected, the nurse will monitor for signs of uteroplacental insufficiency.

     19.5 Interventions During Birth

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the obstetric indications for the use of forceps during birth
         · Explain the obstetric indications for the use of the vacuum extractor during birth
         · Discuss the nursing care of the person in labor requiring an operative vaginal birth

     The use of forceps or vacuum to assist with the birth is considered operative delivery. These deliveries can be

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.5 · Interventions During Birth                                                                                                            841

difficult for both the laboring person and the fetus. However, in certain situations, the use of these instruments can
protect the person or the fetus by expediting delivery.

Obstetric Forceps

The metal instruments placed on the fetal head to rotate the head or assist in delivery of the fetus are called
obstetric forceps. The use of forceps during labor is indicated for maternal exhaustion and when the birth must
urgently occur, such as when fetal heart rate decelerations are noted. This can be an alternative to cesarean birth.
Obstetric forceps are designed to fit the fetal head. They cradle the fetal skull to apply traction, rotation, flexion, and
extension, as seen in Figure 19.12 (Shabib & Black, 2022). Indications for forceps birth include nonreassuring fetal
heart rate, prolonged second stage of labor, and delivery of the head after a breech presentation. Forceps birth can
be attempted only if the cervix is completely dilated, the membranes are ruptured, the fetal head is low in the pelvis,
and the provider does not suspect cephalopelvic disproportion (Shabib & Black, 2022). Complications to the birthing
person when obstetric forceps are used include lacerations of the vagina and cervix, pelvic hematomas, urethral and
bladder injury, rupture of the uterus, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Fetal complications include facial
lacerations and nerve damage, cephalohematomas, skull fractures, intracranial hemorrhage, and seizures (Shabib &
Black, 2022).

FIGURE 19.12 Use of Forceps Forceps can be used to assist the fetal head to birth. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY 4.0 license)

When the health-care provider makes the decision and obtains consent from the birthing person to use forceps to
deliver the fetus, the nurse performs several actions. The nurse assists the person into the lithotomy position and
ensures that the bladder is emptied. If the person has an epidural, the nurse can call the anesthesia provider to
ensure the person has adequate pain relief. The neonatal team should be in the room in case of newborn
complications.

        LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

Consent for Operative Delivery

Upon admission, the laboring person signs consent forms for birth. Because an operative delivery is a deviation from
normal, informed consent should be requested and given by the laboring person for use of forceps or vacuum. The
health-care provider should explain why the operative delivery is necessary, the risks and benefits of the procedure,
and how the procedure will be performed. The provider should allow time for questions and ensure shared decision
making. The health-care provider is responsible for providing this information in a nonbiased way. For consent, the
842  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     person must have the mental capacity to understand and make that decision.

     Vacuum Extractor

     A vacuum extractor is a device used to help deliver the fetal head during the second stage of labor. The vacuum
     device usually features a soft, silicone cup that fits onto the fetal head. A pump and gauge attach to the cup to apply
     the proper amount of suction. Once the vacuum is applied to the fetal head, traction is placed to assist the birth
     while the birthing person is pushing. Indications for a vacuum-assisted delivery are the same as for forceps-assisted
     delivery. Contraindications to the use of the vacuum include face or breech presentation, cephalopelvic
     disproportion, fetal head anomaly, preterm fetus, or fetal bleeding risk (Shabib & Black, 2022). Complications
     include neonatal injury, including superficial scalp markings, retinal hemorrhage, cephalohematoma, subgaleal
     hematoma, and intracranial hemorrhage (Shabib & Black, 2022). The vacuum can cause perineal and vaginal
     lacerations to the laboring person.

     When the provider has indicated a need to deliver the fetus using the vacuum extractor and consent has been
     obtained, the nurse assists the person into stirrups. The vacuum system is checked for leaks. The cup is placed on
     the fetal head, and the vacuum pressure is increased during the contraction. The pressure is decreased between
     contractions. The nurse ensures the pediatric team is available for newborn complications. Figure 19.13
     demonstrates the application of the vacuum.

     FIGURE 19.13 Vacuum-Assisted Birth This is a vacuum-assisted birth of the fetal head. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
     under CC BY 4.0 license)

     19.6 Cesarean Section

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the conditions of the person giving birth associated with an increased risk for cesarean birth
         · Explain the fetal conditions associated with an increased risk for cesarean birth
         · Explain the umbilical cord anomalies associated with an increased risk for cesarean birth
         · Explain the placental conditions associated with an increased risk for cesarean birth
         · Discuss the standards of care for a vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC), ensuring safety of the fetus and

             person in labor

     Cesarean birth is the birth of the newborn through an incision in the uterus. The incidence of cesarean birth has
     risen steadily over the past 60 years, with the present rate between 25 and 30 percent (El-Chaar, 2022). The most

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.6 · Cesarean Section                                                                                                  843

common indication for cesarean birth is dystocia, fetal or uterine. Fetal conditions, placental issues, and umbilical
cord problems are all indications for cesarean birth.

Causes Related to the Person Giving Birth

Cesarean birth can be planned or unplanned. Planned cesarean births can be due to multiple gestation,
macrosomia, previous cesarean, active herpes simplex lesions, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection,
malpresentation of the fetus, placenta previa, and complications during pregnancy. Unplanned cesarean births can
be caused by dystocia, pregnancy complications, and complications during labor. The nurse will educate the family
regarding the procedure and what to expect. Pregnant persons can experience increased anxiety and stress because
of the unexpected change in their plan for birth. The nurse can help decrease anxiety and stress and, when possible,
should allow the significant other to remain with the laboring person.

Dystocia
Labor dystocia can be uterine or fetal. Power, passenger, passage, position, and psyche are the components of
dystocia. Therefore, if contractions are not strong enough to cause cervical dilation and fetal descent, a cesarean
birth can be performed. When the fetus is unable to pass through the pelvis, fetal malpresentation/malposition or
cephalopelvic disproportion can be diagnosed. Other causes of dystocia include uterine masses or neoplasms.

Complications of Pregnancy
Complications of pregnancy such as preeclampsia, gestational DM/DM, and hypertension create increased risk for
cesarean birth. Congenital uterine anomaly puts the pregnant person at risk for cesarean birth. Complications of
previous pregnancies can also increase a person's risk. Previous cesarean birth, hysterotomy, myomectomy, and
cervical suture can be contraindications for labor, and cesarean birth is required (El-Chaar, 2022).

Preeclampsia
Preeclampsia can cause damage to the placenta. The placenta is affected by hypertension, and perfusion of oxygen
and nutrients is decreased to the fetus, which can cause fetal distress prior to or during labor. The pregnant person
can become very ill with thrombocytopenia, liver and kidney dysfunction, seizure, or stroke. The cure for
preeclampsia is birth and delivery of the placenta. Therefore, pregnant persons who are too ill to labor or continue
the pregnancy to term are at higher risk for cesarean delivery.

Gestational Diabetes
Gestational diabetes can cause a large fetus that can be more difficult to birth vaginally. Larger fetuses can cause
longer labors and uterine dystocia. Fetal dystocia can be diagnosed due to the larger fetus attempting to maneuver
through the pelvis. Gestational diabetes can also affect the functioning of the placenta, causing more fetal distress
during labor.

Chronic Medical Conditions
Chronic medical conditions can cause increased risk for cesarean birth. Pregnant persons with HIV are sometimes
encouraged to birth via cesarean birth to decrease the vertical transmission rate, especially when the viral load is
high (ACOG, 2018e). Persons with heart disease may not tolerate labor and are better suited for cesarean birth.

Hypertension
Pregnant persons with chronic hypertension are at higher risk for preeclampsia, placental abruption, stroke, kidney
disease, heart failure, and heart attack. Complications are more common with uncontrolled hypertension, such as
pulmonary edema and renal failure. Peripartum cardiomyopathy is another risk factor. Severe hypertension can lead
to cerebral hemorrhage and heart failure. Therefore, if these pregnant persons become very ill with these
complications, a cesarean birth might be better tolerated than labor.

Diabetes Mellitus
Diabetes mellitus occurring prior to pregnancy can be type 1 or type 2. Both types of diabetes lead to increased
levels of circulating glucose. With uncontrolled glucose levels, arteriole damage occurs. This can affect the fetus and
placenta. Diabetes is associated with an increased risk of fetal demise. Therefore, pregnant persons with diabetes
are monitored more closely as labor nears. If prenatal fetal surveillance shows nonreassuring testing, these persons
might undergo labor induction or cesarean birth. This allows the fetus to leave the intrauterine environment that is
causing complications.
844  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     Fetal Causes

     Fetal causes for cesarean birth include multiple gestation, irregular position, and fetal distress. Twins can be born
     via vaginal birth if the pregnancy is without complications. However, multiple gestation occurring many times ends in
     cesarean birth due to cord entanglement and malposition. The fetus in the breech position is most commonly born
     via cesarean. Fetal distress is a common reason for emergency cesarean birth.

     Multiple Gestation
     The recommendation for multiple gestation is birth during the 38th week of pregnancy. Labor can be complicated
     because the overstretched uterus can cause uterine dystocia. Malpresentation and umbilical cord accidents can
     occur during labor. Postpartum hemorrhage is a risk for multiple gestation pregnancies.

     Twins in the vertex-vertex presentation can be delivered vaginally. Vaginal delivery of twins in the vertex-nonvertex
     presentation is controversial. Twins with the presenting fetus in the breech presentation are recommended to be
     born via cesarean birth (ACOG, 2021). During the cesarean, the nurse must ensure that the person is not lying
     completely supine due to the increased weight on the aorta. The nurse must also take steps to maintain family
     bonding as much as possible.

     Breech Delivery
     Breech presentation at term can pose a risk to the fetus when born vaginally, including trauma at birth, perinatal
     asphyxia, lower Apgar scores, and perinatal mortality (Fernández-Carrasco et al., 2022). Research has shown
     increased perinatal mortality in breech newborns born vaginally (ACOG, 2018b; Bjellmo et al., 2016). Breech
     presentation causes complications because the presenting part (knees, legs, feet, or buttocks) is smaller than the
     fetal head or shoulders. Therefore, if the larger head or shoulders cannot fit through the pelvic outlet, the head or
     shoulders could become lodged under the pubic bone. However, some pregnant persons choose to have a vaginal
     breech birth over a scheduled cesarean birth. ACOG (2018b) listed the following criteria for a planned vaginal
     breech birth: gestational age greater than 37 weeks, frank or complete breech presentation, no fetal anomalies on
     ultrasound examination, adequate maternal pelvis, and estimated fetal weight between 2,500 g and 4,000 g. All
     risks and benefits must be discussed with the pregnant person.

     Indications suggesting cesarean birth include patient request, prior neonatal birth trauma, large fetus,
     oligohydramnios, incomplete breech, pelvic contracture, and prior cesarean delivery. Birth by cesarean must be
     done carefully to avoid fetal head entrapment or damage to the fetus during incision. Prolapsed cord can be avoided
     when cesarean birth is scheduled and labor has not started.

     Fetal Stress/Distress
     Abnormal fetal heart rate suggesting fetal distress can be a cause for cesarean birth. Severe bradycardia, absent
     variability, and late decelerations are signs of fetal distress. Some fetal distress is caused by the use of oxytocin for
     induction or augmentation of labor, leading to tachysystole. Umbilical cord prolapse and uteroplacental insufficiency
     are also causes of fetal distress that can lead to emergency cesarean births. Meconium-stained fluid can be
     suggestive of fetal distress, but MSF alone is not an indication for cesarean birth.

     Umbilical Cord Abnormalities

     The umbilical cord can exhibit many different abnormalities, such as loops, knots, vascular malformations,
     aneurysm, hematoma, abnormal lengths, cysts, and an abnormal amount of Wharton's jelly (Krzyanowski et al.,
     2019). The umbilical cord normally contains two arteries and one vein surrounded by Wharton's jelly. Abnormal
     umbilical cords can contain only one artery and one vein. This complication can lead to fetal growth restriction and
     can also be associated with cardiac and renal abnormalities (Krzyanowski et al., 2019). Extremely long umbilical
     cords can cause complications such as true knots, entanglement, and cord prolapse upon rupturing of the
     membranes. Other umbilical cord abnormalities include those where the umbilical cord is inserted abnormally into
     the placenta.

     Marginal Insertion of the Umbilical Cord
     Cord abnormalities involve cord insertions into the placenta. Marginal insertion of the cord into the placenta is any
     placenta in which the cord inserts along the placental margin and occurs in 6 to 7 percent of pregnancies (Aragie &
     Oumer, 2021). This variant has also been called battledore placenta. This marginal insertion is not a common reason

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.6 · Cesarean Section                                                                                                              845

for cesarean birth; however, this complication could cause fetal distress during labor, necessitating a cesarean
delivery.

Velamentous Insertion of the Cord
The labor complication in which the vessels of the umbilical cord branch before reaching the placenta is called
velamentous insertion of the cord. The cord is actually inserted into the membranes instead of the placenta
(Krzyanowski et al., 2019). Figure 19.14 demonstrates a velamentous insertion. Complications are fetal growth
restriction, cord separation, fetal bleeding, and fetal death. A cesarean birth can prevent fetal exsanguination.

FIGURE 19.14 Velamentous Insertion of the Umbilical Cord The umbilical cord attaches to the amniotic membrane prior to reaching the
placenta. (credit: Insertio velamentosa" by Schokohäubchen/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Vasa Previa
The condition in which fetal vessels implant into the membranes and cross over the cervix in front of the fetal
presenting part is called vasa previa (Wagner, 2019). Figure 19.15 illustrates a vasa previa. When the membranes
rupture or the cervix dilates, the vessels can rupture, causing the pregnant person to bleed excessively and the fetus
to exsanguinate. Vasa previa is usually asymptomatic and diagnosed via ultrasound. Because of the very high risk of
morbidity and mortality, cesarean birth is preferred, especially prior to rupture of membranes and start of labor.
846  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     FIGURE 19.15 Vasa Previa The vessels of the placenta cross the cervix in front of the presenting part. (attribution: Copyright Rice
     University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Watch this video about vasa previa (https://openstax.org/r/77vasaprevia) to learn more about what it is and how it is
     treated.

     Placental Causes

     Placental causes associated with an increased risk for cesarean birth include uteroplacental insufficiency, placenta
     previa, placental abruption, and placenta accreta spectrum. Uteroplacental insufficiency can lead to fetal hypoxia.
     Placenta previa and placental abruption place the fetus at risk for hemorrhage and fetal hypoxia and the laboring
     person at risk for intrapartum hemorrhage and shock. Placenta accreta is associated with retained placenta.
     Uteroplacental Insufficiency
     Uteroplacental insufficiency is the malfunction of the uterine vessels to supply enough oxygen and nutrients to the
     placenta and consequently to the fetus. Risk factors for uteroplacental insufficiency include hypertensive disorders
     of pregnancy and congenital anomalies of the fetus. Uteroplacental insufficiency increases the risk for intrauterine
     growth restriction in the fetus and preterm labor (Burton & Jauniaux, 2018). If the placenta is not functioning well,
     the stress of labor could cause late decelerations, implying uteroplacental insufficiency. Because of this fetal
     distress, a cesarean birth could be necessary.
     Placenta Previa
     Placenta previa is the insertion of the placenta atop the cervix. A previa can be the entire placenta or a marginal
     portion of placenta implanted over the cervix. Any amount of previa could cause hemorrhage secondary to labor
     with dilation of the cervix and subsequent placental separation. To avoid hemorrhage, a cesarean birth is necessary.
     Placental Abruption
     Placental abruption, the separation of the placenta from the uterine lining, seen in labor can be caused by

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                19.6 · Cesarean Section                                    847

hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and external trauma such as a motor vehicle accident or aggravated assault. It
can also be caused by cocaine use; therefore, a drug screen is often obtained in labor and delivery after an
abruption. Abruptions can also be chronic. Chronic abruption is seen anytime during the pregnancy and may not
necessitate delivery. When the abruption causes fetal distress or hemorrhage, an emergency cesarean birth is
required to save the pregnant person and the fetus. The risk for death of both the laboring person and the fetus is
increased with placental abruption (Li et al., 2019).

Placenta Accreta
When the placenta invasively adheres to the uterine wall, it is called placenta accreta. Some cases of placenta
accreta are diagnosed by ultrasound during pregnancy. A cesarean birth is scheduled with the possibility of a
hysterectomy if bleeding is uncontrolled. At other times, accreta is diagnosed at the time of delivery. These cases
have higher incidences of morbidity and mortality. When an accreta is diagnosed, the nurse should anticipate an
emergency hysterectomy and administration of blood products (Morlando & Collins, 2020). The nurse will call for
assistance during this emergency.

Table 19.10 details nursing interventions that promote infant bonding, attachment, and breast-feeding after a
cesarean birth.

Location        Interventions

Operating room  Allow significant other to be present.
                Ask about any birth preferences.
                Place infant skin-to-skin with birthing person or significant other.
                Delay eye ointment for the first hour after birth.

Recovery        Allow significant other to be present.
                Place infant skin-to-skin.
                Initiate breast-feeding within the first hour.
                Take pictures or video.

TABLE 19.10 Nursing Interventions to Promote Bonding and Breast-feeding After Cesarean Birth

Vaginal Birth after Cesarean

Pregnant persons with a previous cesarean birth have the option in a subsequent birth to attempt a trial of labor or
to have a repeat cesarean. A vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) is defined as a successful trial of labor and
eventual birth after a previous cesarean birth. The decision between trial of labor and repeat cesarean is
controversial. Because the number of births via cesarean has steadily increased, the decision for subsequent vaginal
birth is a more prominent issue. The pregnant person should be counseled several times during the pregnancy
regarding pros and cons of both birth options. Several predictive tools or calculators have been developed to
estimate success and risk of a trial of labor. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019d)
suggests that most persons with one prior transverse cesarean birth are candidates for a trial of labor.

Certain factors determine the safety of a trial of labor after cesarean. The type of incision is one of the most
important. Classical uterine scars are more prone to rupture even before labor onset (ACOG, 2019d). The number of
prior cesarean births is also a very important factor. Research has shown that persons with two cesarean births have
a two to three times increased risk for uterine rupture compared to those with one cesarean (ACOG, 2019d).
Persons with prior uterine rupture are at greater risk of another rupture. To decrease the risk of uterine rupture, it is
suggested that the interval between pregnancies be greater than 18 months. Persons with the highest success rate
of VBAC are those who have had a successful VBAC previously.

Persons attempting a trial of labor should be in a facility that can emergently perform a cesarean. No prostaglandin
should be used for cervical ripening or induction of labor. Labor augmentation or induction with oxytocin has a
slightly higher risk of uterine rupture. Cervical ripening with a Foley bulb does not increase the risk for uterine
rupture (Atia et al., 2018). Counseling by the health-care provider must be done prior to signing consent for a trial of
labor or repeat cesarean birth. The role of the nurse is to maintain continuous fetal monitoring and observe for signs
of distress in the laboring person and fetus. See Table 19.11 for recommendations for VBAC candidates.
848  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     Type of Candidate Characteristics

     Good                                   One previous cesarean birth
                                            Low transverse incision
                                            Person with 60%-70% likelihood of achieving a VBAC
                                            Less than 40 weeks' gestation

     Poor                                   Previous classical or T-incision cesarean
                                            Prior uterine rupture
                                            Transfundal uterine surgery
                                            More than one prior cesarean
                                            Macrosomia
                                            Unknown prior uterine incision
                                            Obesity

     TABLE 19.11 Assessing Candidates for VBAC (ACOG, 2019d)

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Preoperation Checklist for Scheduled Cesarean Birth

       1. Verify name, allergies, and reason for cesarean.
       2. Ensure consent forms are signed.
       3. Document pregnancy complications and medical conditions.
       4. Assess vital signs and FHR.
       5. Start IV and IV fluid bolus prior to regional anesthesia.
       6. Shave operative site.
       7. Place sequential compression device on legs.
       8. Apply grounding pad.
       9. Insert Foley catheter.
     10. Listen to FHR prior to start of procedure.
     11. Prep abdomen with antiseptic.
     12. Take a time-out.
     13. Provide support to the pregnant person and significant other.

     19.7 Obstetrical Emergencies

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Describe fetal distress, nursing actions in response to fetal distress, and the complications related to this
             obstetric emergency

         · Describe shoulder dystocia, nursing actions in response to shoulder dystocia, and the complications
             related to this obstetric emergency

         · Describe prolapsed cord, nursing actions in response to prolapsed cord, and the complications related to
             this obstetric emergency

         · Describe uterine rupture, nursing actions in response to uterine rupture, and the complications related to
             this obstetric emergency

         · Describe anaphylactoid syndrome of pregnancy, nursing actions in response to anaphylactoid syndrome
             of pregnancy, and the complications related to this obstetric emergency

         · Describe disseminated intravascular coagulation, nursing actions in response to disseminated
             intravascular coagulation, and the complications related to this obstetric emergency

     Obstetric emergencies can occur with and without warning. Some high-risk pregnancies, such as twin gestation or
     breech presentation, allow the nurse and health-care providers time to prepare for labor and possible emergencies.

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.7 · Obstetrical Emergencies                                                                                          849

Other obstetric emergencies, such as a prolapsed cord, occur without warning. The nurse is aware of risk factors
that increase the chance of emergencies and is also prepared for a routine labor to become an emergency. Most
labor and delivery units practice emergency drills to ensure that everyone is prepared for common emergencies
such as postpartum hemorrhage and shoulder dystocia.

Fetal Distress

Fetal distress is most commonly diagnosed using fetal monitor tracing. The three-tiered categories of FHR tracings
guide the nurse and health-care provider to determine the status of the fetus (ACOG, 2009a; Hernandez Engelhart
et al., 2023). See definitions of these categories in Chapter 16 Electronic Fetal and Uterine Contraction Monitoring.
Category II tracings suggesting difficulty in determining fetal well-being should be monitored to determine if
interventions, such as giving an intravenous fluid bolus or repositioning the laboring person, will resolve the issue.
After multiple interventions, if the FHR remains Category II, the nurse will continue to monitor the labor progress
and the FHR pattern and communicate with the health-care provider. When the nurse interprets the FHR pattern as
Category III, the health-care provider is notified. Once the health-care provider confirms the Category III tracing,
delivery is expected within 30 minutes (Lyndon & Wisner, 2021). The nurse also contacts the neonatal team to be
present at the birth due to the potential complications for the fetus. The nurse keeps the laboring person and family
up to date on what interventions are being done and acts as support during this stressful period.

Shoulder Dystocia

The impaction of the fetal shoulder into the symphysis pubis or sacral promontory, preventing the delivery of the
fetus is called shoulder dystocia. It occurs in less than 3 percent of births (ACOG, 2017a). The health-care provider
attempts to deliver the anterior shoulder, but the shoulder lodges under the pubic bone and is not delivered. Figure
19.16 illustrates shoulder dystocia. Predicting shoulder dystocia is not always successful. Risk factors for shoulder
dystocia are obesity, excessive weight gain, multiparity, increased birth weight, and diabetes (Hill & Cohen, 2016).
However, 50 percent of shoulder dystocia occurs in normal-weight fetuses and persons who do not have diabetes;
therefore, the nurse should always be prepared for shoulder dystocia. A good predictor of shoulder dystocia is a past
shoulder dystocia.
850  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     FIGURE 19.16 Shoulder Dystocia Shoulder dystocia occurs when the anterior shoulder is stuck behind the pubic bone. (attribution:
     Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Complications of shoulder dystocia include increased risk of postpartum hemorrhage and perineal lacerations. Fetal
     complications include brachial plexus injuries and fractures of the clavicle and humerus (ACOG, 2017a). These
     injuries usually resolve; however, shoulder dystocia can cause fetal hypoxia and death.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     This video demonstrates a shoulder dystocia (https://openstax.org/r/77shldrdystocia) that leads to a brachial plexus
     injury.

     Management of shoulder dystocia should be systematic and rapid. The nurse and health-care providers must act
     quickly to resolve the dystocia. The nurse positions the person to help the provider perform maneuvers. The first
     maneuver is McRoberts maneuver, which is the process of flexing the laboring person's legs until the thighs touch
     the abdomen. Posterolateral suprapubic pressure is then provided in hopes of dislodging the shoulder from
     underneath the pubic bone. The nurse will need a stool to get above the person and give downward, lateral pressure
     with one or both hands toward the fetal-facing side. See Figure 19.17 for a demonstration of posterolateral
     suprapubic pressure. The nurse does not give fundal pressure because that impacts the shoulder further. If this
     maneuver is not successful, the health-care provider will attempt to deliver the posterior arm or attempt to turn the
     shoulders. The nurse is also prepared to turn the person to hands-and-knees position (Gaskin maneuver) if previous
     maneuvers are not successful. See Table 19.12 for a mnemonic, HELPERR, to remember the maneuvers for a
     shoulder dystocia.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  19.7 · Obstetrical Emergencies                                       851

FIGURE 19.17 Posterolateral Suprapubic Pressure Applying posterolateral suprapubic pressure in the event of shoulder dystocia can aid
in delivery. (credit: "Suprapubic-pressureforSD" by Henry Lerner/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 4.0)

Letter Stands For Intervention

H  Help         Shoulder dystocia is an emergency, and the nurse will need assistance.

E  Episiotomy An episiotomy might be made; the nurse will assist the provider as necessary.

L  Legs         Pull the legs back (McRoberts).

P  Pressure     Give posterolateral suprapubic pressure.

E  Enter        The provider enters the vagina and attempts to rotate the shoulder.

R  Remove       Remove the posterior arm.

R  Roll         Roll the person to all fours.

TABLE 19.12 HELPERR for Shoulder Dystocia (Baxley & Gobbo, 2004)

Prolapsed Cord

When the umbilical cord lies beside or in front of the fetal presenting part, it is called a prolapsed cord. This is an
emergency because oxygen is unable to reach the fetus due to cord occlusion. Figure 19.18 demonstrates a
prolapsed cord. A prolapsed cord is usually diagnosed after rupture of the amniotic membranes, either
spontaneously or artificially. The fetal monitor tracing will usually show a prolonged deceleration. The nurse
suspects a prolapsed cord and does a vaginal exam. Many times, the cord with pulsation is felt in the vagina. At
other times it cannot be palpated, but the assumption is made because of the prolonged deceleration. The nurse
will lift the presenting part off the cord to allow for perfusion to the fetus. The nurse calls for assistance while
keeping the presenting part elevated. An emergency cesarean birth will be performed, and the nurse's hand will
remain lifting the presenting part until the fetus is delivered.
852  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     FIGURE 19.18 Prolapsed Cord The cord is prolapsing in front of the fetal head, causing cord compression. (attribution: Copyright Rice
     University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)
     Nursing Actions for Prolapsed Cord

       1. Assess for the umbilical cord at the perineum.
       2. Perform a vaginal exam.
       3. If the cord is palpated, lift the presenting part off the cord.
       4. Observe the FHR to assess if that intervention relieved the compression and the FHR returned to normal.
       5. If no cord is palpated, lift the presenting part to evaluate if that could help relieve compression. If

             compression is relieved, do not remove the hand until birth.
       6. Avoid touching the cord because it can spasm and decrease perfusion.
       7. If lifting the presenting part does not relieve compression, turn the person onto their hands and knees, then

             lower the top part of the body with the buttocks remaining high in the air.
       8. Again evaluate for a cord.
       9. Monitor the FHR to assess for relief of compression.
     10. Prepare for emergency cesarean birth.

     Uterine Rupture

     A uterine rupture is defined as a tearing or an opening in the muscle of the uterus. Figure 19.19 illustrates a uterine
     rupture. It is seen more commonly in persons with a previous cesarean birth. Most ruptures occur during labor, but
     some occur during pregnancy. Uterine rupture is an emergency for the fetus and the pregnant person. The pregnant
     person can hemorrhage quickly, and the fetus can be deprived of oxygen. Time is important in this emergency. The
     nurse is aware that the fetus must be born quickly, usually via cesarean, and that the uterus must be repaired before
     the pregnant person has lost an excessive amount of blood.

     FIGURE 19.19 Uterine Rupture The uterus is ruptured, and the head of the fetus is protruding into the abdominal cavity. (attribution:
     Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Risk factors for uterine rupture are a history of a cesarean or other uterine surgery, uterine trauma, polyhydramnios,

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.7 · Obstetrical Emergencies                                                                                          853

and prolonged labor. If a fetal monitor is in place, the symptoms of uterine rupture are that the FHR no longer traces
and contractions are not present. If the patient does not have an epidural, they may notice a lack of pain. Other
signs could be late decelerations or prolonged decelerations and severe abdominal pain in the pregnant person.
Vaginal bleeding may or may not be seen (Lumala & Atwijukire, 2021).

The nurse caring for a pregnant person attempting a VBAC is aware of the higher risk for uterine rupture. The
pregnant person attempting a VBAC is on continuous monitoring to screen for fetal distress because this is
sometimes the first sign of uterine rupture. When uterine rupture is suspected, the nurse quickly calls for assistance
and prepares the person for an emergency cesarean birth. The nurse is prepared to order blood products because
risk for postpartum hemorrhage is high. The perinatal team will be in the operating room to care for a depressed
newborn.

Anaphylactoid Syndrome of Pregnancy

An anaphylactic reaction to amniotic fluid entering the respiratory system is anaphylactoid syndrome of pregnancy
(ASP), also known as amniotic fluid embolus. The incidence of ASP is anywhere from 1 in 80,000 to 1 in 20,000
pregnancies; the incidence has a large range because the clinical diagnosis of ASP is usually done retrospectively or
during autopsy (Barnhart & Rosenbaum, 2019).

For ASP to occur, an opening between the amniotic sac and the pregnant person's venous system must exist. This
happens at the time of rupture of membranes or at other times during labor and birth. Risk factors include:

    · multiparity
    · tachysystole
    · advanced maternal age
    · uterotonics
    · cesarean birth
    · uterine rupture
    · uterine trauma
    · premature separation of the placenta
    · IUFD

(Fox et al., 2019).

Amniotic debris, vernix, hair, and other tissue enters the cardiopulmonary system, leading to shock similar to sepsis
or anaphylaxis (Fox et al., 2019). Symptoms are respiratory distress, cyanosis, hypotension, and seizure. Treatment
is to support the person's respiratory and cardiovascular systems. Many persons go into cardiac arrest and require
intubation and ventilator support. The majority of persons experiencing ASP will have disseminated intravascular
coagulation. The mortality rate associated with ASP is 60 to 80 percent (Fox et al., 2019). Those who survive can
have neurologic damage leading to seizures, confusion, or coma (Kaur et al., 2016). The role of the nurse is to assist
the health-care provider, support the laboring person, and keep the family up to date on the interventions being
performed. The nurse also anticipates the need for escalation of care to the intensive care unit for the laboring
person and the NICU for the newborn.

Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation

The condition associated with the coagulation cascade in which the body releases all of its clotting and anti-clotting
factors, leading to massive hemorrhage and organ failure is disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) (Fox et al.,
2019). The incidence of DIC ranges from 0.03 percent to 0.35 percent, with developing countries having higher
incidences (Erez et al., 2022). DIC occurs in response to placental abruption, ASP, fetal demise, sepsis, and
preeclampsia. Symptoms of DIC are bleeding, petechiae, fever, hypotension, hypoxia, and localized hemorrhage.
Treatment is correcting the initial cause of DIC. Other treatments are blood and blood-product replacement,
intubation, and ventilation. Nurses are aware of the risk of DIC with preeclamptic persons who also have HELLP
syndrome (Erez, 2022). See Chapter 12 Pregnancy at Risk for a thorough discussion of DIC.
854  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     19.8 Complications of the Second Stage of Labor

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Describe the conditions related to dystocia, the medical intervention(s) for them, and nursing care during
             the second stage of labor

         · Describe the conditions related to FHR patterns, the medical intervention(s) for them, and nursing care
             during the second stage of labor

     Second stage labor is also known as the pushing stage. Complications can occur during this and any stage of labor.
     The laboring person is working very hard to push, and the fetus is working hard to be born. Because of the stress of
     pushing, the laboring person can become fatigued, and the fetus can exhibit distress. The nurse will monitor the
     laboring person and fetus for signs of distress. At times, the second stage can take longer than expected and may be
     diagnosed as prolonged second stage. At other times, the fetus has difficulty in engaging in the pelvis, causing
     failure to descend. The nurse works with the person to support the pushing effort and provide guidance and
     encouragement.

     Prolonged Second Stage

     Prolonged second stage labor is defined as a second stage labor lasting longer than 3 hours for a nulliparous person
     and longer than 2 hours for a multiparous person. Risk factors for prolonged second stage are use of epidural
     anesthesia, persistent occiput posterior position, and head circumference or birth weight above the 90th percentile
     (Lipschuetz et al., 2018). Complications to the birthing person resulting from prolonged second stage include
     chorioamnionitis, postpartum hemorrhage, operative vaginal birth, extended perineal lacerations, and cesarean
     birth. Prolonged second stage is also a risk factor for shoulder dystocia in the newborn.

     Failure to Descend
     Descent of the presenting part begins in active labor. During second stage labor, the fetal presenting part descends
     past the cervix, into the vagina, and out past the perineum. Failure to descend is defined as lack of change in the
     station for at least 2 hours. Many times, this is caused by fetal malpositioning, especially occiput posterior position
     (ACOG, 2020). Rotation of the fetal head by the health-care provider manually or with forceps can allow for increase
     in station and vaginal birth. At other times, failure to descend results in cesarean birth.

     Laboring Person Fatigue
     Second stage labor takes a great deal of energy and effort. Many times, laboring persons become fatigued and need
     a break from pushing. If the person can no longer continue pushing, the person is said to have labor fatigue. As
     discussed previously, one of the Ps of dystocia is power. With labor fatigue, the power is deficient, and second stage
     dystocia occurs. Labor fatigue can be prevented by waiting until the peak of the contraction to encourage the
     birthing person to bear down during contractions, providing food and drink to replenish calories, and allowing the
     fetus to descend or "labor down." The nurse can support the laboring person and encourage these interventions to
     help decrease fatigue.

     End-Stage Fetal Bradycardia

     During the second stage, the fetal head molds to fit through the pelvis. At times, the compression and molding cause
     FHR decelerations. These decelerations can be early (mirror the contraction), late (uteroplacental insufficiency), or
     prolonged (bradycardia lasting longer than 2 minutes). Monitoring the FHR can be difficult as the fetus descends.
     Therefore, the nurse must compare the laboring person's heart rate to the FHR to ensure the monitor is tracing the
     FHR. In cases of prolonged decelerations during the second stage, the health-care provider might expedite birth by
     performing an episiotomy, using forceps or a vacuum extractor, or by performing an emergency cesarean birth.

             LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

     Laboring Person Fatigue and Request for Cesarean Birth

     During the second stage, the laboring person can become very fatigued and discouraged. Many times, they will

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.9 · Complications in the Third Stage of Labor                                                                           855

request to have a cesarean birth to stop pushing. They are not always making a sound decision because of their
exhaustion. The nurse and health-care provider must closely evaluate the laboring person to determine if the fatigue
is leading to a prolonged second stage or if the person needs a rest. Periods of rest during the second stage allow
the person to relax, decrease stress, and regain focus. Rest is an important nursing intervention during second stage
of labor.

19.9 Complications in the Third Stage of Labor

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Explain the clinical manifestations, treatment, and nursing actions in the event of a retained placenta
    · Explain the clinical manifestations, treatment, and nursing actions in the event of an immediate

        postpartum hemorrhage
    · Explain the clinical manifestations, treatment, and nursing actions in the event of an inverted uterus

During the third stage of labor, the placenta and the membranes are birthed. Several complications can occur during
this stage. The placenta or parts of the placenta can be retained inside the uterus. The placenta can be implanted
into the muscle of the uterus as well. Complications with the placenta can lead to postpartum hemorrhage, which
can be a life-threatening complication. The nurse is prepared to treat postpartum hemorrhage quickly.

Retained Placenta

If the placenta has not delivered spontaneously within the expected 30 minutes, the health-care provider will
determine if manual removal is indicated. If manual removal is not possible, the anesthesia provider is alerted of the
need for a possible dilation and curettage (D&C) or hysterectomy. Occasionally, the placenta will partially detach,
and the birthing person will begin to bleed and pass clots vaginally. This is an emergency situation requiring manual
removal before the 30-minute waiting period. Nursing actions include emotional support and education of the
birthing person and support person, requesting assistance in notifying the anesthesia provider of the probable need
for surgery, administering pain medication, and administering uterotonics once the placenta is delivered.

Risk factors for retained placenta include uterine atony, placenta accreta spectrum, cervical closure, premature
birth, and previous retained placenta (Perlman & Carusi, 2019). Congenital uterine anomalies such as bicornuate
uterus increase the risk of retained placenta. Complications of retained placenta include postpartum hemorrhage,
endometritis, and retained placental tissue.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Manual removal of the placenta may be done by the health-care provider if the placenta or placental fragments are
retained. This video from Global Health Media (https://openstax.org/r/77placentaremov) shows the manual removal
of a placenta.

Cervical Closure
After birth of the infant, the cervix remains open until the birth of the placenta. Complications can occur if the cervix
closes prematurely. In those cases, the placenta becomes trapped in the uterus. Trapped placentas can lead to
postpartum hemorrhage. Treatment is administration of nitroglycerine to relax the uterus and cervix for manual
extraction of the placenta. After removal of the placenta, oxytocin should be given to contract the uterus to decrease
hemorrhage risk. The nurse will monitor vital signs, observing for hypotension, tachycardia, and inadequate oxygen
saturation.

Preterm Birth
In the third stage of labor, delayed umbilical cord clamping is recommended for the preterm fetus. Preterm infants
have increased incidences of blood transfusion, poor circulation, and intraventricular hemorrhage (Bennett et al.,
2019). Delayed cord clamping can help prevent some of these complications. However, preterm birth has a higher
incidence of retained placenta. If the placenta has not delivered within the expected 30 minutes, the nurse should
prepare for transferring the birthing person to the operating room for a D&C to remove the placenta.
856  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     Spontaneous Abortion
     The loss of a pregnancy prior to 20 weeks' gestation is called a spontaneous abortion (SAB). It can be complete or
     incomplete. With an incomplete abortion, products of conception, such as fetal or placental tissue, can be retained.
     If the tissue can be seen at the cervical os, the health-care provider can remove it using ring forceps. If the tissue
     cannot be removed and bleeding is present, the person is taken to surgery to have a D&C to remove those products.
     Infection and bleeding can occur if the uterus is not free of all products of conception.

     Placenta Accreta
     Placenta accreta is the invasive adherence of part or all of the placenta to the uterus. Placenta accreta spectrum
     disorder describes all invasive placenta occurrences (Oppenheimer & Singh, 2022). Table 19.13 lists the different
     types of placentas in the placenta accreta spectrum disorders. The incidence of these disorders has increased as
     the rate of cesarean births has increased. The pregnant person's risk is much higher, the more cesarean births that
     person has experienced. Other risk factors are age at delivery of 35 years or older, in vitro fertilization, placenta
     previa, and prior uterine surgery (Oppenheimer & Singh, 2022). The mortality rate of pregnant persons with placenta
     accreta spectrum disorder is approximately 7 percent.

     Placental Accreta                Description
     Spectrum Disorders

     Grade 1: Placenta accreta        Abnormal adherent placenta
                                      Adherent to the superficial myometrium

     Grade 2: Placenta increta        Abnormally invasive placenta
                                      Penetrate the uterine muscle but not to its full thickness

     Grade 3: Placenta percreta       Abnormally invasive placenta
                                      Penetrates the wall of the uterus, perforates the serosa, and may grow into the
                                      bladder or other pelvic tissue or organs

     TABLE 19.13 Placenta Accreta Spectrum Disorders (Oppenheimer & Singh, 2022)

             REAL RN STORIES

     Name: LW, RN
     Years in practice: 16
     Clinical setting: In-hospital labor and birth unit
     Facility location: South Carolina

     I remember being the labor nurse for a 21-year-old patient having her first baby. The labor and birth of the baby
     went well. Then, the midwife waited for signs of placenta separation. After 30 minutes the midwife attempted a
     manual removal and asked me to notify the physician backup that she was unable to separate the placenta from the
     uterine wall. The placenta was still undelivered when the physician arrived. After examining the patient, the
     physician informed the patient that the placenta was adhered to the uterus and a D&C was needed. Informed
     consent was obtained and I witnessed the consent. The patient had an epidural and the anesthesiologist re-dosed it
     for the procedure. The physician performed the D&C but was unable to prevent the uterus from continuing to bleed
     heavily. At this time a decision was made by the physician to perform a hysterectomy. The physician brought the
     patient's husband into the operating room and explained the situation to both the patient and her husband about
     the cause, need for, and long-term effects of a hysterectomy on a patient at the age of 21. After facing the future of
     no more biological children, the patient consented to the hysterectomy. This was not an easy decision for either the
     physician or the patient and her husband, but I will never forget this physician's patience when trying to prevent
     having to perform the hysterectomy and answering all the questions from the patient and her husband. When the
     pathology report on the uterus became available, the report stated the patient experienced placenta increta.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           19.9 · Complications in the Third Stage of Labor                                 857

Succenturiate Lobe of the Placenta
An accessory lobe of the placenta that is separate from the main placenta is called a succenturiate lobe. The blood
vessels feeding the lobe usually run through the membranes to the extra lobe. Figure 19.20 illustrates a
succenturiate lobe and vessels. If these vessels cross the cervix, they can create a vasa previa. During the third
stage of labor, the succenturiate lobe can be retained, which can cause postpartum hemorrhage or infection if not
removed.

FIGURE 19.20 Succenturiate Lobe with Placenta The main placenta sits at the top of the photograph. The succenturiate lobe is distal to
the main placenta. The vessels feeding the extra lobe are seen connecting to the main placenta. (credit: "Figure 2: Leash of blood vessels
running through the membranes connecting succenturiate lobe to main placental disc" by Snigdha Kumari et al/Edorium Journals, CC BY
4.0)

Immediate Postpartum Hemorrhage

Total blood loss greater than or equal to 1,000 mL or blood loss and signs or symptoms of hypovolemia within 24
hours after birth is considered postpartum hemorrhage. When hemorrhage occurs during the third stage of labor or
the first hour after birth, it is considered an immediate postpartum hemorrhage. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends that postpartum persons who have lost more than 500 mL of blood
after a vaginal delivery be assessed by the health-care provider. There are multiple causes of postpartum bleeding.
Table 19.14 describes the causes of postpartum hemorrhage using the four T's.

Considerations for  Cause for PPH
PPH

Tone                Uterine atony*

Trauma              Lacerations or uterine rupture

Tissue              Retained placenta or clots

Thrombin            Clotting-factor disorder (most likely genetic and listed in problem list of prenatal
                    record)

*Most common cause--70 percent of postpartum hemorrhages.

TABLE 19.14 Four T's of PPH (Bienstock et al., 2021)

Uterine Atony
Uterine atony is the most common cause of postpartum hemorrhage. The uterus can become atonic after
chorioamnionitis, magnesium sulfate infusion, prolonged or precipitous labor, overdistention of the uterus due to
858  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     twins or macrosomia, or cesarean birth. Nursing actions in the first hour after delivery include assessment of the
     location and tone of the uterus. Upon discovery of uterine atony, the nurse will start vigorous uterine massage.
     Treatment of uterine atony can be oxytocin (Pitocin), methylergonovine (Methergine), misoprostol (Cytotec),
     carboprost (Hemabate), tromethamine (Tham), and/or tranexamic acid (Cyklokapron). A full bladder can displace
     the uterus and not allow it to contract efficiently. The nurse empties the bladder to prevent or treat uterine atony.

     Retained Fragments of the Placenta
     After the placenta is delivered, the health-care provider will examine the placenta and membranes for
     completeness. Retained placental fragments or membranes can cause immediate postpartum hemorrhage. When
     fragments are retained in the uterus, the uterus is unable to contract properly to stop the spiral arteries from
     attempting to feed the placenta. If retained fragments are suspected, the health-care provider will manually
     evacuate the uterus.

     Lacerations
     Cervical and vaginal lacerations can cause immediate postpartum hemorrhage. Careful inspection is very important.
     If the nurse notices heavy vaginal bleeding and the uterus is contracted, inspection of the vagina for lacerations
     should occur. The health-care provider can assess for cervical lacerations using ring forceps to evaluate the
     completeness of the cervix. Lacerations are repaired using absorbable sutures. Figure 19.21 illustrates a cervical
     laceration.

     FIGURE 19.21 Cervical Laceration This cervix has a laceration at the 3 o'clock position. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
     under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Inversion of the Uterus

     When the uterus turns inside out, protruding through the vagina, called inversion of the uterus, it is a life-
     threatening complication in the third stage of labor (Kumari et al., 2022). This occurs more often with active
     management of the third stage. However, other risk factors can be precipitous labor, manual removal of the
     placenta, and traction on a short umbilical cord. The signs of uterine inversion are hemorrhage, shock, and pelvic
     pain. The nurse attempts to massage the uterus, but the fundus cannot be palpated. The most common
     complication is hypovolemic shock and vagal response to sudden stretching of the uterine ligaments (Kumari et al.,
     2022). Rapid treatment is necessary. The health-care provider will attempt to reposition the uterus by placing a fist
     in the uterus and keeping it in that position until the uterus contracts. Uterotonics will be administered once the
     uterus is returned to the proper position. The nurse will monitor for worsening signs of shock. Figure 19.22
     illustrates a uterine inversion.

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.10 · Monitoring the Person in Labor for Complications Developing During the Process of Labor and Birth                                    859

FIGURE 19.22 Inversion of the Uterus Inversion of the uterus is defined as the uterus turning inside out, protruding through the vagina,
and causing a life-threatening complication in the third stage of labor. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)

19.10 Monitoring the Person in Labor for Complications Developing During
the Process of Labor and Birth

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Explain the clinical manifestations, treatment, and nursing actions in the event of an undetected vaginal,
        cervical, or perineal laceration

    · Explain the clinical manifestations, treatment, and nursing actions in the event of altered perfusion and
        oxygenation of the person during labor and birth

    · Explain the clinical manifestations, treatment, and nursing actions in the event of altered neurologic
        function of the person during labor and birth

    · Explain the clinical manifestations, treatment, and nursing actions in the event of psychosocial
        dysfunction of the person during labor and birth

Certain complications develop during the process of labor and birth. These complications include undetected
lacerations, alteration in oxygenation, altered neurologic status, and psychosocial dysfunction. The nurse monitors
for and attempts to prevent these complications.

Undetected Lacerations

The nurse assesses lochia every 15 minutes during the first hour after birth. Normal lochia is dark red with small
clots. Bright red, brisk bleeding is not normal. If the uterus remains firm, undetected lacerations can be the cause of
the vaginal bleeding. Risk factors for perineal trauma include older age, higher BMI, primiparity, gestational
diabetes, hospital birth, longer second stage labor, and higher fetal weight and larger head circumference (Bczek et
al., 2022). Lacerations can lead to symptoms of hemorrhage (hypotension, tachycardia, and decreased oxygen
saturation) prior to the laceration being detected. The nurse examines the vagina and perineum to discover any
undetected lacerations. Once a laceration is detected, the health-care provider is notified, and the laceration is
repaired. The nurse will monitor for continued signs of bleeding. The hemoglobin and hematocrit will also be
monitored. The health-care team will use lab results, vital signs, and the postpartum person's ability to ambulate
and perform activities to determine the need for a blood transfusion.
860  19 · Complications of Labor and Birth

     Alterations in Perfusion

     Alterations in perfusion can occur during the birthing process. Pregnant persons with preeclampsia can have kidney
     damage due to vasoconstriction secondary to hypertension. They can also have a seizure (eclampsia) causing
     alteration in perfusion to the placenta and central nervous system. Preeclampsia with HELLP syndrome can lead to
     DIC, causing hemorrhage. Uterine atony can also lead to postpartum hemorrhage. Hemorrhage causes hypovolemia,
     which produces vasoconstriction in the peripheral vessels and shunting of blood to the vital organs. This causes
     alteration in perfusion of the extremities. Diabetes can decrease perfusion to the placenta because of abnormal
     aging of the placenta caused by elevated blood glucose. Other alterations in perfusion occurring during the
     postpartum period (hematoma, deep vein thrombosis, and pulmonary embolus) are discussed in Chapter 21
     Postpartum Complications.

     Signs of alteration in perfusion can be diminished peripheral pulses, decreased capillary refill, delay in milk
     production, and clammy, pale skin. Changes in vital signs can be seen, such as hypotension and tachycardia.
     Alteration in mental status can also occur. Kidney damage can result from hypertension, hypotension, or
     hypovolemia.

     Nursing interventions include monitoring and increasing perfusion in the laboring and birthing person and notifying
     the health-care provider. The nurse will evaluate vital signs, oxygen saturation, nail beds, gums, and mucosa for
     color and temperature. Lowering the head of the bed and elevating the legs perfuses the heart and brain. Oxygen is
     administered if needed (Obermeyer et al., 2022).

     Laboratory results should be monitored when altered perfusion is present. Proteinuria is present when kidneys are
     not being perfused. The 24-hour urinary output should be assessed. Hemoglobin, hematocrit, and platelets are
     monitored after postpartum hemorrhage. In massive hemorrhage or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
     clotting studies and plasma fibrinogen should be monitored.

     Alterations in Oxygenation

     Alterations in oxygenation can occur during labor and birth. The most common cause of oxygenation complications
     is hemorrhage. Complications can also be caused by eclampsia, pulmonary edema, and pulmonary embolus. Signs
     of alteration in oxygenation include restlessness, cyanosis, nasal flaring, orthopnea, and use of accessory muscles.
     The nurse will assess respiratory rate, use of accessory muscles, nasal flaring, and abnormal breathing patterns.
     Auscultation for decreased ventilation should be performed. The person with altered oxygenation may have altered
     mental status or confusion that should be monitored. Nail beds and skin should be assessed for cyanosis. A pulse
     oximeter should be used to monitor pulse and oxygen saturation. Arterial blood gas tests might be ordered, and
     results should be monitored. Nursing interventions are elevating the head of the bed; administering oxygen;
     encouraging slow, deep breathing; and splinting for those post-cesarean birth persons who are coughing. The most
     important intervention is treating the cause of the alteration in oxygenation.

     Alterations in Neurologic Function

     During pregnancy, birth, and the postpartum period, alterations in neurologic function can occur. The most common
     causes of these alterations are seizure, stroke, and ruptured brain aneurysm. These complications are most likely
     due to preeclampsia and eclampsia. Seizures, sudden abnormal electrical activity in the brain, can occur any time
     before, during, or after birth. The cause of progression from preeclampsia to eclampsia is unknown. Eclamptic
     seizures lead to hypoxia and neurologic dysfunction. Stroke can be attributed to severe hypertension. A stroke, or
     cerebrovascular accident (CVA), is a sudden loss of brain function due to lack of blood supply to the brain.
     Peripartum migraines, infection, and coagulation disorders have been associated with stroke (Zambrano & Miller,
     2019). Treatment of stroke requires rapid response from a multidisciplinary team. If the seizure or stroke is
     associated with hypertension, treatment should focus on reducing hypertension. A brain aneurysm is a bulging or
     weakening in a blood vessel in the brain. Aneurysms can rupture due to severe hypertension or preeclampsia. It is
     not within the scope of this text to discuss these disorders in detail. Refer to a medical-surgical text for in-depth
     discussion.

     Nursing assessment of these persons includes monitoring for level of consciousness, voluntary/involuntary
     movements of extremities, blood pressure, ability to speak, cognition, and oxygenation. The nurse will support the
     person by giving positive feedback, decreasing their anxiety, and involving the family in care. The nurse will monitor

     Access for free at openstax.org
19.10 · Monitoring the Person in Labor for Complications Developing During the Process of Labor and Birth                 861

for aspiration, thought processes, skin integrity, and improved mobility. The nurse will communicate with the health-
care provider if vital signs become abnormal or if the person is unusually confused or cannot communicate, loses
consciousness, or has another seizure.

Alterations in Psychosocial Function
Pregnancy, birth, and the postpartum period can be an exciting time for many people; however, others have
alterations in psychosocial functioning. Postpartum depression is a common change. Some persons have difficulty in
bonding with the newborn immediately after birth. Birth can trigger negative emotions in persons with a history of
rape or sexual assault. Birth trauma can occur from difficult births or from feelings of lack of autonomy or control.
Alterations in psychosocial functioning can also occur due to substance use. Pregnant persons are usually screened
for substance use during the prenatal period. These persons should be offered assistance for their substance use
disorder. When in labor, some persons are under the influence of substances. The nurse should be aware of the
symptoms of certain substances. Cocaine and methamphetamine use causes higher risk for migraines, seizures,
prelabor rupture of membranes, and placental abruption (National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2022). Infants born to
persons using stimulants have symptoms of irritability, hyperactivity, tremors, high-pitched cry, and excessive
sucking. Heroin use in pregnancy causes neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) in newborns; infants with NAS have
symptoms similar to those of stimulant-dependent newborns, with the addition of gastrointestinal problems
(National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2022). Alcohol use can result in fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, which affects
fetal brain development and can cause birth defects. These defects can cause emotional and cognitive problems for
the life of the offspring. If the nurse suspects the pregnant person is using an illegal substance, a drug screen can be
obtained during pregnancy and at delivery. The nurse should also notify the nursery or NICU if the results are
positive.
862 19 · Summary

Summary

19.1 Labor Dystocia

Labor dystocia can be caused by multiple factors. These factors are associated with power, passage, passenger,
psyche, or position. The uterine contraction pattern controls the power. The pelvis is considered the passage. The
fetus is the passenger. Position of the laboring person influences both the power and the passenger's descent.
When one or more of these factors are abnormal, labor dystocia occurs. The nurse is aware of the causes of labor
dystocia and the most common treatments to resolve those causes.

19.2 Medical Interventions During Labor

The physiologic influence of oxytocin on uterine contractions is well documented. It has been shown to increase
strength, frequency, and duration. Use of oxytocin can overcome some causes of inadequate contraction patterns,
such as maternal exhaustion. Other causes of inadequate contractions, such as fetal malposition or
chorioamnionitis, do not respond as well. Additionally, overstimulation of the uterine muscle using oxytocin and
prostaglandins can cause tachysystole and fetal hypoxia. If overstimulation is not corrected, uterine rupture,
hemorrhage, and fetal death can occur. The nurse is aware of the risks and benefits of oxytocin use and should
monitor the fetal heart rate (FHR) and uterine contractions to maintain maternal and fetal safety

Amnioinfusion is used to replace lost amniotic fluid. Amnioinfusion can also help resolve variable decelerations. Use
of amnioinfusion has been shown to decrease the incidence of cesarean birth. The nurse is aware of the benefits of
and contraindications to amnioinfusion.

19.3 Obstetrical Conditions Affecting Labor and Birth

Complications can occur during labor. These complications can be due to pregnancy-related issues or issues
beginning in labor. Meconium-stained fluid can appear during labor. Problems with the amniotic fluid amount occur
and at times require induction of labor. Infection can also be a complication during labor. Fetal complications can
arise during labor of multiple gestation, IUFD, and fetal malpresentation. Preterm and postdate deliveries each have
complications. Preeclampsia and gestational diabetes cause disruptions in the placenta, putting the fetus at risk for
uteroplacental insufficiency during labor.

Complications during labor affect the laboring person and the fetus. The nurse assesses for these complications and
is prepared for appropriate interventions. Complications during labor lead to parental anxiety, and the nurse can
help relieve this anxiety by educating the laboring person and support persons regarding the interventions being
performed. Preparation is key to addressing labor complications.

19.4 Preexisting Conditions of the Pregnant Person Placing the Delivery at Risk

Preexisting conditions of the pregnant person can cause complications during labor that affect the laboring person
and the fetus. Cardiovascular disorders and hypertension can lead to maternal morbidity and mortality. Preexisting
diabetes mellitus affects the blood glucose of both the laboring person and the fetus. Musculoskeletal disabilities
not only increase fetal risk but also make labor more difficult for persons who requires special equipment for
mobility. Alterations in nutrition increase the risk of fetal complications. Nursing interventions revolve around
knowledge of these conditions and individual plans of care.

19.5 Interventions During Birth

Operative delivery can be lifesaving for the fetus. These births can also cause complications to the laboring person
and fetus. Precautions are taken by the health-care provider, and nurses are prepared for emergencies. The nurse is
aware of the consequences of an operative delivery and is prepared for complications to the birthing person and
newborn.

19.6 Cesarean Section

Some pregnancy and labor complications can lead to a cesarean birth. These complications can be caused by
conditions of the fetus or the pregnant or laboring person. Fetal complications can be multiple gestation,
malpresentation, fetal distress, or placental abnormalities. Conditions related to the pregnant or laboring person
can be labor dystocia, preeclampsia, diabetes, and other chronic conditions. Cesarean births can be planned or

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             19 · Key Terms 863

caused by emergency complications. The nurse plays a vital role in preparing the laboring person for the cesarean
birth. The nurse ensures that bonding with the newborn occurs in the operating room if possible. For the person with
a previous cesarean birth, options are available for subsequent births, such as a trial of labor for vaginal birth after a
cesarean or repeat cesarean birth. The nurse can encourage the person to discuss the options with their health-care
provider.

19.7 Obstetrical Emergencies

The nurse is prepared for obstetric emergencies. Understanding risk factors leading to emergencies is critical. The
health-care team works together to resolve the emergency as quickly as possible. Most hospitals use emergency
drills to stay prepared for emergency situations.

19.8 Complications of the Second Stage of Labor

Second stage labor complications can include prolonged pushing, infection, decelerations, and exhaustion. Nurses
who assist laboring persons in the second stage can prevent exhaustion by coaching the laboring person. The
nurse's recognition of fetal distress is essential during the second stage of labor.

19.9 Complications in the Third Stage of Labor

Complications can arise during the third stage of labor. The placenta can be implanted abnormally. Retained
placenta or placental fragments can lead to postpartum hemorrhage. Postpartum hemorrhage can be a life-
threatening complication. Emergencies arising in the third stage are managed by the health-care team. The nurse
plays an important role in ensuring the safety of the birthing person.

19.10 Monitoring the Person in Labor for Complications Developing During the Process of
Labor and Birth

Monitoring the laboring and birthing person for complications is done by the nurse and health-care team.
Complications can arise that alter the perfusion, oxygenation, and neurologic status of the person. The nurse is
aware of the risk factors for these complications. The nurse also provides care during and after these complications.
The nurse monitors the person for progression of the problem or resolution of the complications. The safety of the
laboring person and fetus is of highest priority to the nurse.

Key Terms

amnioinfusion process of replacing amniotic fluid by adding fluid back to the uterus
anaphylactoid syndrome of pregnancy (ASP) (also: amniotic fluid embolus) anaphylactic reaction to amniotic

    fluid entering the respiratory system
Bishop score tool used to determine if the cervix is favorable
dystocia lack of progress during labor, which could make it prolonged or difficult
fetal dystocia complication in which the fetal head is unable to navigate through the pelvis
induction of labor stimulation of uterine contractions prior to the spontaneous onset of labor
inversion of the uterus uterus turning inside out, protruding through the vagina, and causing a life-threatening

    complication in the third stage of labor
labor augmentation enhancement of inadequate uterine contractions that have failed to cause cervical dilation,

    effacement, or fetal descent
McRoberts maneuver process of flexing the laboring person's legs until the thigh touches the abdomen
meconium-stained amniotic fluid brown or green staining of amniotic fluid due to the fetal passage of meconium
obstetric forceps metal instruments placed on the fetal head to assist in delivery of the fetus
operative delivery refers to the use of forceps or vacuum to assist with a vaginal birth
pelvic dystocia labor complication that occurs when the size of the fetal head is larger than the size of the

    maternal pelvis due to a small capacity of the pelvic inlet, midpelvis, or pelvic outlet
precipitous labor delivery that is extremely rapid and usually less than 3 hours from start of the contractions to

    birth
prolapsed cord umbilical cord lying beside or in front of the fetal presenting part
shoulder dystocia impaction of the fetal shoulder into the symphysis pubis or sacral promontory, preventing the

    delivery of the fetus
864 19 · Assessments

spontaneous abortion (SAB) loss of a pregnancy prior to 20 weeks' gestation
succenturiate lobe accessory lobe that is separate from the main placenta
uterine dystocia labor complication in which lack of cervical dilation occurs due to insufficient contraction

    strength, frequency, or duration
uterine rupture tearing or opening in the muscle of the uterus
uterine tachysystole more than five contractions occurring in 10 minutes averaged over 30 minutes
vacuum extractor device that uses suction to help deliver the fetal head
vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) successful trial of labor and eventual birth after a previous cesarean birth
vasa previa condition in which fetal vessels implant into the membranes and cross over the cervix in front of the

    fetal presenting part
velamentous insertion of the cord complication in which the vessels of the umbilical cord branch before reaching

    the placenta

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. What type of dystocia occurs when the fetal head is unable to navigate through the pelvis?
           a. uterine dystocia
           b. fetal dystocia
           c. pelvic dystocia
           d. contraction dystocia

    2. What type of dystocia should the nurse prepare for if she palpates prominent ischial spines during the vaginal
        exam?
           a. pelvic dystocia
           b. fetal dystocia
           c. contraction dystocia
           d. uterine dystocia

    3. What pregnant person is at high risk for labor dystocia?
           a. 38-week gestation
           b. 41-year-old
           c. prenatal anemia
           d. no prenatal care

    4. The nurse is caring for a pregnant person who was in a motor vehicle accident when she was younger and
        broke a bone in her pelvis. For what complication should the nurse be prepared?
           a. fetal dystocia
           b. pelvic dystocia
           c. uterine dystocia
           d. age dystocia

    5. What Bishop score describes the most favorable cervix?
           a. 2
           b. 4
           c. 6
           d. 8

    6. What is a possible complication of uterine tachysystole?
           a. Category I fetal heart rate tracing
           b. placenta previa
           c. fetal hypoxia
           d. prolapsed cord

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      19 · Assessments 865

 7. What can amniotomy cause?
         a. six-hour decrease of labor
         b. chorioamnionitis
         c. elevated blood pressure
         d. second stage labor dystocia

 8. What medication is used for cervical ripening?
         a. amniotomy
         b. Hemabate
         c. misoprostol
         d. progesterone

 9. How often is oxytocin usually increased for induction or augmentation of labor?
         a. every 10 minutes
         b. every 30 minutes
         c. every 60 minutes
         d. every 90 minutes

10. What is a potential complication for the neonate due to precipitous labor?
         a. respiratory distress
         b. low birth weight
         c. prelabor rupture of membranes
         d. placenta previa

11. What nursing intervention is performed during labor for a person with preeclampsia?
         a. Assess deep tendon reflexes for hyperreflexia.
         b. Provide frequent IV fluid boluses.
         c. Educate the laboring person that preeclampsia is only a concern for pregnancy, not labor.
         d. Discourage pain medication in order to assess for headache.

12. What is a condition in which there is an excessive amount of amniotic fluid surrounding the fetus?
         a. amniotic fluid embolism
         b. gestational diabetes
         c. oligohydramnios
         d. polyhydramnios

13. What is a possible complication of oligohydramnios?
         a. fetal macrosomia
         b. preterm labor
         c. placenta previa
         d. fetal growth restriction

14. What medication should the nurse anticipate administering when caring for a person with preeclampsia in
      labor?
         a. ampicillin
         b. magnesium sulfate
         c. nalbuphine hydrocholoride (Nubain)
         d. sodium bicarbonate

15. What is a potential sign of intrauterine fetal demise?
         a. increased fetal heart rate
         b. vaginal bleeding
         c. decreased or absent fetal movement
866 19 · Assessments

           d. macrosomia

  16. What is a potential complication when the fetus is footling breech?
           a. prolapsed cord
           b. oligohydramnios
           c. low biophysical profile score
           d. meconium-stained fluid

  17. Gestational diabetes increases what complication of labor?
           a. breech
           b. macrosomia
           c. postterm birth
           d. precipitous birth

  18. Multiple gestation can lead to what labor complication?
           a. tachysystole
           b. postterm birth
           c. uterine dystocia
           d. early declarations

  19. With what is malnutrition during pregnancy associated?
           a. fetal growth restriction
           b. fetal macrosomia
           c. group B strep
           d. precipitous birth

  20. What newborn complication does type 1 diabetes mellitus cause?
           a. hyperglycemia
           b. umbilical hernia
           c. hypoglycemia
           d. cyanosis

  21. With what has maternal hypertension been associated?
           a. anorexia
           b. low birth weight
           c. macrosomia
           d. symphysis pubis dysfunction

  22. What is one potential fetal complication of using obstetric forceps?
           a. flexion of the head
           b. abdominal complications
           c. skull fracture
           d. femur fracture

  23. What is one potential fetal complication of using the vacuum extractor?
           a. cephalohematoma
           b. face presentation
           c. fetal growth restriction
           d. scalp fracture

  24. What is a common reason for cesarean birth?
           a. cephalic presentation
           b. laboring person's BMI of 23

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      19 · Assessments 867

         c. labor dystocia
         d. lack of adequate pain control

25. What condition is related to an increased risk for fetal demise?
         a. diabetes
         b. migraine headache
         c. spina bifida
         d. thyroid disorder

26. Why is multiple gestation is a risk factor for cesarean delivery?
         a. cord prolapse
         b. increased pain in labor
         c. inability to push
         d. twins in cephalic-cephalic presentation

27. What is the condition where the umbilical cord vessels cross the cervix?
         a. placenta previa
         b. placenta cervix
         c. velamentous insertion
         d. vasa previa

28. What is the condition in which the umbilical cord vessels branch prior to insertion into the placenta?
         a. placenta previa
         b. placenta cervix
         c. velamentous insertion
         d. vasa previa

29. What is a sign of fetal distress?
         a. prolonged moderate variability
         b. accelerations
         c. repetitive late decelerations
         d. variable decelerations

30. Shoulder dystocia is difficult to predict. What are thought to be predictors for shoulder dystocia? Select all
      that apply.

         a. estimated birth weight of 4,000 g
         b. gestational diabetes
         c. previous shoulder dystocia
         d. oligohydramnios
         e. hypertension
          f. preterm delivery

31. How soon should delivery of the fetus occur when a Category III FHR tracing is diagnosed?
         a. 15 minutes
         b. 30 minutes
         c. 45 minutes
         d. 60 minutes

32. What is a complication of uterine rupture?
         a. DIC
         b. nuchal cord
         c. polyhydramnios
868 19 · Assessments

           d. oligohydramnios

  33. What is the nursing intervention for prolapsed cord?
           a. Turn the person to the side.
           b. Give the person oxygen.
           c. Lift the presenting part off the cord.
           d. Increase the oxytocin.

  34. At what point is the second stage considered prolonged for a nulliparous laboring person?
           a. 1 hour
           b. 2 hours
           c. 3 hours
           d. 4 hours

  35. What is a potential risk associated with prolonged second stage labor?
           a. decreased risk of instrumental delivery
           b. decreased risk of cesarean birth
           c. increased risk of fetal distress
           d. increased risk of rapid delivery

  36. What intervention may be used to manage failure to descend during labor?
           a. administering pain medication
           b. allowing the patient to rest
           c. continuing to push for an extended period of time
           d. using forceps or a vacuum to assist delivery

  37. The placenta is diagnosed as retained when it is not delivered in what timeframe after the birth of the infant?
           a. 10 minutes
           b. 30 minutes
           c. 1 hour
           d. 2 hours

  38. In a spontaneous abortion, if bleeding from the retained products of conception cannot be stopped, what is
        the next course of action?
           a. surgery for a dilation and curettage
           b. surgery for a hysterectomy
           c. administration of magnesium sulfate
           d. administration of calcium gluconate

  39. What is the most common cause of placenta accreta?
           a. malnutrition
           b. smoking
           c. previous cesarean birth
           d. obesity

  40. How much blood loss must occur to define the loss as a postpartum hemorrhage?
           a. 250 mL
           b. 500 mL
           c. 750 mL
           d. 1,000 mL

  41. What medication is administered to treat uterine atony?
           a. ampicillin

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         19 · Assessments 869

           b. nitroglycerine
           c. magnesium sulfate
           d. methylergonovine

  42. What complication makes uterine inversion an emergency?
           a. shock
           b. pain
           c. retained placenta
           d. hypertension

  43. Decreased capillary refill, delay in milk production, and diminished peripheral pulses are signs of what
        complication?
           a. alteration in perfusion
           b. alteration in liver function
           c. alteration in kidney function
           d. alteration in uterine function

  44. The nurse is caring for a postpartum person after a hemorrhage. How does the nurse monitor for decreased
        perfusion?
           a. Monitor lochia.
           b. Measure blood loss.
           c. Check temperature.
           d. Monitor 24-hour urine output.

  45. What condition do restlessness, cyanosis, nasal flaring, orthopnea, and use of accessory muscles indicate?
           a. liver failure
           b. alteration in oxygenation
           c. preeclampsia
           d. gestational diabetes

  46. The nurse will monitor for aspiration, thought processes, and improved mobility after which complication?
           a. neurologic dysfunction
           b. kidney failure
           c. gestational diabetes
           d. postpartum hemorrhage

  47. What complications can cocaine and methamphetamine use in pregnancy cause?
           a. seizures
           b. hypotonic contractions
           c. prolonged second stage labor
           d. prolonged first stage labor

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. Explain the difference between a normal contraction pattern and patterns demonstrating uterine dystocia.

    2. What causes a pregnant person to be at risk for labor dystocia?

    3. Explain how fetal dystocia affects the second stage of labor.

    4. What is the Bishop score of this cervix: 1 cm, anterior position, 50 percent effacement, -2 station, medium
        consistency?

    5. Describe the characteristics and risk factors for preterm labor.

    6. Describe common risk factors and fetal complications related to meconium-stained fluid.
870 19 · Assessments

    7. Name the risk factors for chorioamnionitis.
    8. Explain how preeclampsia is associated with fetal hypoxia during labor.
    9. What newborn complications are associated with the laboring person who has an eating disorder?
  10. Discuss indications for operative delivery.
  11. Explain the options for subsequent births in a person with a previous cesarean birth.
  12. How does preeclampsia increase the risk for cesarean birth?
  13. Describe the complications of fetal distress.
  14. Describe the risk factors for uterine rupture.
  15. How can the nurse support the laboring person to decrease the risk of exhaustion?
  16. Describe complications related to succenturiate lobe of the placenta.
  17. Explain the 4 T's related to postpartum hemorrhage.
  18. What is the difference between normal lochia and bleeding related to an undetected laceration?
  19. How does uterine atony contribute to alteration in perfusion to the extremities?

Reflection Questions

    1. Explain why the laboring person with polyhydramnios is at risk for labor dystocia.
    2. Explain how pelvic dystocia can cause malpositioning of the fetal head and stalling of cervical dilation.
    3. What are the contraindications to induction of labor?
    4. How will the nurse prepare for the delivery of twins?
    5. How can the nurse prepare the parents for delivery of an intrauterine fetal demise?
    6. What nursing interventions are necessary for the laboring person with heart disease?
    7. Describe possible labor complications associated with maternal musculoskeletal disorders.
    8. How does the nurse prepare the person for an operative birth?
    9. Explain placental abruption and its emergency status.
  10. Discuss umbilical cord problems that indicate the need for a cesarean birth.
  11. The nurse is caring for a 40-year-old person with preeclampsia during labor induction. The nurse sees

        bleeding at the IV site and the site where the lab drew blood this morning. What complication should the
        nurse predict and why?
  12. What is the recommended course of action for the nurse in the case of end-stage prolonged fetal bradycardia
        during labor?
  13. Describe the interventions used during a postpartum hemorrhage.
  14. Explain how preeclampsia can cause neurologic dysfunction.

Critical-Thinking Questions about Case Studies

    1. Refer to Labor and Delivery: Part 2.
        List two complications of labor and birth Brianne is at risk for due to the protracted active phase. Provide a
        rationale for each complication.

    2. Refer to Labor and Delivery: Part 2.
        Describe the purpose for artificial rupture of membranes and insertion of the intrauterine pressure catheter.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            19 · References 871

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. A patient in active labor experiences a persistent arrest of descent. How should a nurse explain the pelvic
        causes of dystocia in this case, and what nursing strategies might a nurse employ to manage dystocia related
        to pelvic factors?

    2. A laboring patient presents with a persistent occiput posterior position. How should a nurse explain the fetal
        causes of dystocia in this situation, and what nursing interventions might be beneficial in managing dystocia
        related to fetal factors?

    3. A patient in active labor shows signs of slowed progress. How should a nurse explain the reasons for
        augmenting labor, and what nursing actions could be employed to facilitate the augmentation process?

    4. A patient experiences variable decelerations in fetal heart rate patterns, and the health-care provider orders
        amnioinfusion. How would you explain the reasons for amnioinfusion, and what nursing actions should be
        implemented during and after the procedure?

    5. A pregnant patient has a preexisting endocrine condition like diabetes. How should a nurse explain the
        pathophysiology of endocrine conditions that can place the birth at risk, and what nursing strategies might be
        employed to manage and optimize outcomes in such cases?

    6. A pregnant patient has a preexisting musculoskeletal condition, such as scoliosis. How should a nurse explain
        the pathophysiology of musculoskeletal conditions that can place the birth at risk, and what nursing
        considerations should be taken into account for managing labor and delivery in such cases?

    7. A laboring patient is experiencing prolonged second stage labor. How would you recognize the need for
        forceps assistance, and what obstetric indications would justify the use of forceps during birth? Additionally,
        what nursing considerations should be taken into account?

    8. A laboring person is being prepared for an operative vaginal birth. What nursing care considerations should be
        discussed with the patient and the health-care team? How can a nurse provide support to the patient during
        this process?

    9. A delivery is complicated by shoulder dystocia. What maneuvers can be employed to resolve shoulder
        dystocia, and how do you prioritize them? Discuss the potential complications of shoulder dystocia and how
        nursing actions contribute to minimizing risks.

  10. Describe prolapsed cord, the nursing actions in response to prolapsed cord, and the potential complications
        associated with this obstetric emergency.

  11. A patient is suspected of having uterine rupture. How can nursing actions contribute to the early detection
        and management of uterine rupture? Discuss the potential complications associated with uterine rupture and
        the role of the nurse in minimizing risks.

References

Aiken, C., Aiken, A., & Brockelsby, J. (2017). 824: A propensity scoring analysis of maternal and neonatal adverse
   outcomes associated with precipitous labor. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 216(1),
    S472-S473. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2016.11.733

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2009a). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 106: Intrapartum fetal
   heart rate monitoring: Nomenclature, interpretation, and general management principles. Obstetrics &
   Gynecology, 114 (1), 192-202. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0b013e3181aef106.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2009b). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 107: Induction of labor.
   Obstetrics & Gynecology, 114, 386-397. https://doi.org/10.1097/aog.0b013e3181b48ef5

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2014). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 146: Management of late-
   term and postterm pregnancies. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 124(2), 390-396. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    01.AOG.0000452744.06088.48

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2016). ACOG Committee Opinion Nu. 657: The obstetric and
872 19 · References

   gynecologic hospitalist. Reaffirmed 2022. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 127, e81-85. https://www.acog.org/-
    /media/project/acog/acogorg/clinical/files/committee-opinion/articles/2016/02/the-obstetric-and-gynecologic-
    hospitalist.pdf

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017a). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 178: Shoulder dystocia.
   Obstetrics & Gynecology, 129(5), e123-e133. https://doi.org/10.1097/aog.0000000000002043

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017b). ACOG Committee Opinion No. 712: Intrapartum
   management of intraamniotic infection. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 130(2), e95-e101. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000002236

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017c). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 183: Postpartum
   hemorrhage. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 130(4), e168-186. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000002351

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018a). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 190: Gestational
   diabetes mellitus. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 131(2), e49-e64. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000002501

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018b). ACOG Committee Opinion No. 745: Mode of term
   singleton breech delivery. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 132 (2), e60-e63. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000002755

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018c). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 201: Pregestational
   diabetes mellitus. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 132(6), e228-e248. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000002960

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018d). Obstetric care consensus: Placenta accreta
   spectrum. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 132(6), e259-e275. https://www.acog.org/-/media/project/acog/acogorg/
    clinical/files/obstetric-care-consensus/articles/2018/12/placenta-accreta-spectrum.pdf

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018e, reaffirmed 2024). Committee Opinion No. 751: Labor
    and delivery management of women with human immunodeficiency virus infection. https://www.acog.org/
    clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-opinion/articles/2018/09/labor-and-delivery-management-of-women-
    with-human-immunodeficiency-virus-infection

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019a). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 203: Chronic
   hypertension in pregnancy. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 133(1), e26-e50. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000003020.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019b). ACOG Committee Opinion No. 766: Approaches to
   limit intervention during labor and birth. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 133(2), e164-e173. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000003074.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019c). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 212: Pregnancy and
   heart disease. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 133(5), e320-e356. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000003243

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019d). Practice Bulletin No. 205: Vaginal birth after
   previous cesarean section. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 133(2), 393-395. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000003079

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020a). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 219: Operative vaginal
   delivery. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 135(4), e149-e159. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000003764

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2020b). Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia.
   Obstetrics & Gynecology, 135 (6), e237-e260. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000003891

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 231: Multifetal gestations:
   Twin, triplet, and higher-order multifetal pregnancies. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 137(6), e145-e162.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000004397

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            19 · References 873

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2024). ACOG Clinical Practice Guideline No. 8. First and
   second stage labor management: Obstetrics & Gynecology 143(1), 144-162. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000005447

Aragie, H., & Oumer, M. (2021). Marginal cord insertion among singleton births at the University of Gondar
   Comprehensive Specialized Hospital, Northwest Ethiopia. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth, 21(1), 211.
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-021-03703-x

Aristizabal, M. (2019). Natural labor and birth: An evidence-based guide to the natural birth plan. McGraw-Hill
    Education.

Association of Women's Health, Obstetric, and Neonatal Nursing. (2022). Antepartum and intrapartum fetal heart
   rate monitoring: Clinical competencies and education guide (7th ed.). Author.

Atia, Ellaithy, M., Altraigey, A., Kolkailah, M., Alserehi, A., & Ashfaq, S. (2018). Mechanical induction of labor and
   ecbolic-less vaginal birth after cesarean section: A cohort study. Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology,
   57(3), 421-426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tjog.2018.04.017

Bczek, G., Rzoca, E., Sys, D., Rychlewicz, S., Durka, A., Rzoca, P., & Bie, A. (2022). Spontaneous perineal trauma
   during non-operative childbirth--Retrospective analysis of perineal laceration risk factors. International Journal
   of Environmental Research and Public Health, 19(13), 7653. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19137653

Banday, M. Z., Sameer, A. S., & Nissar, S. (2020). Pathophysiology of diabetes: An overview. Avicenna Journal of
   Medicine, 10(4), 174-188. https://doi.org/10.4103/ajm.ajm_53_20

Barnhart, M. L., & Rosenbaum, K. (2019). Anaphylactoid syndrome of pregnancy. Nursing for Women's Health, 23(1),
    38-48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nwh.2018.11.006

Baxley, E. G., & Gobbo, R. W. (2004). Shoulder dystocia. American Family Physician, 69(7), 1707-1714.
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15086043/

Bennett, T., Proudfit, C., & Roman, A. S. (2019). Normal & abnormal labor & delivery. In A. H. DeCherney, L. Nathan,
   N. Laufer, & A. S. Roman (Eds.), CURRENT Diagnosis & Treatment: Obstetrics & Gynecology (12th ed.). McGraw
    Hill.

Bianchi, D. W., Crombleholme, T. M., D'Alton, M. E., & Malone, F. D. (Eds.). (2010). Oligohydramnios. In Fetology:
   Diagnosis and management of the fetal patient. (2nd ed.). McGraw Hill.

Bienstock, J., Eke, A. C., & Hueppchen, N. A. (2021). Postpartum hemorrhage. The New England Journal of
   Medicine, 384(17), 1635-1645. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra1513247

Bjellmo, S., Andersen, G. L., Martinussen, M. P., Romundstad, P. R., Hjelle, S., Moster, D., & Vik, T. (2016). Is vaginal
    breech delivery associated with higher risk for perinatal death and cerebral palsy compared with vaginal cephalic
   birth? Registry-based cohort study in Norway. BMJ Open, 7, e014979. https://doi.org/10.1136/
    bmjopen-2016-014979

Burton, C. J., & Jauniaux, E. (2018). Pathophysiology of placental-derived fetal growth restriction. American Journal
   of Obstetrics & Gynecology,218(2 supplement), S745-S761. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2017.11.577

Canobbio, M. M., Warnes, C. A., Aboulhosn, J., Connolly, H. M., Khanna, A., Koos, B. J., Mital, S., Rose, C., Silversides,
    C., & Stout, K. (2017). Management of pregnancy in patients with complex congenital heart disease: A scientific
   statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation, 135(8), e50-e87.
    https://doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020, September 3). Spina bifida. https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/
    spinabifida/facts.html#types

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022). Gestational diabetes. https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/basics/
    gestational.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023, October 24). Preterm birth. https://www.cdc.gov/
    reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/pretermbirth.htm
874 19 · References

Cohen, W. H., & Friedman, E. A. (2024, March). The second stage of labor. American Journal of Obstetrics and
   Gynecology, 230, S865-S875. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2022.06.014

Conde-Agudelo, A., Romero, R., Jung, E. J., & Garcia Sánchez, Á. J. (2020). Management of clinical chorioamnionitis:
   An evidence-based approach. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 223(6), 848-869. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.ajog.2020.09.044

Content Engine (Trans.). (2023). Polyhydramnios: What are its symptoms, causes and treatment? (English ed.).
    ContentEngine LLC.

Danei, S., Kasim, N. I., & Takai, I. U. (2022). Clinical audit of the management and outcomes of preterm pre-labour
   rupture of membranes at Aminu Kano Teaching Hospital. Pan African Medical Journal, 43, 41. https://doi.org/
    10.11604/pamj.2022.43.41.32790

Dashe, J., Pressman, E., & Hibbard, U. (2018). SMFM Consult Series No. 46: Evaluation and management of
   polyhydramnios. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 219(4), B2-B8. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.ajog.2018.07.016

El-Chaar, D. (2022). Cesarean section. In G. D. Posner, A. Y. Black, G. Jones, & D. El-Chaar (Eds.), Oxorn-Foote
   human labor & birth (7th ed.). McGraw Hill.

Elfazari, T., & El-Chaar, D. (2022). Breech presentation. In G. D. Posner, A. Y. Black, G. Jones, & D. El-Chaar (Eds.),
   Oxorn-Foote human labor & birth (7th ed.). McGraw Hill.

Erez, O. (2022). Disseminated intravascular coagulation in pregnancy: New insights. Thrombosis Update, 6.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tru.2021.100083

Erez, O., Othman, M., Rabinovich, A., Leron, E., Gotsch, F., & Thachil, J. (2022). DIC in pregnancy--Pathophysiology,
   clinical characteristics, diagnostic scores, and treatments. Journal of Blood Medicine, 13, 21-44. https://doi.org/
    10.2147/JBM.S273047

Fadel, N., & Mashally, S. (2022). The newborn infant. In G. D. Posner, A. Y. Black, G. Jones, & D. El-Chaar (Eds.),
   Oxorn-Foote human labor & birth (7th ed.). McGraw Hill.

Fernández-Carrasco, Cristóbal-Cañadas, D., Gómez-Salgado, J., Vázquez-Lara, J. M., Rodríguez-Díaz, L., & Parrón-
    Carreño, T. (2022). Maternal and fetal risks of planned vaginal breech delivery vs planned caesarean section for
   term breech birth: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Global Health, 12, 04055-04055.
    https://doi.org/10.7189/jogh.12.04055

Fox N. S., Weiss J., & Smith, R. S. (2019). Critical care obstetrics. In A. H. DeCherney, L. Nathan, N. Laufer, & A. S.
   Roman (Eds.), CURRENT Diagnosis & Treatment: Obstetrics & Gynecology (12th ed.). McGraw Hill.

Hernandez Engelhart, C., Gundro Brurberg, K., Aanstad, K. J., Pay, A. S. D., Kaasen, A., Blix, E., & Vanbelle, S. (2023).
   Reliability and agreement in intrapartum fetal heart rate monitoring interpretation: A systematic review. Acta
   Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica, 102(8), 970-985. https://doi.org/10.1111/aogs.14591

Hill, M. G., & Cohen, W. R. (2016). Shoulder dystocia: Prediction and management. Women's Health (London,
   England), 12(2), 251-261. https://doi.org/10.2217/whe.15.103

Kaur, K., Bhardwaj, M., Kumar, P., Singhal, S., Singh, T., & Hooda, S. (2016). Amniotic fluid embolism. Journal of
   Anaesthesiology, Clinical Pharmacology, 32(2), 153-159. https://doi.org/10.4103/0970-9185.173356

Kawakita, T., Wilson, K., Grantz, K. L., Landy, H. J., Huang, C. C., & Gomez-Lobo, V. (2016). Adverse maternal and
   neonatal outcomes in adolescent pregnancy. Journal of Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology, 29(2), 130-136.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpag.2015.08.006

Krzyanowski, Kwiatek, M., Gca, T., Stupak, A., & Kwaniewska, A. (2019). Modern ultrasonography of the umbilical
   cord: Prenatal diagnosis of umbilical cord abnormalities and assessment of fetal wellbeing. Medical Science
   Monitor, 25, 3170-3180. https://doi.org/10.12659/MSM.913762

Kuba, K., Kirby, M. A., Hughes, F., & Yellon, S. M. (2023). Reassessing the Bishop score in clinical practice for
   induction of labor leading to vaginal delivery and for evaluation of cervix ripening. Placenta and Reproductive

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            19 · References 875

   Medicine, 2, 8. https://doi.org/10.54844/prm.2023.0353

Kumari, S., Singh, V., Ray, A., & Swain, A. (2022). Post-partum complete acute uterine inversion: A coordinated
   multi-disciplinary approach ameliorates an obstetric nightmare, a case report. Journal of Family Medicine and
   Primary Care, 11(2), 793-795. https://doi.org/10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_1164_21

Leathersich, S. J., Vogel, J. P., Tran, T. S., & Hofmeyr, G. J. (2018). Acute tocolysis for uterine tachysystole or
   suspected fetal distress. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 7(7), CD009770. https://doi.org/
    10.1002/14651858.CD009770.pub2

Li, Y., Tian, Y., Liu, N., Chen, Y., & Wu, F. (2019). Analysis of 62 placental abruption cases: Risk factors and clinical
   outcomes, Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 58(2), 223-226. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.tjog.2019.01.010

Lipschuetz, M., Cohen, S. M., Lewkowicz, A. A., Amsalem, H., Haj Yahya, R., Levitt, L., & Yagel, S. (2018). Prolonged
   second stage of labor: Causes and outcomes. Harefuah, 157(11), 685-690. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    30457229/

Lumala, A., & Atwijukire, V. (2021). Non-haemorrhagic uterine rupture at 28 weeks of pregnancy following previous
   caesarean section: A case report. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth, 21, 529. https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s12884-021-03990-4

Lyndon, A., & Wisner, K. (2021). Fetal heart monitoring principles and practices (6th ed.). AWHONN.

McCance, K. L., & Huether, S. E. (2023). Pathophysiology: The biologic basis for disease in adults & children (9th
    ed.). Mosby.

Metz, T. D., Berry, R. S., Fretts, R. C., Reddy, U. M., & Turrentine, M. A. (2020). Obstetric Care Consensus #10:
   Management of stillbirth. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 222(3), B2-B19. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.ajog.2019.01.017

Mitchell, S. & Chandraharan, E. (2018). Meconium-stained amniotic fluid. Obstetrics, Gynaecology & Reproductive
    Medicine, 28(4), 120-124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ogrm.2018.02.004

Mohammed, R., & El-Chaar, E. (2022). Labor dystocia. In G. D. Posner, A. Y. Black, G. Jones, & D. El-Chaar (Eds.),
   Oxorn-Foote human labor & birth (7th ed.). McGraw Hill.

Morlando, M., & Collins, S. (2020). Placenta accreta spectrum disorders: Challenges, risks, and management
   strategies. International Journal of Women's Health, 12, 1033-1045. https://doi.org/10.2147/IJWH.S224191

Nadar, A. N., & Sirisha, P. (2018). Comparative study of oral PGE 1 and intracervical PGE2 gel for pre-induction
   cervical ripening in prelabour rupture of membranes >37 weeks gestational age. International Journal of
   Reproduction, Contraception, Obstetrics, & Gynecology, 7(1), 1801-1807. https://doi.org/10.18203/
    2320-1770.ijrcog20181906

Narbhavi, T. D., Cicily, T. J., & Kala, B. S. (2020). Prophylactic amnioinfusion in oligohydramnios. International
   Journal of Reproduction, Contraception, Obstetrics and Gynecology, 9(1), 305. https://doi.org/10.18203/
    2320-1770.ijrcog20196039

National Institute on Drug Abuse. (2022, May 4). Substance use while pregnant and breastfeeding.
    https://nida.nih.gov/publications/research-reports/substance-use-in-women/substance-use-while-pregnant-
    breastfeeding

Obermeyer, S., Mielke, R. R., & Lederhos, H. L. (2022). The role of perinatal nurses in the use of tranexamic acid
   during postpartum hemorrhage. Nursing for Women's Health, 26(1), 63-71. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.nwh.2021.12.003

Oppenheimer, L., & Singh, S. S. (2022). Delivery of the placenta, retained placenta, and placenta accreta spectrum
   disorder. In G. D. Posner, A. Y. Black, G. Jones, & D. El-Chaar (Eds.), Oxorn-Foote human labor & birth (7th ed.).
    McGraw Hill.

Patel, T. L., & Rathod, D. A. (2022). Study of maternal and perinatal outcome in post-dated pregnancy. International
876 19 · References

   Journal of Reproduction, Contraception, Obstetrics and Gynecology, 11(5), 1507. https://doi.org/10.18203/
    2320-1770.ijrcog20221285

Penuela, I., Isasi-Nebreda, P., Almeida, H., Lopez, M., Gomez-Sanchez, E., & Tamayo, E. (2019). Epidural anesthesia
   and its implications in the maternal health in a low parity community. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth, 19(52),
    1-9. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-019-2191-0

Perlman, N., & Carusi, D. (2019). Retained placenta after vaginal delivery: Risk factors and management.
   International Journal of Women's Health, 11, 527-534. https://doi.org/10.2147/IJWH.S218933

Petrangelo, A., Alshehri, E., Czuzjo-Shulman, N., & Abenhaim, H. A. (2017). 773: Maternal and neonatal outcomes in
   pregnancies affected by muscular dystrophy: A retrospective study. American Journal of Obstetrics and
   Gynecology, 218(1), S462-S462. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2017.11.305.

Rahimian, J. (2019). Disproportionate fetal growth. In A. H. DeCherney, L. Nathan, N. Laufer, & A. S. Roman (Eds.),
   CURRENT Diagnosis & Treatment: Obstetrics & Gynecology (12th ed.). McGraw Hill.

Roche, P., & Bouhour, F. (2021). Myasthenia gravis and pregnancy. Revue Neurologique, 177(3), 215-219.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurol.2020.09.015

Rosen, H., & Yogev, Y. (2023). Assessment of uterine contractions in labor and delivery. American Journal of
   Obstetrics and Gynecology, 228(5), S1209-S1221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2022.09.003

Ruys, T., Cornette, J., & Roos-Hesselink, J. (2013). Pregnancy and delivery in cardiac disease. Journal of Cardiology,
   61(2), 107-112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jjcc.2012.11.001

Sebastiani, G., Andreu-Fernández, V., Herranz Barbero, A., Aldecoa-Bilbao, V., Miracle, X., Meler Barrabes. E.,
    Ibañez, A. B., Astals-Vizcaino, M., Ferrero-Martínez, S., Gómez-Roig, M. D., & García-Algar, O. (2020). Eating
   disorders during gestation: Implications for mother's health, fetal outcomes, and epigenetic changes. Frontiers in
   Pediatrics, 8, 587-587. https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2020.00587.

Shabib, G., & Black, A. (2022). Operative vaginal birth. In G. D. Posner, A. Y. Black, G. Jones, & D. El-Chaar (Eds.),
   Oxorn-Foote human labor & birth (7th ed.). McGraw Hill.

Sukumaran, S., Jia, Y., & Chandraharan, E. (2021). Uterine tachysystole, hypertonus, and hyperstimulation: An
   urgent need to get the definitions right to avoid intrapartum hypoxic-ischemic brain injury. Global Journal of
   Reproductive Medicine, 8(2), 5556735. http://dx.doi.org/10.19080/GJORM.2021.08.555735

Sundelin, H., Stephansson, O., Johansson, S., & Ludvigsson, J. F. (2020). Pregnancy outcome in women with
   cerebral palsy: A nationwide population-based cohort study. Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica,
   99(4), 2020, 518-524. https://doi.org/10.1111/aogs.13773

Suzuki S. (2015). Clinical significance of precipitous labor. Journal of Clinical Medicine Research, 7(3), 150-153.
    https://doi.org/10.14740/jocmr2058w

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (n.d.). Pitocin (oxytocin injection, USP) synthetic. Access Data.
    https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2014/018261s031lbl.pdf

Uvnäs-Moberg, K. (2024, March). The physiology and pharmacology of oxytocin in labor and in the peripartum
   period. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 230, S740-S758. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.ajog.2023.04.011.

Vallerand, A. H., & Sanoski, C. A. (Eds.). (2021). Davis's drug guide for nurses (17th ed.). F. A. Davis.

Wagner S.A. (2019). Third-trimester vaginal bleeding. In A. H. DeCherney, L. Nathan, N. Laufer, & A. S. Roman (Eds.),
   CURRENT Diagnosis & Treatment: Obstetrics & Gynecology (12th ed.). McGraw Hill.

Waldenstrom, U., & Ekeus, C. (2017). Risk of labor dystocia increases with maternal age irrespective of parity: A
   population-based register study. Acta Ostetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica, 96(9), 1033-1152.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/aogs.13167

Wennerholm, U., Saltvedt, S., Wessberg, A., AlkMark, M., Bergh, C., Brismar, W., Wendel, S., Fadl, H., Jonsson, M.,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            19 · References 877

    Ladfors, L., Sengpiel, V., Wesstrom, J., Wennergren, G., Wikstrom, A., Elden, H., Stephansson, O., & Hagberg, H.
    (2020). Induction of labour at 41 weeks versus expectant management and induction of labour at 42 weeks
   (SWEdish Post-Term Induction Study, SWEPIS): Multicentre, open label, randomised, superiority trial. Obstetrical
   & Gynecological Survey, 75(4), 207-209. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.ogx.0000659588.42587.0e

Wu, E., Clair, K., & Chan, K. (2017). Compliance with contemporary guidelines for the diagnosis of labor dystocia by
   stage of Labor [22O]. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 129 Suppl 1(1), S158-S159. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    01.AOG.0000514771.24576.3d

Zambrano, M. D., & Miller, E. C. (2019). Maternal stroke: An update. Current Atherosclerosis Reports, 21(9), 33.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s11883-019-0798-2

Zhao, Y., Lin, S., Zhang, M., Wang, C., & Xu, F. (2020). Septic shock in pregnancy caused by acute chorioamnionitis:
   Diagnosis, surgical selection, and hemodynamic therapy. Frontiers in Medical Case Reports, 1(2), 1-14.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.47746/FMCR.2020.1207
878 19 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 20

Postpartum Care

FIGURE 20.1 Postpartum Family Big brother is introduced to his new twin brothers during postpartum care at a Labor and Delivery Unit.
(credit: "Meeting the Twins" by Shannon Miner/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
20.1 Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period
20.2 Psychosocial Adaptation to Parenthood
20.3 Nursing Care During the Postpartum Period

INTRODUCTION Recovering from the process of pregnancy, labor, and birth and becoming a parent require change.
The first 6 weeks of recovery after birth is considered the postpartum period (also called the puerperium). During
the postpartum period, many physiologic changes and psychologic and social adaptations take place. The first 24
hours after delivery is considered immediate postpartum. Nursing care during the postpartum period involves
conducting physical and psychosocial assessments of the postpartum person and communicating postpartum
education topics while considering cultural expectations of parenting. This chapter presents the expected systemic
changes and psychosocial adaptations of the birthing person occurring during the postpartum period.

20.1 Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Differentiate the basic physiologic changes that occur in the postpartum period as the person transitions
        from pregnant back to a prepregnant state

    · Describe the elements of the postpartum assessment with the most common concerns
    · Summarize the impact of cultural influences on postpartum recovery
The physiologic changes that occur in the postpartum period affect every system in the body. Rapid shifts in fluid
and levels of estrogen and progesterone occur during the immediate postpartum period. Slower physiologic changes
880  20 · Postpartum Care

     that restore the body to the prepregnant state, such as the tightening of the ligaments, occur throughout the 6
     weeks of the postpartum period. This period of physiologic change is influenced by previous births, family traditions,
     and cultural influences as well as comorbidities and perinatal complications.

     Postpartum Physiologic Adaptation

     The body makes changes during the 40 weeks of pregnancy that return to the prepregnant state after birth. During
     the first few days after birth, large changes occur in the cardiovascular, reproductive, neurologic, gastrointestinal,
     and musculoskeletal systems. Subtle changes continue in those systems throughout the postpartum period. The
     nurse caring for the postpartum person provides anticipatory guidance on these changes.

     Vital Signs
     During the immediate postpartum period, the person's temperature can be slightly elevated due to dehydration and
     the work of labor. A temperature above 100.4º F (38º C) is not expected, and it is important for the nurse to review
     the patient's labor and birth record for risks for infection. The nurse will note the pertinent patient data when the
     nurse contacts the health-care provider and include the patient data along with the increased temperature in the
     SBAR (situation, background, assessment, and recommendation) communication tool.

     A slight increase in blood pressure (BP) in the immediate postpartum period is normal. Blood pressures around 130/
     80 mm Hg can be due to postdelivery pain, anxiety, or cesarean birth (Parker et al., 2023). Blood pressures greater
     than 140/90 mm Hg can indicate postpartum preeclampsia, gestational hypertension, or chronic hypertension. The
     nurse assesses the postpartum person to gather data supporting the most probable cause of the rise in BP, then
     contacts the health-care provider to report possible postpartum preeclampsia or an unexpected high level of pain. A
     slight decrease in BP can also be normal due to dehydration and expected blood loss. Hypotension, a BP below 90/
     60 mm Hg, can occur after a postpartum hemorrhage. Hypotension combined with tachycardia, dizziness, and
     weakness is reported to the health-care provider by the nurse to determine if fluid replacement is indicated.

     The patient's respiratory rate can be slightly increased because of the work of labor or pain, but is lower than that of
     pregnancy (Kanakaiah, 2023). The nurse can place a pulse oximeter to determine oxygenation status and can
     supplement with oxygen as needed. The pulse can be increased due to pain, recovery from birth, and preexisting
     anemia. The pulse can also be elevated from dehydration and blood loss (Varrias et al., 2022). The person who has
     experienced a postpartum hemorrhage will have an elevated pulse due to the body compensating for hypovolemia.
     The nurse can provide an intravenous (IV) fluid bolus to help with dehydration and hypovolemia.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     The Preeclampsia Foundation is a nonprofit organization that provides information and educational materials on
     hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Preeclampsia is still a risk after the baby is born, so this group offers
     information specific to postpartum preeclampsia (https://openstax.org/r/77preeclampsia) that is helpful for
     educating patients.

     Postpartum Fluid Shift
     During pregnancy, many people experience edema. After birth, extracellular fluid from edema is pulled back into the
     venous system and excreted through increased urine output and diaphoresis, which is the process of excessive
     sweating to rid the body of excess fluid, stimulated by the levels of estrogen and progesterone decreasing from the
     higher levels of pregnancy (Martin et al., 2022). Postpartum diaphoresis continues during lactation. The nurse
     educates the postpartum person on the cause of the sweating, clothing modifications to ease discomfort, and
     hygiene practices to cope with the diaphoresis.

     The intravascular fluid supporting the enlarged uterus also accounts for a portion of the increased urination in the
     postpartum person. Involution and decreasing levels of estrogen and progesterone produce the increase in fluid into
     the postpartum person's vascular system. The average amount of postpartum fluid loss is 2 liters, with the majority
     over the first 5 to 7 days after giving birth (Martin et al., 2022). The nurse informs the postpartum person that
     antepartum swelling should subside over the next several days and that they will be urinating often. The edema may
     take more than a week to resolve after birth if the postpartum person received IV fluids during the labor and birth

     Access for free at openstax.org
20.1 · Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period                                                                    881

process. It is also important for the postpartum person to understand that to prevent a urinary tract infection the
person must not postpone urination.

Blood loss occurs during birth and postpartum, causing a decrease in intravascular fluid. Normal blood loss during
birth can be as low as 150 mL and up to 1,000 mL for a vaginal or cesarean birth (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists [ACOG], 2017; Association of Women's Health Obstetrics and Neonatal Nursing [AWHONN],
2021). The placenta also retains 75 to 400 mL of blood after delivery, depending on the weight of the infant (Martin
et al., 2022).

Cardiovascular Instability
Cardiac output increases significantly in the immediate postpartum period. The decrease in the size of the uterus
immediately after birth and the birth of the placenta increase the amount of intracellular fluid, contributing to the
rise in cardiac output. Edema and extracellular fluid reabsorb into the vascular system, further contributing to the
increase in cardiac output. This increase in intravascular fluid and cardiac output makes the heart work harder, and
any preexisting cardiac disease can worsen. (More information on these and other complications are discussed in
Chapter 21 Postpartum Complications.)

Urinary System
As discussed previously, the shift in fluids increases urine output in the postpartum period. Because of this increase
in urinary output, overdistention and decreased sensation of the bladder without complete emptying can occur
(Martin et al., 2022). Postpartum persons can have difficulty in emptying their bladder in the immediate postpartum
period due to the normal physiologic accommodations needed to allow for a vaginal birth. Vaginal births, with or
without genital tract trauma, can lead to swelling around the urethra, causing urinary retention. Laceration or
episiotomy repair can also cause swelling and pain upon urination. Urinary retention can be caused by epidural or
spinal anesthesia, which results in a decreased urge to urinate while in use, and it can take time for feeling to return.

An overdistended bladder interferes with uterine contractions, causing the uterus to become boggy (or soft). The
distended bladder can also displace the uterus to the left or right side instead of midline in the abdomen (Figure
20.2), causing the uterus to lose tone and increasing the risk for postpartum hemorrhage. The nurse encourages the
person to attempt to empty their bladder often, either on a bed pan or with assistance to the restroom. If the
postpartum person cannot empty the bladder, the nurse follows the postpartum orders for urinary catheterization.
882  20 · Postpartum Care

     FIGURE 20.2 Change in Uterine Placement A full bladder displaces the uterus farther up into the abdomen. (credit: modification of work
     from Anatomy and Physiology, 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

       CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

       Postpartum Assessment

       The nurse is called to the room by the postpartum person, who states they are bleeding a lot. The nurse begins
       the assessment of the postpartum person's vaginal bleeding.

          1. The nurse assesses the uterus to ensure it is firm and midline.
          2. The uterus is firm and deviated to the right.
          3. Uterine deviation can be caused by a full bladder. Palpate the bladder.
          4. Bladder distention is noted.
          5. The nurse assists the postpartum person in emptying their bladder (bedpan, bathroom, catheter).
          6. The nurse reassesses the uterus for tone and location.
          7. The uterus is firm, midline, and at the umbilicus.
          8. The nurse assesses the vaginal bleeding (lochia) and notes it has slowed to normal.

       Clinical judgment used by the nurse in this patient scenario:

       The nurse assesses the postpartum person for possible causes of the increased vaginal bleeding. The nurse is
       aware that bladder distention is a common reason. Palpation of the bladder is a necessary assessment.

     Breast Changes and Lactation
     The growth of the breasts during pregnancy may cause striae (stretch marks) and loss of elasticity of the skin.
     Superficial veins occurring during pregnancy will fade in those who do not breast-feed but will continue to be seen in
     breast-feeding persons, especially during engorgement. Darkening of the areola during pregnancy will fade over the
     first 6 weeks postpartum (Martin et al., 2022). The nurse encourages the postpartum person to wear a supportive
     bra.

     Lactogenesis
     The physiologic process of developing the means to secrete milk is called lactogenesis (Lawrence & Lawrence,

     Access for free at openstax.org
20.1 · Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period                                                                                   883

2022). The first stage of lactogenesis (secretory differentiation) occurs during pregnancy and results in the growth
of the mammary lobes, ducts, and alveoli within the breast (Figure 20.3). A balance of hormones during pregnancy
prevents the secretion of milk once the first stage is complete at around 22 weeks of pregnancy. After the birth of
the newborn and placenta, progesterone levels drop significantly, and the second stage of lactogenesis (secretory
activation) begins (Lawrence & Lawrence, 2022). As progesterone levels decrease, prolactin levels rise, stimulating
milk production. The lobes, ducts, and alveoli within the lactating breast (Figure 20.3) increase in size. Stimulation
of the nipples by the newborn increases secretion of oxytocin, causing the milk to let down and secrete out of the
breast for the newborn to ingest.

FIGURE 20.3 Changes in the Breast The drawings illustrate the changes in the ductal system, lobes, and alveoli of the breast from
nonpregnant (a) to pregnant (b) to lactating (c) due to the hormonal changes of lactogenesis. (credit: modification of work from Anatomy
and Physiology, 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Initiating Breast-Feeding
Immediately after birth if the newborn and postpartum person are stable, the newborn should be placed skin-to-
skin on the birthing person's chest. The World Health Organization (2023) recommends breast-feeding within the
first hour of birth. Having the newborn on the chest allows the newborn to learn the smell of the postpartum person
and milk and encourages breast-feeding. Colostrum, present in the breasts at the time of birth, is a nutrient-dense
first milk, thick and whitish-yellow with little volume, containing antibodies to build the infant's immune system. The
nurse teaches the postpartum person the importance of colostrum for the newborn's immune system and digestion.

        REAL RN STORIES

Nurse: Alexis, RN, postpartum nurse
Years in practice: 8
Clinical setting: Medical City McKinney
Facility location: McKinney, Texas

I enjoy teaching patients about breast-feeding. I was caring for a patient who was concerned that her baby was not
getting enough milk because when she pumped, she only got a tiny amount. She was only 18-hours postpartum. I
explained the difference between colostrum and traditional milk. She insisted that her baby could not be satisfied
with such a little amount.

We had sweetened condensed milk in the staff refrigerator. I got a teaspoon of the thick, sweet milk and a teaspoon
of skim milk. I asked the patient to drink the skim milk, then the sweetened condescended milk. When she tasted
the sweet milk, I asked if she could drink an entire glass of that milk. She said that she could not, that it was too
884  20 · Postpartum Care

     sweet. I explained that colostrum was similar. The baby did not need as much because it was concentrated and the
     perfect amount.

     After our "experiment," she laughed and thanked me for explaining that to her. She said it made so much more
     sense to her. It was great to see her feel good about the colostrum she was feeding to her baby.

     At approximately postpartum day 2 or 3, milk changes from colostrum to traditional milk that is thinner with more
     volume than colostrum. The nurse explains that some lactating persons will have an increase in temperature and
     feel feverish as their milk comes in. The painful sensation of filling of the breasts characterized by hard breasts that
     ache and are hot to the touch is called engorgement. The nurse explains hand expression of milk (Figure 20.4) and
     offers cold packs to help ease engorgement. Milk production works through supply and demand. As the newborn
     empties the breasts, prolactin stimulates the breasts to produce more milk. The newborn will set somewhat of a
     schedule to feed every 2 to 3 hours.

     FIGURE 20.4 Patient Education: Hand Expressing Breast Milk The nurse educates the breast-feeding person and provides educational
     material on hand expression. (credit: "Steps for expressing milk by hand" by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Division of
     Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Public Domain)

     Milk released during a breast-feeding session has different nutritional content. Milk high in water and protein and
     low in fat, called foremilk, is released at the beginning of a breast-feeding session; hindmilk, a milk high in fat and
     calories, is released later in the breast-feeding session (Pu et al., 2023). The nurse educates the breast-feeding
     person on the importance of both types of milk and encourages complete emptying of one breast prior to changing
     the infant to the other breast during a feeding.

     For postpartum persons not desiring to breast-feed, their breasts should be bound with a tight, supportive, and well-

     Access for free at openstax.org
20.1 · Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period                                                                                885

fitting bra to avoid filling of the breasts with milk. The nurse can provide a cold compress or encourage the person to
use cold cabbage leaves to reduce the production of milk. The nurse encourages the person to face away from warm
water in the shower, as this stimulates letdown. Letdown is a reflex caused by the release of oxytocin that contracts
the alveoli, ejecting milk from the breast. Letdown can be caused by heat, hearing a baby cry, thinking of the infant,
and while the infant is feeding. Ice packs or frozen peas in an unopened bag and a mild analgesic can be
recommended to ease any breast discomfort in the postpartum person who is not breast-feeding.

Very few conditions are contraindications to breast-feeding. However, a person who is human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) positive or has AIDS is advised by their provider to not breast-feed if living in the United States. In low-
income countries where water is unclean or inaccessible, breast-feeding is encouraged even in those who are HIV
positive. Other contraindications include infants with a rare genetic disorder called galactosemia and the
postpartum person with T-cell lymphotropic virus type I or II or active herpes lesion or who uses illicit drugs.
Persons with active tuberculosis or varicella can pump and feed the infant breast milk (Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention [CDC], 2023).

Reproductive System
The reproductive system undergoes the most changes during pregnancy and the postpartum period. After birth, the
cervix and uterus must begin the process of changing back to the prepregnant state. The perineum and vagina begin
the healing process from the birth. The nurse explains that the uterus takes several weeks to return to the
prepregnancy state. The nurse also explains that the perineum and vagina will heal and that any stitches used to
repair lacerations or the episiotomy will dissolve with time.

Uterus and Lochia
During the first 24 to 48 hours, the uterus involutes, or shrinks, to the approximate level of the umbilicus. The uterus
shrinks approximately 1 cm per day and is within the confines of the pelvis by day 10, as illustrated in Figure 20.5.
Involution is aided by postpartum uterine contractions. These contractions stop the blood flow from the spiral
arteries, which are attempting to perfuse the placenta even after delivery. Without contractions, the risk of
postpartum hemorrhage increases. If the nurse notices the fundus is not firm, the nurse should massage the uterus,
assess the lochia, and administer oxytocin (Pitocin) according to postpartum orders. Complete involution of the
uterus to the prepregnant size occurs over approximately 6 weeks.

FIGURE 20.5 Involution of the Uterus The fundus is at the umbilicus after birth, then involutes 1 cm per day during the first 10 days
postpartum. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The placental site takes 6 weeks to heal as well. The placental site heals by sloughing off old tissue, and the
endometrium generates new tissue. The old tissue is sloughed off as part of the lochia. Placental fragments or
membranes that are not sloughed off are retained and can cause infection or subinvolution of the uterus. The nurse
teaches the person to call the health-care provider for increased bleeding, foul-smelling discharge, or expulsion of
pieces of membranes or placenta.
886  20 · Postpartum Care

     The vaginal bleeding that occurs during the postpartum period is called lochia. When it is bright to dark red and
     consists of blood, cervical discharge, and uterine lining, it is considered lochia rubra. It occurs during the first 1 to 4
     postpartum days and originates from the placental site. Lochia is measured based on the amount of peripad
     saturation. Lochia that saturates a peripad in less than 1 hour is considered excessive and requires immediate
     assessment of the uterus to determine if the cause is bladder distention or uterine atony. The nurse also assesses
     the blood pressure and pulse for signs of hypovolemia. The health-care provider will be provided a report by the
     nurse. Figure 18.7 illustrates the measurement of lochia by peripad saturation. The quantitative blood loss of lochia
     is accurately measured by weighing each peripad used by the patient. A gram of weight is considered equal to 1 mL
     of blood loss.

     As the placental site heals, the lochia changes to pinkish-brown, or lochia serosa, which lasts 4 to 10 days. This
     lochia consists of white blood cells, cervical mucus, and discharge from the healing placental site. The final
     postpartum discharge, lochia alba, is yellow-white and consists of white blood cells, epithelial cells, and mucus. It
     occurs from approximately day 10 to 28. The nurse explains the stages of lochia progression to the postpartum
     person, including the expected amount and appearance of the lochia. These are summarized in (Figure 20.6).

     FIGURE 20.6 The Stages of Lochia Lochia discharge of blood and fluids changes in color and quantity during the postpartum period, which
     can range from 10 to 28 days. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Uterine cramping during the immediate postpartum period and up to 12 hours after birth is strong and rhythmic. The
     cramping continues for 2 to 3 days, is a part of the uterine involution process, and is usually more painful in
     multiparous persons. These cramps are more noticeable during nursing because oxytocin is released with milk
     letdown, and oxytocin causes rhythmic uterine contractions perceived as cramping or pain. The nurse educates the
     patient on the cause of the cramping and offers the prescribed analgesic such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
     drugs (NSAIDs) to decrease cramping pain (ACOG, 2022). The nurse also encourages the person to lie on their side
     with a pillow splinting the fundus or a warm compress or heating pad to relieve pain.

     Cervical Changes
     The cervix is bruised and floppy after a vaginal birth (or a cesarean birth performed after cervical changes have
     occurred) and remains slightly dilated. It returns to its prepregnant state gradually and is less than 1 cm dilated
     after a week. The cervical os permanently changes shape after the first vaginal birth or after a cesarean birth where
     cervical dilation occurred, going from a round pinhole to a transverse slit (see Figure 11.3). The cervix of a person
     after an elective or planned cesarean birth must also go through a recovery period back to prepregnant status. Even
     though the cervix is not dilated like the vaginal birth cervix, the cervical canal must return to a long, closed,
     recollagenized state without the influence of excessive estrogen.

     Vagina and Perineum
     The vagina is enlarged and often swollen after a vaginal birth, possibly with lacerations present. The nurse reassures
     the person that the vagina will heal and revert to its prepregnant size. Lacerations or episiotomy sites are repaired
     using absorbable sutures and take 2 to 3 weeks to heal. The nurse provides prescribed comfort measures to
     decrease perineal pain. These include ice packs to the perineum for the first 24 hours, sitz baths after 24 hours, and
     topical analgesics (ACOG, 2022).

     The pelvic floor muscles have decreased tone due to stretching to accommodate the fetus during the birth process.
     The decrease in tone increases the incidence in postpartum stress incontinence. Kegel exercises, sometimes called
     pelvic floor muscle exercises or therapy, are exercises performed to strengthen the pelvic floor and are important to
     the postpartum person's recovery. To perform a Kegel, the patient should be instructed to squeeze the muscles of
     the pelvic floor in an upward motion, contracting the muscles around the urethra, vagina, and rectum. The
     contraction should feel like trying to stop the flow of urine.

     Because the pelvic floor is stretched from the weight of the pregnant uterus or the birth process, many postpartum

     Access for free at openstax.org
20.1 · Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period                                                                             887

persons suffer from pelvic floor relaxation and can experience urinary incontinence. Kegel exercises throughout
pregnancy and postpartum will strengthen the pelvic floor muscles. The nurse can teach the postpartum person
how to perform a Kegel and recommend starting with 10 Kegels three times per day. For the person with urinary
incontinence, suggest working up to 30 Kegel exercises one to three times every day for 3 months (Yount et al.,
2021). Sometimes Kegel exercises may be insufficient, and pelvic floor therapy may be needed.

        LINK TO LEARNING

This video further explains how to perform Kegel exercises (https://openstax.org/r/77KegelExercise) in three steps.

Musculoskeletal and Integumentary Changes
During pregnancy, the muscles in the midline of the abdomen can stretch to a point of separation, a condition known
as diastasis recti abdominis (Figure 20.7). If diastasis occurs, part of the abdominal wall has no muscular support.
Birthing persons who have a history of multiple gestation, polyhydramnios, macrosomia, short intervals between
pregnancies, and are multiparous are at greater risk for diastasis due to the overdistention of the abdomen (Martin
et al., 2022). Persons experiencing a cesarean birth are also at increased risk because of the rectus abdominis
muscles being manually separated to access the uterus. If the healing of the diastasis is not complete by 6 weeks
postpartum (the diastasis is less than 2 cm in width), the patient should consult their health-care provider or a
physical therapist (Chen et al., 2023). Persons giving birth by cesarean will have a longer recovery due to inability to
exercise until the incision has healed and pain has resolved. The nurse educates the person that the incision will
take approximately 6 weeks to heal and encourages them to roll to their side while getting out of bed to avoid using
the abdominal muscles.

FIGURE 20.7 Diastasis Recti Abdominis During pregnancy, the muscles in the midline of the abdomen (a) can stretch to a point of
separation (b), a condition known as diastasis recti abdominis. (modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

        LINK TO LEARNING

Healing the postpartum diastasis recti abdominis involves exercise and physical therapy. In this video, a pelvic floor
physiotherapist describes how to help postpartum persons (https://openstax.org/r/77diastasis) heal their diastasis.

Relaxation and softening of the pelvic bones, muscles, and ligaments occur during pregnancy due to increased
estrogen, progesterone, and placental relaxin, a hormone produced in the ovaries and placenta (Stolarczyk et al.,
2021). Relaxin allows the pelvic bones to separate, increasing the diameters of the pelvis to accommodate birth of
the newborn. These hormones also cause lordosis (curving in of the spine), separation of the symphysis pubis, and
alterations in center of gravity. These changes cause feelings of pelvic instability and pain. After delivery of the
888  20 · Postpartum Care

     placenta, relaxin gradually decreases, and the pelvic bones return to their prepregnant state in approximately 5
     months (Stolarczyk et al., 2021).

     The abdominal skin also stretches under the influence of pregnancy hormones. Stretching of the skin can cause
     striae, also known as stretch marks. Striae can occur on the abdomen, hips, breasts, legs, or anywhere the skin has
     stretched during pregnancy. Figure 20.8 shows an example of striae on the pregnant abdomen. Striae in light-
     skinned persons are pink-purple during pregnancy and fade to a silver color. People with darker skin have striae that
     are darker during pregnancy and fade over time. Striae are not preventable and do not completely disappear from
     the skin but become much less visible over time.

     FIGURE 20.8 Striae on the Abdomen Striae can be seen on the pregnant abdomen as a result of the skin stretching. (credit: "Woman in
     Black and White Zebra Print Bikini Top" by directorvinny studios/Pexels, CC0)

     Gastrointestinal System
     Nausea and vomiting can occur during labor and postpartum. As the gastrointestinal (GI) system awakes from the
     birth process or anesthesia, some persons experience nausea and vomiting. The nurse can encourage small, bland
     meals or administer antiemetics according to the postpartum orders to calm the nausea and vomiting. Constipation
     can also occur (Martin et al., 2022). This can be due to dehydration, poor diet, decreased mobility, hormonal shifts,
     or medication, such as opiates for pain control. Fear of pain or tearing stitches after a vaginal birth can prevent a
     person from attempting to have a bowel movement. Hemorrhoids occur during pregnancy and labor. Pain from
     hemorrhoids can also cause fear of defecation, increasing the risk for constipation. The nurse explains the
     importance of attempting to have a bowel movement so that the person does not become constipated and
     encourages ambulation to promote defecation. Increased ambulation and stool softeners may also be
     recommended.

     After a cesarean birth, the GI system is slowed due to anesthesia. These persons must wait for bowel motility to
     return before having a bowel movement. The nurse explains that passing flatus is a sign that the bowels are moving.
     Increased water intake, early ambulation, and a prescribed stool softener can help with constipation. Routine bowel
     movements return in 2 to 3 days after birth.

     Weight Loss
     Weight loss of approximately 10 to 15 pounds occurs immediately after the delivery of the infant, placenta, and
     amniotic fluid. Depending on the amount of edema during pregnancy and labor, some persons lose more than 5
     pounds in extracellular fluid over the first few postpartum days. The nurse reassures the postpartum person that
     returning to prepregnant weight is gradual and different for every person. The nurse educates the postpartum
     person to eat fruits and vegetables for vitamins and fiber; whole grains for energy; lean proteins to rebuild muscle

     Access for free at openstax.org
20.1 · Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period                                                                                   889

and tissue after labor and birth; dairy for calcium; and a small amount of healthy fats for breast milk. According to
the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA, 2020), the breast-feeding person should eat 330 extra calories per day
the first 6 months of breast-feeding (500 extra calories for milk production minus 170 calories per day for weight
loss), then 400 extra calories after 6 months postpartum (assuming weight is back to the prepregnant level). The
nurse can use the MyPlate recommendations for nutrition education (Figure 20.9).

FIGURE 20.9 MyPlate Recommendations The USDA has recommended using this food guide to educate persons on nutrition. This guide is
acceptable for postpartum and breast-feeding people. (credit: "Start simple with MyPlate" by U.S. Department of Agriculture/MyPlate U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Public Domain)

Neurologic Changes
Neurologic changes can occur in the postpartum period for several reasons. Spinal or epidural anesthesia is one
cause. When the epidural or spinal needle is inserted, if the dura is punctured, the puncture causes cerebrospinal
fluid to leak, and the postpartum person can develop a spinal headache. The nurse recognizes a spinal headache as
a severe headache that worsens when the person sits up. The anesthesia provider will be consulted to address this
problem. Headaches can also be a neurologic sign of preeclampsia, dehydration, fatigue, and loss of sleep. The
nurse will assess the characteristics of the headache of the postpartum person to differentiate the most likely
cause(s) of the headache. The nurse will also assess the deep tendon reflexes of the postpartum person because
persons with preeclampsia could continue to have brisk reflexes for several days and still be at risk for an eclamptic
seizure for up to 6 weeks after birth. See Chapter 21 Postpartum Complications for further discussion.

Lab Values
During labor, the white blood cell (WBC) count can elevate up to 20,000 to 30,000 and remain elevated for several
days due to the stress of labor. The WBC count returns to prepregnant values after 1 week (Moldenhauer, 2022). If
the person did not hemorrhage, the hemoglobin and hematocrit usually remain in the prepregnant range; however,
levels can fluctuate and can be less than the prepregnant range. Plasma fibrinogen is elevated for 1 week to help
with clotting; however, this elevation can cause a risk for deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Erythrocyte sedimentation
890  20 · Postpartum Care

     rate also remains elevated for 1 week. The nurse monitors postpartum lab results for signs of anemia and infection,
     especially in people with a history of postpartum hemorrhage or chorioamnionitis. For persons with a low
     hemoglobin and hematocrit, the nurse educates on foods high in iron and encourages prescribed supplemental iron.
     The nurse contacts the health-care provider with an elevated WBC count and assessment findings suggestive of
     infection. Table 20.1 compares lab values during pregnancy and the postpartum period.

     Lab                              Prepregnanta Antepartuma Postpartuma (24 hours)

     Hemoglobin (g/dL) 12-16                   9.5-15    8-13.7

     Hematocrit (g/dL)                35-44    28-41     24.5-40.8
     WBC (×109/L)                     4-10     6-16      7--21
     Platelets (×109/L)               150-400  145-400   67-251 (average 160)

     Fibrinogen (g/L)                 1.5-4.0  2.38-5.9  2.5

     Ferritin (ng/mL)                 10-150   16--24    32-50b

     aMorton, 2021

     bEmegoakor et al., 2015

     TABLE 20.1 Lab Values Pre-Pregnancy, Antepartum, and Postpartum

     Postpartum Physical and Emotional Assessment

     Postpartum assessment begins after the birth of the placenta and continues until the patient's discharge home. The
     nurse will remain with the postpartum person and newborn during the initial recovery period. The newborn should
     remain skin-to-skin with the postpartum person during this time if both are stable. The nurse assesses vital signs,
     the uterus and lochia, level of pain, and attachment and bonding during the immediate postpartum period. Breast-
     feeding can be initiated during this time, and the nurse can help the person to obtain a good latch. Postpartum
     assessment is continued for the time the person is in the birthing facility; however, assessment findings will change
     slightly from the immediate postpartum to the next 48 hours.

     The postpartum assessment can be summarized using the acronym BUBBLE-EE explained in Table 20.2. The nurse
     will perform the postpartum assessment in a systematic manner and observe for progression in healing or signs of
     complications (Khidhir & Ahmed, 2022). The assessment begins at the breasts, assessing both the breast-feeding
     and non-breast-feeding person for signs of filling, infection, or nipple cracking. The uterus is assessed for firmness
     and location. The amount and character of lochia are noted. The nurse assesses the bladder and assists the person
     to the restroom or bedpan if needed. Bowel sounds are auscultated. The nurse discusses the passing of flatus as a
     good sign, especially for persons having a cesarean birth. The nurse assesses the perineum and notes any
     hematomas, hemorrhoids, or signs of infection. Extremities are assessed to detect DVTs, reflexes, and overall
     edema. The nurse also assesses the emotional status of the person, noting signs of baby blues, depression, anxiety,
     and bonding. Postpartum education can be included while performing the assessment.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 20.1 · Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period             891

Category                    Areas of Assessment

B: Breasts                  Feeding method
                            If breast-feeding: frequency and duration, LATCH scorea
                            Firmness/Filling
                            Redness
                            Warmth
                            Nipples

U: Uterus                   Fundus: firm or boggy
                            Fundal height: in relation to the umbilicus
                            Midline or deviated
                            If cesarean birth: incision

B: Bladder                  Last void
                            Distention
                            Retention
                            Dysuria

B: Bowels                   Last bowel movement
                            Flatulence
                            Bowel sounds

L: Lochia                   Color
                            Odor
                            Amount
                            Clots

E: Episiotomy and perineum  Redness
                            Edema
                            Ecchymosis
                            Discharge
                            Approximation
                            Hemorrhoids
                            Hematoma

aA breast-feeding charting system and documentation tool that assigns a score, of 0, 1, or 2 to five key components
of breast-feeding.

TABLE 20.2 Postpartum Assessment: BUBBLE-EE
892  20 · Postpartum Care

     Category                         Areas of Assessment

     E: Extremities                   Reflexes
                                      Edema
                                      Signs of DVT in extremities
                                       Pain
                                       Edema
                                       Heat
                                       Redness

     E: Emotional Status              Postpartum blues
                                      Postpartum depression (PPD)
                                      Postpartum psychosis
                                      Screening tool for PPD
                                      Attachment
                                      Fatigue
                                      Bonding
                                      Support system

     aA breast-feeding charting system and documentation tool that assigns a score, of 0, 1, or 2 to five key components
     of breast-feeding.

     TABLE 20.2 Postpartum Assessment: BUBBLE-EE

     Breast Assessment Including Lactation
     The nurse assesses the breasts for general appearance, noting any dimpling, redness, or changes in skin color or
     texture. They assess for filling of milk by noting firmness of the breasts. When breasts are filling, the nurse will note
     a slight firmness. Engorgement can occur when milk fills the breasts and makes the breasts very full, firm, and
     painful. Engorgement is expected at 3 to 5 days postpartum. The nurse encourages nursing every 2 to 4 hours to
     help with engorgement. The nurse assesses nipples for signs of inversion, trauma, or blisters. The nurse also
     observes a session of breast-feeding to assess latch (Figure 20.10). The nurse can utilize the LATCH score to assess
     the breast-feeding session and observe for progress or signs of breast-feeding difficulties (see 24.1 Basic Newborn
     Care). A lactation consultant or counselor can provide additional assistance.

     Access for free at openstax.org
20.1 · Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period                                                                                893

FIGURE 20.10 Steps to a Good Latch The nurse can provide a visual aid to help the breast-feeding person create a good latch. (credit:
"Steps to a Good Latch" by U.S. Department of Agriculture/USDA WIC Breastfeeding Support, Public Domain)

Uterine/Fundal Assessment
The nurse assesses the uterus for firmness and position after either a vaginal or cesarean birth. The fundus should
be firm, slightly above or below the umbilicus after birth, and midline. The uterus involutes approximately 1 cm
daily. If the fundus is boggy, the nurse massages the fundus and teaches the postpartum person how to massage it.
If the fundus is deviated to one side, a full bladder is usually the cause (Martin et al., 2022). If a cesarean birth
occurred, the nurse assesses the abdominal dressing to ensure it is clean and dry. When uncovered, the nurse
assesses the incision for approximation, heat, redness, and discharge. The nurse premedicates the postsurgical
person with a pain reliever prior to assessment of the uterus and incision if possible.

Bladder Assessment
Postpartum diuresis will cause an increase in urine output. The nurse assesses the bladder for fullness and
retention. A full bladder can also cause the uterus to be boggy, rise above the umbilicus, and be deviated to one side
(Martin et al., 2022). The nurse can measure the amount of urine with each void to ensure emptying of the bladder
and can assess the bladder for residual urine using a bladder scanner per facility policy. If the person is unable to
void, the nurse can encourage the person to use a peri-bottle or attempt to void while taking a shower, as the warm
water sometimes helps relax the muscles, allowing urination. The peri-bottle is a plastic bottle with a spray spout
that the patient fills with warm water to help cleanse the perineum (Figure 20.11). If the bladder is palpable and the
person cannot void, the nurse can insert a catheter per the health-care provider's order.
894  20 · Postpartum Care

     FIGURE 20.11 Peri-Bottle The peri-bottle is used during the postpartum period to cleanse the perineum. (attribution: Copyright Rice
     University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Bowel Assessment
     The nurse will determine if the postpartum person has passed flatus or had a bowel movement. The nurse also
     assesses the abdomen for bowel sounds and firmness. Hypoactive bowel sounds and abdominal guarding can be
     normal for the person who had a cesarean birth (Elsevier, 2024). The abdomen should be soft and easy to palpate,
     not taut. The nurse will palpate and percuss the abdomen for signs of bloating. The nurse will encourage fiber,
     ambulation, and increased fluid intake. Prescribed stool softeners can be administered.
     Lochia Assessment
     The nurse assesses lochia for color, amount, and odor. Lochia rubra is present for the first 3 days and should not fill
     a pad in less than an hour. The nurse teaches the person that small clots (size of a quarter) are normal; however,
     larger clots (larger than a golf ball) should be evaluated (Elsevier, 2024). They also teach the person that a foul odor
     could be a sign of uterine infection and to contact the health-care provider.
     Episiotomy and Perineal Assessment
     The nurse assesses the perineum and the anus. The nurse positions the postpartum person in the lateral position
     and lifts the buttock to assess for stitches and wound healing. The REEDA (redness, edema, ecchymosis, discharge,
     and approximation) assessment is documented as shown in (Table 20.3). Hemorrhoids and hematomas should be
     noted. The nurse will also inquire about pain at the perineum or during a bowel movement.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        20.1 · Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period  895

               0       1                           2                         3

R: Redness     None    < 0.25 cm of incision       < 0.5 cm of incision      > 0.5 cm of incision
                       bilaterally                 bilaterally               bilaterally

E: Edema       None < 1 cm from incision           1-2 cm from incision      > 2 cm from incision

E: Ecchymosis None     < 0.25 cm bilaterally or <  0.25-1 cm bilaterally or  >1 cm bilaterally or > 2 cm
                       0.5 cm unilaterally         0.5-2 cm unilaterally     unilaterally

D: Discharge None Serous                           Serosanguineous           Bloody or purulent

A:             Closed  < 3 mm separation of        Separation of skin and    Separation of skin,
Approximation          wound edges                 subcutaneous fat          subcutaneous fat, and
                                                                             fascia

TABLE 20.3 REEDA Episiotomy Healing Assessment (Ernawati et al., 2020)

Extremities Assessment
The nurse assesses the lower extremities for edema, reflexes, and signs of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). The level of
edema varies in the postpartum person based on the amount of edema present during the pregnancy, the amount of
IV fluids administered during the labor and birth process, and the presence of preeclampsia (Martin et al., 2022).
Deep tendon reflexes are expected to be normal; when brisk, they require further evaluation for preeclampsia.
Postpartum persons are at increased risk for DVT due to a hypercoagulable state, increased production of clotting
factors, decreased fibrinolysis, obesity, or traumatic birth along with decreased movement after birth. The nurse
assesses all extremities for signs of a DVT, such as single-extremity edema with a painful area of redness and
warmth. A DVT can dislodge and cause a pulmonary embolism; therefore, the postpartum person is assessed for
shortness of breath and diminished breath sounds. The nurse teaches the postpartum person to call if shortness of
breath or chest pain occurs.

Nurses should encourage early ambulation to decrease edema and prevent DVT occurrences for the postpartum
person after either vaginal or cesarean birth. If ambulation is restricted, especially in the first 12 hours after a
cesarean birth, application of sequential compression devices and administration of prescribed anticoagulants
(enoxaparin [Lovenox], heparin, aspirin) will be performed by the nurse.

Emotional Assessment
The postpartum period is a time of change. This time of transition for the body and mind can be stressful for the
postpartum person and their support person. The person is encouraged to talk about their perceptions and feelings
surrounding their birth. Family presence and support are evaluated.

A postpartum depression screening tool helps identify persons with positive postpartum depression so that
referrals can be made prior to discharge from the birthing facility. The most common postpartum depression
screening tool is the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS). The EPDS is usually performed during
pregnancy, during the initial birthing facility stay, at the postpartum follow-up visits with the health-care provider,
and at the newborn's health-care visit (Levis et al., 2020). The nurse educates the person and family on the
difference between postpartum blues and postpartum depression and instructs them on signs of when to call the
health-care provider.

Low moods that are common during the first 2 weeks of the postpartum period are called postpartum blues, or
baby blues. These moods resolve by themselves without treatment or medication. Postpartum blues are attributed
to the massive change in hormones after birth. Symptoms can include fatigue, crying, irritability, anxiety, insomnia,
and sadness (ACOG, 2021a). The nurse educates the postpartum patient on the importance of contacting the
health-care provider to be assessed for postpartum depression if symptoms worsen or last longer than 2 weeks.

Postpartum depression (PPD) is When the symptoms include feelings of extreme stress, detachment from the
newborn, anxiety, and feelings of being overwhelmed, the postpartum person is diagnosed with postpartum
896  20 · Postpartum Care

     depression (PPD). These feelings last longer than 2 weeks and are more severe than postpartum blues.

     Postpartum depression can affect maternal-newborn attachment, leading to avoidance of the newborn, negative
     feelings toward the newborn, and inability to be a caretaker (ACOG, 2021a). Postpartum persons who lack
     attachment behaviors exhibit little eye contact, avoid holding the newborn, and do not find joy in their new role. The
     nurse supports the postpartum person and explains the importance of receiving help for their feelings. A consult
     with social worker services is initiated, and the health-care provider is notified. The person will follow up with the
     health-care provider to monitor for worsening symptoms of PPD after being discharged.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     This video about postpartum depression (https://openstax.org/r/77postpartumdep) describes how to perform a
     postpartum depression screen, explains how to talk with families of a depressed person, and reviews necessary
     treatment for depression.

     Parent-Infant Attachment
     Parent-infant attachment is the relationship that develops between the newborn and the parent in which the infant
     gains security and the parent takes on the caregiver role (Trombetta et al., 2021). The nurse assesses this
     attachment by observing the interaction between the postpartum person and their newborn. Parent-infant
     attachment will be further explored in 20.3 Nursing Care During the Postpartum Period.

     Abnormal Findings
     The nurse evaluates the postpartum person for abnormal findings. Some findings can necessitate an immediate
     intervention, while other findings can be monitored. Table 20.4 describes the most common abnormal postpartum
     assessment findings and suggested nursing interventions.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                     20.1 · Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period                       897

Physical     Normal Findings         Abnormal Findings                                 Nursing Interventions
Assessment

Vital signs  · afebrile              · temp 100.4º F (38º C)                           · assess for dehydration
             · BP 120/80             · BP >140/90                                         and signs of infection
             · pulse <100            · pulse >100
             · respirations <22      · labored breathing,                              · assess for signs of
                                                                                          preeclampsia
                                        shortness of breath
                                     · respirations >24                                · assess for hemorrhage
                                                                                       · assess for signs of

                                                                                          pulmonary embolus
                                                                                       · notify health-care

                                                                                          provider for fever,
                                                                                          preeclampsia signs,
                                                                                          excessive bleeding,
                                                                                          shortness of breath, or
                                                                                          signs of embolus

Breasts      · nipple everted        · inverted nipples                                · assess for infection
             · colostrum expressed   · red, hot area on breast                         · encourage hydration
             · filling               · nipple trauma                                   · contact lactation
             · firm with milk        · bloody discharge
                                     · engorgement                                        consultant
                                                                                       · apply nipple cream
                                                                                       · encourage hand

                                                                                          expression for
                                                                                          engorgement
                                                                                       · can apply cool
                                                                                          compress for
                                                                                          engorgement
                                                                                       · can use nipple shield

Uterine/     · firm                  · boggy                                           · massage fundus
Fundal       · at the umbilicus      · elevated >2                                     · assess lochia amount
assessment   · midline                                                                 · assess bladder for
                                        fingerbreadths above
                                        the umbilicus                                     fullness
                                     · deviated to one side or                         · empty bladder if
                                        the other
                                                                                          necessary
                                                                                       · notify health-care

                                                                                          provider if bogginess
                                                                                          continues

Bladder      · nonpalpable           · palpable                                        · assist to bathroom
             · able to void without  · urinary retention                               · provide bedpan
                                     · deviated uterus                                 · empty bladder with
                difficulty           · elevated uterus
                                                                                          catheter per health-
                                                                                          care provider order

TABLE 20.4 Normal Postpartum Assessment, Abnormal Findings, and Nursing Interventions
898  20 · Postpartum Care

     Physical     Normal Findings                    Abnormal Findings                      Nursing Interventions
     Assessment

     Bowel                 · normoactive bowel       · absent bowel sounds                  · administer stool
                              sounds                 · no flatus                               softener

                           · passing flatus                                                 · encourage ambulation
                                                                                            · encourage hydration

     Lochia                · lochia rubra            · bright red bleeding                  · assess fundus; if boggy,
                           · soaking a pad after 1   · soaking a pad in <1                     massage

                              hour                      hour                                · assess for bleeding
                                                     · large clots                             from laceration or
                                                     · foul smell                              episiotomy if fundus is
                                                                                               firm

                                                                                            · assess for tenderness
                                                                                               or pain with fundal
                                                                                               massage

                                                                                            · notify health-care
                                                                                               provider if lochia is
                                                                                               heavy and bright red

     Episiotomy/           · slight edema            · redness                              · apply ice pack for 24
     Perineum/             · bruising                · edema                                   hours
     Rectum                · stitches intact         · ecchymosis
                           · mild to moderate        · discharge                            · encourage sitz baths
                                                     · not approximated                     · apply local anesthetic
                              laceration/episiotomy  · hematoma
                              pain                   · severe laceration/                      spray or foam
                           · rectal hemorrhoids                                             · assess for infection
                                                        episiotomy pain                     · administer stool
                                                     · rectal hemorrhoids red,
                                                                                               softener
                                                        hot, painful                        · apply witch hazel to

                                                                                               hemorrhoids
                                                                                            · notify health-care

                                                                                               provider for hematoma
                                                                                               or nonapproximated
                                                                                               edges of laceration

     TABLE 20.4 Normal Postpartum Assessment, Abnormal Findings, and Nursing Interventions

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                     20.1 · Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period                            899

Physical     Normal Findings         Abnormal Findings          Nursing Interventions
Assessment
                                         · pain when flexing        · notify health-care
Extremities  · able to walk without      · hot, red area                provider
                pain in legs             · pitting edema

             · extremities slightly
                edematous

Emotions/    · happy                 · manic                    · encourage rest and
Attachment   · tired                 · crying uncontrollably       limitation of visitors
             · slightly overwhelmed  · sad about the birth
             · holding the baby en   · not holding the baby     · provide privacy for
                                     · leaving the baby in the     sleep
                face
             · exploring the baby       bassinet                · educate on postpartum
             · talking to the baby   · not talking to the baby     blues and depression
             · cuddles               · making negative
                                                                · evaluate support
                                        comments about the         system
                                        baby
                                                                · evaluate history of
                                                                   depression or anxiety

                                                                · administer postpartum
                                                                   depression screen
                                                                   (EPDS)

                                                                · notify health-care
                                                                   provider for concerns
                                                                   with depression

                                                                · demonstrate behaviors
                                                                   that increase bonding

                                                                · point out positive
                                                                   attributes of the baby

                                                                · encourage postpartum
                                                                   person to explore and
                                                                   talk to the baby

                                                                · notify health-care
                                                                   provider if concerned
                                                                   about bonding

TABLE 20.4 Normal Postpartum Assessment, Abnormal Findings, and Nursing Interventions

Cultural Influence on Postpartum Recovery

The nurse must be aware of cultural differences that affect postpartum care and recovery. The nurse honors the
postpartum person's traditions and asks about dietary restrictions, important practices, and alterations in the plan
of care to aid in their recovery. The nurse can encourage family members to bring in traditional foods. Some cultures
encourage the postpartum person to rest and stay in bed for extended periods, while in other cultures the person is
responsible for the household very soon after birth (Finlayson et al., 2020). In certain cultures, the extended family
plays a large role in caring for the infant and postpartum person. Breast-feeding practices may differ, such as
avoiding colostrum and supplementing with formula until the transition milk is present. By supporting cultural
preferences, the nurse creates an accepting environment for the postpartum person to thrive and transition into
their new parental role.

People of different cultures, races, and socioeconomic status have differing postpartum outcomes. Some of these
outcomes are based on discrimination and stigma. For example, people of color have higher rates of postpartum
depression than White people (Beck, 2023). Nurses should be diligent in assessing for postpartum depression in
Black persons and offering resources for mental health providers. Members of the LGBTQIA+ community have less
access to mental health care; higher rates of abuse, postpartum depression, and substance use; and experience a
900  20 · Postpartum Care

     lack of social support (Griggs et al., 2021). Nurses can discuss resources for support groups and encourage persons
     to reach out to friends and family when feeling stressed. Approximately 31 percent of postpartum teen parents will
     become pregnant again in 2 years (Roque et al., 2022). Nurses can encourage teens to discuss birth control
     methods with the health-care provider. Persons experiencing homelessness have difficulty accessing health care in
     the postpartum period, and some fear being reported to Child Protective Services (McGeough et al., 2020). The
     nurse can provide emotional support and initiate a social services consult to aid these persons in finding and
     securing postpartum care. Finally, exclusive breast-feeding at 3 months postpartum is practiced at lower rates than
     at birth (Garrett et al., 2018). The nurse can educate the postpartum person on the importance of breast-feeding for
     12 months and discuss barriers to breast-feeding.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Birthing in a Different Environment

     A first-generation immigrant can have a difficult journey during the postpartum and new parenting period. They may
     be in the United States without their family or with very few family members. They may not be accustomed to the
     health-care system in the United States. The nurse can inquire about traditions in their country of origin.

     A person from Mexico may request tummy binding, also known as faja. This tradition is believed to help support the
     uterus and abdomen. In Turkey, a special herbal bath is prepared and believed to promote healing. In some Native
     American cultures, a "Blessing Way" ceremony is conducted to honor the postpartum person during the new parent
     journey. Providing support and resources for patients allows them to honor their traditions.

     20.2 Psychosocial Adaptation to Parenthood

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Describe the psychologic adjustments that will occur during the postpartum period through the Maternal
             Role Attainment Theory and Rubin's Puerperal Phases

         · Describe psychologic warning signs during the postpartum period
         · Explain the factors that influence parent-infant attachment in the nursing assessment of early

             attachment

     The new family goes through many psychosocial changes and adaptations during the postpartum period.
     Attachment styles are different within families and among cultures. Psychologic concerns can negatively influence
     attachment, while social support can positively influence attachment. Theories like Mercer's Maternal Role
     Attainment and Rubin's "taking-in" and "taking-hold" phases can help the nurse understand how to help the
     parents and newborn develop successful attachment.

     Attachment Behaviors and Family Adaptation

     Assessing and supporting parental attachment is an important postpartum nursing responsibility. The postpartum
     person needs assistance in self-care and newborn care, including skin-to-skin contact, breast-feeding, and bonding.
     Family support allows the new parents to focus on adaptation to their new roles. Social support is critical for family
     adaptation. Lack of support can lead to postpartum depression and attachment disorders (Galziowska et al.,
     2021).

     Maternal Role Attainment Theory
     Maternal Role Attainment Theory was developed by Ramona Mercer, whose nursing career focused on studying the
     process of becoming a mother (Husmillo, 2013). Maternal Role Attainment Theory suggests that early skin-to-skin
     contact, breast-feeding, and minimizing time apart promotes bonding, decreases maternal anxiety, and allows for
     maternal role attainment. The nurse can positively influence this role attainment by reassuring the parent, educating
     the family on early contact and breast-feeding, and decreasing the time the dyad is apart. The first hour after birth
     has been referred to as the "Golden Hour" because of its importance to the bonding experience for both the
     newborn and postpartum person.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                20.2 · Psychosocial Adaptation to Parenthood                           901

Rubin's "Taking-in" and "Taking-hold" Phases
Rita Rubin (1967) described psychologic phases that occur as the postpartum person adapts to the maternal role
(Table 20.5). Two of the phases are discussed here. During the taking-in phase, 1 to 3 days after birth, the
postpartum person is concerned with physical recovery, adapting to body changes, and caring for the newborn. The
person is dependent on the nurse or partner for help physically. The person is focused on their labor and birth
experience. The nurse encourages the person to talk and process their feelings.

In the taking-hold phase, 4 to 10 days after delivery, the postpartum person begins to initiate actions without
relying on the nurse or partner. Focus turns to the newborn. The nurse takes this opportunity to demonstrate
newborn care. The person is more confident in caring for the baby and more comfortable in the role but continues to
seek support from family, who can provide guidance and understanding. The nurse provides positive reinforcement
and encourages the person's independence when caring for the newborn. Because patients are routinely discharged
between 24 and 48 hours after birth, nurses may need to teach newborn care prior to the patient being ready.

Postpartum    Phase            Characteristics
Days

First 3 days  Taking-in phase  · person focused on their own needs
                               · nurse listens to the person and helps them interpret the birth

                                  process
                               · not an optimum time for teaching about newborn care

Days 4-10     Taking-hold      · person more independent
              phase            · assumes the position of caregiver
                               · optimal time for teaching about newborn care

TABLE 20.5 Rubin's First Two Puerperal Phases

Maternal-Newborn Attachment Behavior
Newborns develop secure attachments when warm, responsive, and emotionally present behaviors are consistently
provided by the parent or caretaker (Curran et al., 2021). Newborns who develop secure attachment later exhibit
social skills to express emotions and communicate, and they have higher self-esteem and emotional intelligence
(Curran et al., 2021). Maternal-newborn contact has been shown to improve physiologic and psychologic
attachment; this can be fostered by immediate skin-to-skin contact after birth (Norholt, 2020). Skin-to-skin contact,
shown in Figure 20.12, regulates the infant's temperature, increases breast-feeding success, and decreases the
stress of the newborn (Gomes et al., 2023). The nurse can aid in skin-to-skin contact after birth and throughout the
facility stay. The nurse is aware that positive attachment behaviors are exhibited by the newborn and parent
interacting, and making and holding eye contact, and by the parent soothing the newborn.
902  20 · Postpartum Care

     FIGURE 20.12 Maternal-Infant Skin-to-Skin Contact Skin-to-skin contact helps regulate the newborn's temperature, increases breast-
     feeding success, and decreases stress for the newborn. (credit: "Skin to Skin time" by Anthony J/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Initial Parent-Newborn Attachment Behavior
     Initial touch increases emotional bonds between parents and newborns. Attachment behaviors can be seen as
     affection shown to the newborn and include touch, eye contact, kissing, and holding the newborn's hand (Barker et
     al., 2017). Other attachment behaviors are soothing the newborn and being attentive to their needs. If the newborn
     is stable, the nurse gives the parents time to hold and talk to the baby prior to performing assessments or
     administering medications.
     The nurse can assess initial attachment behaviors to screen for risk factors for attachment disorders. Attachment
     assessment begins when the nurse admits the pregnant person to the labor unit. Pregnant persons who avoid
     talking about the baby or who seem unhappy about their pregnancy are at high risk for attachment disorder. Persons
     with a history of psychosocial difficulties are also at higher risk (Gerlach et al., 2022). The nurse observes initial
     attachment behaviors and becomes concerned about persons who avoid skin-to-skin contact, eye contact, soothing
     or talking to the newborn, or cuddling. Persons with a history of depression, homelessness, sexual abuse, or poverty
     can exhibit fewer attachment behaviors.
     Partner-Newborn Attachment
     Support persons who are more involved during the prenatal, birth, and postpartum periods feel more attached to
     their newborn and report higher levels of self-esteem and self-worth (Lagarto & Duaso, 2022). The nurse can
     nurture the support person's interactions by encouraging skin-to-skin contact, listening to and addressing their
     concerns, and providing gentle guidance on soothing and caring for the newborn, as shown in Figure 20.13.
     Research has shown that education on attachment skills during the prenatal period--at prenatal visits or childbirth
     education classes--can increase partner-newborn attachment (Dagla et al., 2023). Having family support to
     demonstrate newborn care is also helpful. Persons with positive parental role models are more inclined to
     demonstrate positive interactions with the newborn. The nurse compliments the support person on changing
     diapers or soothing the baby and assesses their comfort with handling the newborn and providing care. It is
     important for the support person to participate in the physical care of the newborn so that they feel they are
     contributing, are valued, or have some form of control of the situation (Lagarto & Duaso, 2022).

     Access for free at openstax.org
20.2 · Psychosocial Adaptation to Parenthood                                                                                       903

FIGURE 20.13 Father Caring for His Newborn Attachment and adaptation are supported through partner interactions, including active
participation in soothing and caring for the newborn. (credit: reproduced with permission from Norabelle Greenberger)

Lagarto & Duaso (2022) noted the partner's mental health and relationship with the postpartum person had the
largest impact on attachment with the newborn. This study also found that partners who were separated or divorced
from the birthing parent had fewer interactions with the newborn, lacked understanding of their partner's
experience, and were more emotionally distant. The nurse encourages the parents to discuss how to share
responsibilities and time with the newborn.

Attachment by Siblings, Extended Family, and Others
Extended families can provide emotional, physical, and social support to new parents, decreasing the incidence of
postpartum depression. Family support allows the parents to rest, decreasing fatigue and stress. The nurse
assesses if the parents have the family support they need. Siblings must also adapt to having a new family member.
This adaptation is reliant upon the age of the sibling, preparation and education of the sibling regarding the new
baby, and feelings of attachment and security of the sibling to the parents (American Academy of Pediatrics [AAP],
2021) (Figure 20.14.) The nurse helps the new parents brainstorm ways to help siblings adapt to the new baby.
Some birthing facilities provide sibling classes to aid in attachment. The nurse will also explain how siblings and
children will be able to meet the newborn within the facility.
904  20 · Postpartum Care

     FIGURE 20.14 Older Sibling Attachment with Newborn Preparation and support for older siblings throughout the pregnancy can smooth
     the adjustment of the arrival of the newborn into the family. ("Siblings" by Natalie Wright/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

     Research suggests that the positive or negative role the family plays in the postpartum and newborn phase can
     prevent or trigger postpartum disorders (Rosa & Astuti, 2021). Persons with lack of family support have increased
     postpartum disorders. Positive support of the family--exhibited by providing love and support, bringing nutritious
     food, allowing adequate rest, and helping care for the baby--helps prevent postpartum disorders. The nurse is
     aware that persons living away from extended family or who do not have good relationships with family are at
     increased risk for postpartum depression.

     Postpartum Psychosocial Concerns and Complications Affecting Parent-Newborn
     Attachment

     Many psychosocial factors can influence the health of the postpartum patient. Postpartum depression, substance
     use, lack of support, poverty, and trauma are examples. The nurse assesses each postpartum person for potential
     psychosocial risk factors, including noting existing social supports and identifying persons at risk for complications.
     The nurse discusses financial problems, homelessness, safety in the home, and history of domestic violence
     (Gerlach et al., 2022). The nurse also asks about substance use in the home. A social work consultation can be
     requested to offer help and support to families struggling with any of these issues.

             LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

     Homelessness and Postpartum

     Homelessness is linked to higher rates of morbidity and mortality as well as poor mental health (Kelly et al., 2023).
     In turn, poor mental health is a contributing factor to homelessness. Stressors such as homelessness, food
     insecurity, and financial hardships are associated with an increased incidence of postpartum depression (Kelly et al.,
     2023). For persons who are socioeconomically challenged, many barriers exist for mental health services. Because
     these parents are focused on survival instead of bonding, the newborn will be affected by possible maladapted

     Access for free at openstax.org
20.3 · Nursing Care During the Postpartum Period                                                                         905

bonding. This can begin a cycle of stress and mental illness. How can our society address these issues and stop this
cycle?

Psychosocial concerns affecting parent-infant attachment can be related to poverty, homelessness, discrimination,
or substance use. Families without financial means or a place to live struggle with attachment due to the increased
stress of their situation. The nurse understands that if the parent is focused on where to live and how to feed the
family, newborn attachment is not the first priority. Postpartum persons who are survivors of domestic violence are
at increased risk for attachment disorder. If persons are afraid of their partners, they will sometimes seek shelter
and be in hiding and, therefore, lack family and social support (Gerlach et al., 2022). The nurse can assist the parent
in finding shelter and assistance.

Other Patients and Partners at Risk for Disordered Attachment
Parents of a newborn in the NICU are also at risk for attachment problems. Parents are limited in the amount of care
they can provide to a sick newborn, which leads to fear, stress, and feelings of insecurity. The equipment used in the
NICU and attached to the baby can make parents feel overwhelmed and afraid to touch their newborn. Nurses in the
NICU can foster bonding and attachment by recognizing the need for parental involvement, acknowledging their
feelings, and encouraging parents to participate in appropriate newborn care.

Persons with substance use disorders (SUD) are at risk for impaired maternal-newborn attachment. Some persons
with SUD had childhood experiences of violence and parental substance use. Their view of childhood caregivers is
often contradictory and characterized by trauma (Punamäki et al., 2021). Many times, postpartum persons with SUD
also have a history of social, legal, and economic struggles. Parents with a history of trauma or childhood abuse can
have difficulty with infant attachment.

20.3 Nursing Care During the Postpartum Period

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Explain nursing care responsibilities and education of the postpartum couplet during the early
        postpartum period

    · Determine appropriate nursing interventions to promote maternal comfort and well-being
    · Discuss holistic nursing care for surgical and vulnerable postpartum patients
    · Identify the goals and discharge planning for the patient and newborn, and the nursing care and

        education that must be completed

Nursing care during the postpartum period includes physical and psychologic assessment and recognition of normal
and abnormal findings. Nursing interventions will differ for persons having a vaginal or cesarean birth, choosing to
breast-feed or not to breast-feed, and having a single birth or multiple births. Nurses provide support to all
postpartum persons with individualized interventions based on the patient's educational level and social factors.
Education on parenting, self-care, newborn care, and warning signs will be presented and reinforced at the time of
discharge.

Postpartum recovery begins after birth. The nurse assesses vital signs every 15 minutes during the first hour of
postpartum recovery, every 30 minutes to 1 hour during the second hour, then every 4 hours (Milton, 2024). Once
the postpartum person is stable, recording vital signs might be changed to every 8 hours or once per shift according
to the health-care provider's orders or facility policy. Pain will be assessed, and different options for pain
management will be offered.

Postpartum Education

Postpartum education is provided by the nurse throughout the postpartum stay by demonstration and verbal
education. During the first 8 hours, the nurse will demonstrate how to perform a fundal massage and will assist with
breast-feeding techniques. The nurse explains the assessment of vaginal bleeding, use of pads and peri-care, and
pain expectations. The nurse also demonstrates immediate newborn care.

After the first 8 hours, the nurse will demonstrate newborn cord care, feeding techniques, use of the bulb syringe,
bathing, and newborn warning signs (see Chapter 25 Care of the Newborn at Risk). The nurse discusses the
906  20 · Postpartum Care

     importance of rest for the postpartum person and encourages them to rest when the newborn is resting, to increase
     fluid intake, and to eat a well-balanced diet. Cultural traditions are considered during education.

     At approximately 24 hours postpartum, the nurse teaches about caring for the newborn at home, lochia and its
     changing characteristics, rest, constipation, hemorrhoids, and perineal healing. The nurse assesses the person's
     support system, signs of attachment, ability to care for the self and newborn, emotional status, and pain control.
     Most persons will be discharged between 24 and 36 hours after a vaginal birth and between 48 and 72 hours after a
     cesarean birth. This provides limited time for education and nursing interventions. Early discharge can lead to
     complications and possible readmission to the hospital. In addition to education on normal physiologic and
     emotional expectations, postpartum persons and their support persons should be provided education on the signs
     and symptoms of complications and information on how to contact health-care providers to answer questions and
     concerns.

     Education for Pharmacologic Interventions
     During the postpartum period, the nurse will educate the postpartum patient on prescribed pharmacologic
     medications including immunizations (flu, rubella, hepatitis B), pain medications, and Rh immune globulin
     (RhoGAM).

     Pharmacologic Pain Management
     Pain medication is used for postpartum cramping, perineal pain, surgical incision pain, and general pain from
     childbirth. Analgesics are the most common pain medications administered. The nurse will offer acetaminophen
     (Tylenol) and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (ibuprofen; Motrin) for mild to moderate pain. For moderate to
     severe pain, the nurse will offer the narcotic ordered for the postpartum pain. Many times, the narcotic is paired with
     acetaminophen. The nurse must be aware of how much total acetaminophen the postpartum person receives daily
     and ensure that the person does not take more than 4g per 24 hours. The nurse assesses pain before and 30
     minutes to 1 hour after administering pain medication.

     Immunizations
     The nurse educates the postpartum person that the influenza vaccine is safe during pregnancy and the postpartum
     period and is recommended during influenza season (ACOG, 2018). If the patient has not received it during
     pregnancy, they will be offered the vaccine prior to discharge. The tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis (TDP) vaccine is
     usually administered during pregnancy. The nurse can offer this vaccine if the person has not received it during
     pregnancy to protect the newborn against pertussis. If the person is not immune to rubella, the nurse will explain
     that the vaccine is not safe during pregnancy and should be given postpartum to protect the person and any
     subsequent pregnancy. The rubella vaccine is manufactured in a combination of measles, mumps, and rubella
     (MMR). The nurse can administer the vaccine prior to discharge and teaches the person to avoid pregnancy for 3
     months after the administration of the live vaccine.

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     The Measles, Mumps, and Rubella Vaccine

     The measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine is given to postpartum persons to provide immunity against the
     rubella virus and to gain immunity prior to the next pregnancy. Rubella is a contagious virus that, when contracted
     during pregnancy, can cause miscarriage, stillbirth, and severe birth defects. A pregnant person is tested for
     immunity to rubella at the first visit. If the person is not immune, they are instructed that they cannot receive the
     vaccine until after pregnancy because it is a live vaccine. Signs of rubella are provided to the pregnant person (low-
     grade fever, headache, swollen lymph nodes, cough, sore throat, and rash that starts on the face and spreads to the
     rest of the body) with instructions to call their health-care provider if they experience any of those symptoms.

         · Generic Name: measles, mumps, and rubella virus vaccine
         · Trade Name: M-M-R II
         · Class/Action: vaccine, live (viral)
         · Route/Dosage: sub-Q 0.5 mL
         · High Alert/ Black Box Warning: anaphylactoid/hypersensitivity reaction; use with caution in persons with

     Access for free at openstax.org
20.3 · Nursing Care During the Postpartum Period                                                                          907

        thrombocytopenia, active untreated tuberculosis, immunocompromised status, allergy to eggs, sensitivity to
        neomycin
    · Indications: active immunization against measles, mumps, and rubella
    · Mechanism of Action: A live, attenuated vaccine, MMR vaccine offers active immunity to disease.
    · Contraindications: pregnancy; hypersensitivity to measles, mumps, and/or rubella vaccine or any component
        of the formulation (neomycin, eggs); current febrile respiratory illness; those receiving immunosuppressive
        therapy; primary and acquired immunodeficiency states; blood dyscrasias
    · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: syncope, vasculitis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, ataxia,
        dizziness, Guillain-Barré syndrome, headache, seizure, erythema multiforme, IgA vasculitis, Stevens-Johnson
        syndrome, urticaria, thrombocytopenia, anaphylactoid reaction, angioedema, local injection site reaction,
        bronchospasm, fever
    · Nursing Implications: The nurse ensures the consent is signed. The nurse educates the person that this is a
        live vaccine and that it is recommended not to get pregnant for 12 weeks.
    · Parent/Family Education: Call health-care provider for severe abdominal pain, severe back pain, severe
        nausea/vomiting, high blood sugar, confusion, severe dizziness, seizures, swollen glands, change in hearing/
        vision, wheezing, chest tightness, fever, itching, bad cough, blue skin, swelling of face/lips/tongue/throat

(Vallerand & Sansoski, 2023; CDC, 2020)

Rh Immune Globulin
If the postpartum person is Rh negative and the newborn is Rh positive, the person should be offered Rh immune
globulin (RhoGAM) to protect against isoimmunization in future pregnancies. If the Rh-positive fetal blood mixes
with the Rh-negative maternal blood, maternal antibodies are created to attack Rh-positive antigens. If the maternal
antibodies cross the placenta to a future fetus, fetal red blood cells will be destroyed and can lead to extreme fetal
anemia (Neamu et al., 2022). Rh immune globulin prevents maternal blood from creating antibodies against the Rh
antigen. Rh-negative pregnant persons receive Rh immune globulin at 28 weeks due to the unknown fetal blood
type. Some providers will test the blood type of the baby's father. If Rh negative, the pregnant person does not need
the immune globulin because the fetus can have only Rh-negative blood. Some providers, however, give the immune
globulin to all Rh-negative persons regardless of the partner's Rh status. After birth, the newborn's blood is typed; if
it is Rh positive, the postpartum person receives Rh immune globulin. If the baby is Rh negative, another dose is not
warranted.

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Rh Immune Globulin

Rh immune globulin is given to Rh-negative pregnant persons to prevent isoimmunization caused by the fetus being
Rh positive.

    · Generic Name: Rh immune globulin
    · Trade Name: HyperRHO S/D, MICRhoGAM Ultra-Filtered Plus, Rho GAM Ultra-Filtered Plus, Rhophylac,

        WinRho SDF
    · Class/Action: immune globulin
    · Route/Dosage: 300 mcg intramuscularly (IM) at 28 weeks and within 72 hours after birth; if less than 13

        week's gestation and given within 72 hours of termination, spontaneous abortion, or threatened abortion, 50
        mcg (microdose) IM can be given.
    · High Alert/Black Box Warning: none
    · Indications: Rh-negative person who is not sensitized to the Rh factor who is pregnant or recently birthed an
        Rh-positive newborn
    · Mechanism of Action: prevents isoimmunization by suppressing the immune response and antibody
        formation by Rh-negative individuals to Rh-positive red blood cells
    · Contraindications: anaphylactic or severe systemic reaction to a previous dose of human immune globulin;
        Rh-positive individuals
    · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: chills, headache, increased bilirubin, fever, dizziness, infection
908  20 · Postpartum Care

         · Nursing Implications: Rh immune globulin must be refrigerated. The nurse should confirm the pregnant or
             postpartum person's blood type and confirm Rh-negative status. The nurse also confirms the newborn's blood
             type to confirm Rh-positive status. The nurse gives the immune globulin IM within the first 72 hours of birth. If
             the newborn's blood type is unknown, the immune globulin is administered.

         · Parent/Family Education: The pregnant person is educated on the prevention of isoimmunization due to their
             blood type being Rh negative and the fetus' blood type being unknown or identified as positive after birth.

     (Brunton et al., 2018; Haider et al., 2020)

     Nursing Interventions for Common Postpartum Discomforts

     Postpartum persons will experience some discomfort after birth. Discomforts depend on mode of birth, breast-
     feeding, and any birth complications. The nurse will determine if the discomforts are normal or warning signs
     requiring further evaluation.

     Breast Discomfort
     Postpartum persons who do not breast-feed will have discomfort when their milk comes in. They are likely to
     experience engorgement pain. The nurse educates them on how to relieve this discomfort by wearing a sports bra or
     support bra to compress the breasts. The nurse instructs the patient to apply cool packs or cabbage leaves to the
     breasts to relieve feelings of engorgement (Safitri et al., 2022). The nurse recommends avoiding any breast
     stimulation, including running hot water over the breasts in the shower, as this can increase milk production.
     Medications such as acetaminophen (Tylenol) and ibuprofen (Motrin) can be taken to decrease pain and
     inflammation.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Cabbage Leaves and Breast Pain

     Cabbage leaves have been used to reduce pain from breast engorgement for many years. Some people use cold
     cabbage leaves from the refrigerator. The cold temperature helps numb the pain and reduce swelling. Cabbage
     leaves contain enzymes called flavonoids that are anti-inflammatories and help reduce the swelling associated with
     engorgement. Safitri et al. (2022) created a gel using cabbage leaves and found that the gel resulted in better relief
     from breast swelling than standard breast care of warm compresses and massage. Aprilina et al. (2021) created a
     cabbage leaf compress and placed it in the postpartum patients' bras for 30 minutes or until it wilted two times per
     day for 3 days. Their study found a significant reduction in pain and swelling for those postpartum persons. Neither
     study found negative side effects with the cabbage leaves. The nurse can safely suggest the use of cabbage leaves
     for treating engorgement pain to their postpartum patients.

     Persons choosing to breast-feed can experience engorgement pain as well. Unlike the non-breast-feeding person,
     the breast-feeding patient should be encouraged to lightly hand express milk and nurse the baby or to use warm
     compresses to promote comfort. The nurse explains that acetaminophen and ibuprofen are safe during breast-
     feeding and can be utilized for breast discomfort. When breast-feeding persons experience nipple pain, it is most
     often due to latching problems. The nurse assists the person with latching. If unsuccessful, they can contact the
     lactation consultant or counselor, if available, to help the person improve the latch and decrease nipple trauma.
     Nipple creams can help relieve pain, and applying breast milk to the nipple and allowing it to air dry can aid in nipple
     healing. Lanolin, a thick, waxy substance found in sheep's wool, is nourishing and protects the nipple; it is commonly
     used as a nipple ointment. Other natural options, such as coconut oil or cocoa butter, may also appeal to breast-
     feeding persons (ahin et al., 2023). Other nipple creams use olive oil or beeswax as a base. All nipple creams will
     be ingested by the newborn and should be researched for safety; some creams must be wiped off prior to breast-
     feeding.

     The nurse also educates the postpartum person about the importance of regular, frequent feedings (every 2 to 3
     hours) and checking their breasts for clogged ducts. This information is important to prevent a breast infection or
     mastitis. (Mastitis and clogged ducts are discussed in more detail in Chapter 21 Postpartum Complications.)

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         20.3 · Nursing Care During the Postpartum Period             909

Uterine Discomforts
Uterine cramping after birth can be painful. Multiparous persons experience more uterine discomfort than
primiparous persons. The nurse educates the person that breast-feeding releases oxytocin, causing uterine
contractions and the letdown of breast milk. The breast-feeding person may take a mild pain medication prior to
nursing. The nurse encourages the postpartum person to empty their bladder often. A full bladder displaces the
uterus, causing the uterus to contract more to stay firm and thereby increasing pain.

Perineal Discomfort
Perineal discomfort is common in persons after a vaginal birth. The nurse assesses the perineum, looking for any
warning signs of infection, hematoma, or breakdown of laceration repair. The nurse educates the person on multiple
techniques to decrease perineal pain. These are summarized in Table 20.6. Ice/cold packs can be applied to the
perineum for the first 24 hours. Topical anesthetic sprays or foams and witch hazel pads can be applied to the
peripad or directly to the perineum after voiding. The nurse can prepare a sitz bath, a warm bath for soaking the
perineum, which can be used for 15 to 20 minutes multiple times during the facility stay and after returning home.
The nurse instructs the person to avoid sitting on hard chairs or sitting for long periods. The patient should use a
pillow or cushion under the buttocks when sitting on a hard surface. A peri-bottle can be used after voiding to keep
the perineum clean and for relief of discomfort. The nurse can offer oral pain medications as needed.

Comfort         Action                                   Instructions
Measure

Ice pack        Reduces swelling and numbs painful       Apply an ice pack or cold pack to perineum or
                area                                     hemorrhoids for 10-20 minutes at a time for first
                                                         24-72 hours after birth.

Witch hazel     Reduces swelling, helps repair broken    Apply witch-hazel pads to perineum and
                skin, fights bacteria                    hemorrhoids; can place witch-hazel pads in
                                                         refrigerator/freezer for further comfort.

Sitz bath       Speeds healing by increasing blood flow  Prepare warm shallow bath; sit in water without
                to the injured area, soothes pain,       soap and soak up to three times per day for 10-15
                reduces inflammation, cleans perineum    minutes. Gently pat the perineum or hemorrhoids
                                                         when drying.
                                                         Some health-care providers will instruct to add
                                                         iodine, Epsom salt, or baking soda to the water. Do
                                                         not add unless instructed by provider.

Peri-bottle     Cleans perineum and hemorrhoids,         Fill peri-bottle with warm water and clean
                soothes pain                             perineum and rectal area after each void and
                                                         bowel movement. Pat dry after use.

Lidocaine gel/  Numbs the injured area; antimicrobial    Spray perineum and rectal area after cleaning with
foam/spray      added to some sprays to fight infection  peri-bottle or apply foam/gel to peripad after
                                                         cleaning perineum and rectal area. Use after
                                                         voiding or bowel movement.

TABLE 20.6 Comfort Measures for the Perineum and Hemorrhoids (Vallerand & Sanoski, 2023)
910  20 · Postpartum Care

     Comfort               Action                                 Instructions
     Measure

     Stool softener        Brings water into the intestines to    Take stool softener per order by the health-care
                           soften stool, which reduces pain with  provider.
                           defecation and lessens the need to
                           strain with bowel movement

     Hemorrhoid            Relieves pain and itching, promotes    Apply to hemorrhoids or insert in rectum after
     cream/                healing                                bowel movements or with pain
     suppository
     with
     hydrocortisone

     TABLE 20.6 Comfort Measures for the Perineum and Hemorrhoids (Vallerand & Sanoski, 2023)

     Hemorrhoid Discomfort
     Many pregnant persons experience hemorrhoid discomfort prior to and after birth (see Table 20.6). Postpartum
     persons with hemorrhoids will have pain upon defecation or throbbing pain at rest. The nurse evaluates the anus for
     hemorrhoids and offers pain relief techniques, including sitz baths, topical anesthetics, oral analgesics, and cool
     packs. Witch hazel pads have been shown to be soothing and to promote healing. A hemorrhoid cream or
     suppository with hydrocortisone can be helpful. Some persons become constipated due to the fear of pain with
     defecation. The nurse educates the person that stool softeners help prevent hard, painful stools. The nurse can
     encourage the person to avoid sitting on hard chairs and to lie on their side to relieve pressure.

     Voiding Discomfort
     Some postpartum persons experience lacerations near the urethra. This causes pain with urination. Other persons
     will have discomfort voiding after having had a urinary catheter. Urinary retention can occur and cause pain. The
     nurse assesses for signs of infection, then educates the person on comfort measures. The nurse recommends that
     the postpartum person with urinary retention stand in the shower and attempt to urinate. The warm water aids in
     releasing tightened bladder muscles. The nurse also educates the person to increase water intake to dilute urine to
     decrease discomfort while urinating. If pain continues, the nurse can contact the health-care provider to discuss
     ordering a urine culture.

     Bowel Discomfort
     Bowel discomfort during the postpartum period can be caused by decreased peristalsis during labor. If the person
     had anesthesia, this causes the bowels to become sluggish, leading to the risk of bloating and constipation. Being
     NPO during labor or consuming only small amounts of water and food can lead to dehydration, which contributes to
     constipation. The nurse assesses the bowels for return of peristalsis. Some postpartum persons are anxious about
     having their first bowel movement due to anxiety about "ripping" any sutures open and increasing their pain. This
     leads to delay of defecation, increasing the risk for constipation. The nurse educates the person on not delaying
     defecation and encourages them to increase water intake and ambulation, as both will aid in natural bowel
     movements that are less uncomfortable to pass. Stool softeners and simethicone (Gas-X) can be offered by the
     nurse to aid in relieving bowel discomfort (Vallerand & Sanoski, 2023).

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Yoga is an excellent exercise that can be used throughout pregnancy and postpartum. (Patients should consult with
     their health-care provider prior to starting an exercise routine.) Yoga is beneficial for reducing stress, increasing
     circulation, and helping with constipation. Twisting poses (https://openstax.org/r/77twistingposes) are very helpful
     for the postpartum person experiencing constipation.

     Access for free at openstax.org
20.3 · Nursing Care During the Postpartum Period                                                                         911

Nursing Care of Surgical and Postpartum Populations at Higher Risk for Complications

Postpartum persons undergoing a cesarean birth will have different needs than those having a vaginal birth. Their
recovery will take longer, and they will have more pain during recovery. The nurse will educate those persons on
pain relief and care of the incision. Populations at higher risk for complications will also have different needs. The
nurse can assist these patients in obtaining resources necessary to help in their recovery.

Nursing Care of the Patient Following a Cesarean Birth
Nursing care after a cesarean birth is more intensive due to the postsurgical care. Compared to someone with a
vaginal birth, the person with a cesarean has more pain, increased risk for DVT, increased risk for incisional
infection, and difficulty in ambulating. The nurse uses a different care plan for the patient who had a cesarean birth.

The patient's pain level is assessed often. Pain medication can be administered during the insertion of spinal
anesthesia, through a patient-controlled pump, or orally. The nurse monitors the incision using the REEDA scale.
The extremities are monitored for signs of DVT. The nurse encourages the person to turn and cough while splinting
the incision and use an incentive spirometer to avoid pneumonia. The nurse assesses for bowel sounds and passing
of flatus. Early ambulation is very important for bowel peristalsis, prevention of DVT, and prevention of pneumonia.
The nurse removes the indwelling catheter when the person feels steady enough to ambulate to the restroom.

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

Teamwork and Collaboration

Following a cesarean birth, teamwork is important to keep the patient safe and comfortable. The team includes:

    · obstetrician: responsible for performing the C-section and monitoring postoperative recovery
    · nurse-midwife: oversees postpartum care, including pain management, breast-feeding support, and

        emotional well-being
    · neonatal nurse: assesses the newborn's health and provides care, especially if there are any complications
    · lactation consultant: offers expertise in breast-feeding support and education
    · social worker: addresses any psychosocial concerns or challenges
    · anesthesiologist: monitors pain management and provides interventions as needed

Step 1. The nurse communicates with the obstetrician to determine any special needs for the patient.

Step 2. The nurse assesses the patient's pain and communicates the need for pain management with the
anesthesiologist or certified nurse-anesthetist.

Step 3. When pain control is adequate, the nurse discusses the patient's desire for newborn skin-to-skin and breast-
feeding with the neonatal nurse.

Step 4. The nurse communicates with the lactation consultant and nurse-midwife to discuss breast-feeding needs
and cultural or religious traditions, and explore any special needs for the patient.

Step 5. The nurse evaluates the patient's psychosocial needs and communicates with the social worker if needed.

Teamwork and collaboration ensure optimum care for the newborn and patient.

Holistic Nursing Care for Populations at Higher Risk for Complications
The nurse provides support to all postpartum persons, with the awareness that some postpartum persons have
specific needs or unique circumstances that require a different approach to care. The nurse adapts their care to
include special equipment, education, and resources.

Nursing Care of the Adolescent Patient
Adolescent pregnant persons are population at higher risk for abuse and poor health outcomes due to their social
situations and are at risk for sex trafficking and coerced sex (Powers & Takagishi, 2021). The nurse should assess for
signs of abuse, especially in the very young adolescent.

Adolescent persons may not be developmentally prepared for parenting. These persons have higher rates of
912  20 · Postpartum Care

     parenting stress and depression, leading to less effective parenting practices. Ineffective parenting practices place
     the newborn at risk for failure to thrive, abuse, neglect, and impaired cognitive functioning (Wu et al., 2023).
     Involvement of the significant other during the prenatal period and a supportive relationship with their partner have
     been shown to increase the significant other's involvement after the birth (Wu et al., 2023). The nurse spends time
     educating the parents on newborn care. The nurse provides community resources for adolescent parents. Research
     has shown that home visits, postpartum education, and cognitive behavior therapy can reduce rates of postpartum
     depression in adolescent parents (Sangsawang et al., 2019). The nurse can collaborate with the social worker to
     ensure the parents have the resources needed to allow them to transition into the parenting role.

     Adolescent persons are at increased risk for repeat pregnancies (Powers & Takagishi, 2021). Postpartum education
     on contraception techniques is essential, and the nurse encourages the person to discuss their options with their
     health-care provider. Long-acting, reversible contraceptives (IUDs, implants) are very good options for adolescent
     persons. Some facilities offer this service prior to discharge.

     Nursing Care of Postpartum Couplets at Higher Risk for Complications
     The newborn and postpartum person are considered as one unit or patient, called a couplet. Persons who were not
     aware that they were pregnant until the very end of their pregnancy, migrant workers, those of lower socioeconomic
     status, and those with mental or physical disabilities are at higher risk for complications. The nurse will order a
     referral to social services or social workers as indicated. Pregnant persons who are either in denial of their
     pregnancy status or unaware of their pregnancy until late into the pregnancy can suffer from attachment disorders.
     They can also feel ill prepared for their unexpected role as a new parent. The nurse can assist with support for
     bonding with their newborn by encouraging skin-to-skin time, demonstrating newborn care, and encouraging the
     person to talk about their feelings regarding the newborn. They can also assist the person to reach out to support
     systems or ask for a social worker consult to help this new couplet in challenges they might face.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     Postpartum Support International (https://openstax.org/r/77postpartsuppt) is a nonprofit organization that provides
     information and support to postpartum persons who are unprepared for their newborn or who have experienced a
     pregnancy loss. This site is helpful for supporting perinatal patients.

     Migrant workers may move several times during their pregnancy. This can interrupt their prenatal care or prevent
     them from having any prenatal care at all. At their birth, they may not know their health-care provider. A language
     barrier may exist. These patients can be distrustful due to their unfamiliarity with the health-care system. The nurse
     can help the migrant worker by assessing the need for a translator and using a medical translator instead of a family
     member (Heath et al., 2023). The nurse can explain the postpartum routine care and inquire about any special
     needs.

     Postpartum couplets in the lower socioeconomic demographic can suffer from limited access to health care
     because of lack of transportation, inability to take time off work, and lack of health insurance. The nurse can consult
     with the social worker to provide resources that could benefit the couplet. During discharge teaching, the nurse asks
     the patient about their ability to get to their follow-up appointments, if they have a car seat, and if they have a safe
     place to live. The nurse is supportive and caring about the struggles of these couplets.

     Postpartum persons with disabilities are at higher risk for depression, social isolation, and smoking than those
     without disabilities (Becker et al., 2021). Those with physical disabilities may have challenges such as difficulty in
     bathing the newborn, lifting the newborn in and out of the crib, and limited reliable options for transporting their
     newborns (Becker et al., 2021). The nurse will assess the person's abilities and difficulties and discuss with the
     health-care provider to ensure the person has what is needed to care for themselves and their newborn at home.
     For the postpartum person with mental disabilities, the nurse assesses the level of disability and alters the
     education provided to a level the person can understand. The nurse can ask for a social worker consult to assess the
     person's support system.

     Access for free at openstax.org
20.3 · Nursing Care During the Postpartum Period                                                                         913

        LINK TO LEARNING

The postpartum person with a spinal cord injury can have physical challenges after taking their newborn home. This
video tells the story of how one person made alterations (https://openstax.org/r/77spinalcdadapt) to help her
accommodate this disability while caring for her newborn.

Nursing Care of LBGTQIA+ Parents
The health-care system may be unfamiliar with the needs of some LBGTQIA+ families. The nurse should ask the
postpartum person how they wish to be addressed and what practices the health-care team can adopt to make
them feel included and involved in their care. The nurse includes the partner in education and decision making.

Same-sex partners can experience social stigma over becoming parents. This stigma can negatively affect their
mental health and make them question their competence in parenting (Farr & Vázquez, 2020). Confidentiality is very
important, as some couples have not shared their relationship with others in their family, or they fear they will be
treated poorly if their sexuality is made known to other health-care providers (Pachankis et al., 2020). The
postpartum nurse can create a safe space for these couples to discuss their fears, concerns, and wishes during their
stay in the facility. Research has shown that the non-birthing person can feel role resentment, exclusion from
health-care services, and feelings of neglect (Howat et al., 2023). The nurse includes the non-birthing person in all
education and decision making.

A transgender man may experience challenges during the postpartum period. For transgender men who have had
surgery to remove their breast tissue (top surgery), lactation can be challenging. Without adequate breast tissue or
nipple size, milk may not be produced, and latching can be difficult (Gedzyk-Nieman & McMillian-Bohler, 2022).
Most transgender men use the term chest-feeding rather than breast-feeding. Postpartum depression should be
monitored closely, as it is reported more often in trans men. Nurses should also encourage postpartum persons to
discuss contraception during their follow-up visit with their health-care provider.

Another challenge is the lack of education of nurses and health-care providers on the special needs of the pregnant
transgender male. A study showed that health-care providers felt they needed more education regarding
childbearing as a trans person, including how to use inclusive language effectively and policies and processes to
support childbearing trans people (Pezaro et al., 2023).

Nursing Care of Patients Who Are Incarcerated
People who are incarcerated often come from poverty, have had poor educational opportunities, and have only
limited access to health care (ACOG, 2021b). The person who is incarcerated is at higher risk of having acute and
chronic illnesses, substance use disorder, mental illness, and reproductive health needs (ACOG, 2021b). Therefore,
the nurse is aware that these persons can have multiple health-care needs beyond pregnancy and birth. These
persons are also at higher risk for sexually transmitted infections. The nurse will look at the prenatal history to
determine testing and treatment for these infections.

The nurse ensures that the postpartum person has time to bond with their newborn. Separation from the newborn
upon return to the facility causes higher rates of postpartum depression among this population (ACOG, 2021b). The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) (2021b) recommends breast-feeding and milk
expression for incarcerated birthing patients and suggests that correctional facilities have private places for persons
to pump. ACOG (2021b) also strongly opposes the use of any type of restraint for these patients during labor, birth,
or the postpartum period. The nurse's role is to support the person and newborn and facilitate bonding.

Nursing Care of Persons Who Are Relinquishing Newborns
Many emotions surround the person who is relinquishing their newborn. Birth parents can feel attached to the
newborn and feel regret about their decision for adoption. They can feel judged by friends and family. They can also
feel relieved and happy about their decision. The nurse provides care that is sensitive to the person's emotions. The
nurse is careful to avoid phrases like "giving away your child" or "giving up for adoption." Instead, the nurse can use
the phrase "making an adoption plan" or "entrusting the baby to another parent" (Rousseau & Friedrichs, 2021).
The nurse should ask about expectations for the newborn, such as how much time the birth parent wants to spend
with the newborn, their desire for photos or video, and when the adoptive parents will take the newborn home. The
914  20 · Postpartum Care

     nurse's responsibility is to provide support and offer resources for support groups or online groups that can help the
     birth parent cope with their emotions.

     Surrogates can also struggle with relinquishing the newborn. They can become attached to the newborn after
     carrying the fetus for 9 months. The nurse is sensitive to these feelings and supports the surrogate in their need to
     talk about and process their feelings. The nurse validates these feelings and offers resources to help the person go
     through this process.

     Nursing Care of Postpartum Patients Who Have Experienced Abuse
     For people who have experienced abuse, especially childhood sexual abuse, birth can be a traumatic experience.
     This is thought to be caused by the focus of care on the areas of the body most likely to have been violated (Brunton
     & Dryer, 2021). Risk factors associated with abuse include substance use during pregnancy and eating disorders
     affecting weight gain during pregnancy (Brunton & Dryer, 2021). These persons have higher rates of postpartum
     depression and anxiety. The nurse will assess for a history of abuse and tailor the postpartum care to decrease the
     person's anxiety. The nurse asks permission to touch the postpartum person prior to exams and includes the person
     in the assessment. For example, the nurse can ask the person to massage her fundus while the nurse observes for
     bleeding. This allows the person to have control over their body and reassures them they are safe. The nurse is
     supportive of the person's boundaries.

     Postpartum Discharge

     Prior to postpartum discharge education, the nurse assesses if the postpartum person is ambulating, is voiding, has
     sufficient pain control, demonstrates self-care, and demonstrates newborn nursing or bottle-feeding and routine
     newborn care. The nurse includes the significant other in discharge instructions as well. Time is provided for
     questions. The nurse has demonstrated patient care and newborn care throughout the person's stay; however,
     formal verbal and written instructions will be provided at discharge. Contraception information is also provided at
     this time (see Chapter 5 Family Planning). The healthy postpartum person is discharged between 24 and 48 hours
     after birth.

     The nurse assesses the person's support system, signs of attachment, ability to care for the self and newborn,
     emotional status, pain control, and any other support services the postpartum person and support persons may
     need or request. The final physical assessment is completed, and warning signs are reviewed. Instructions are given
     to call the health-care provider for:

         · fever above 100.4° F (38º C) or chills
         · pain upon urination
         · shortness of breath
         · unilateral extremity edema
         · unusual facial edema
         · headache not resolved with pain medication
         · blurred vision
         · heavy, bright red blood or clots saturating more than one pad in an hour
         · foul-smelling lochia
         · uterine tenderness or pain
         · postpartum depression (crying, feelings of hopelessness, anger, disengaging with newborn, withdrawal lasting

             longer than 2 weeks)
         · severe lower abdominal or uterine pain
         · redness or pain in the breasts
         · pain, redness, or swelling of the legs or calves

     The nurse reinforces the importance of perineal care. They encourage use of the peri-bottle with warm water. Sitz
     baths are recommended for those with sutures. The nurse reviews the use of spray or foam local anesthetic,
     changing the pad with each void, and cleansing from front to back.

     Medication use is reviewed, and prescriptions are provided. The nurse encourages the person to continue the
     prenatal vitamins and take prescribed iron. Stool softeners may be needed, and the nurse encourages increased
     water intake to help with elimination and breast-feeding. NSAIDs are typically recommended for pain, and the

     Access for free at openstax.org
20.3 · Nursing Care During the Postpartum Period                                                                           915

patient should be taught to take them with food. If the person is given a prescription for a narcotic, the nurse
instructs the person not to drive a car or consume alcohol. They also explain that constipation can be a side effect of
narcotic pain medications.

Signs of postpartum depression are outlined. Some facilities perform a formal postpartum depression scale prior to
discharge. Some also send a depression scale home with the new parents. Differences between postpartum blues
and depression are reviewed. The nurse stresses the importance of calling the health-care provider with extreme
changes in sleep, appetite, feelings of sadness, hopelessness, isolation, and anxiety.

Activity Limitations
The postpartum person should avoid lifting any object heavier than their newborn for the first few weeks after birth.
Normal activity is encouraged. It is recommended to wait until the postpartum person is seen by the health-care
provider to initiate exercise and sexual activity. The person should not be on bed rest, however, due to the risk of
DVT.

Promotion of Rest
Rest is important for healing and for bonding with the newborn. The nurse encourages the patient to take frequent
naps. It is recommended that the patient have certain times set aside for family and friends to visit and certain
times for rest. The new parents should not feel they need to entertain others.

Sexual Health
The nurse explains that the body is not ready to resume intercourse at this time. The nurse stresses the importance
of letting the body heal. It is recommended that nothing be placed in the vagina until that patient is cleared by the
health-care provider. This pelvic rest allows the vagina and placenta site to heal and decreases the risk for
endometritis. The person with a cesarean birth should postpone intercourse until 6 weeks after birth or until cleared
by their health-care provider to resume normal physical activities. The nurse recommends the couple discuss ways
to stay intimate without sexual intercourse.

Breast Care
Discharge teaching for the breast-feeding person includes (Elsevier, 2024) the following:

    · Wear a supportive bra.
    · Expose the nipples to air.
    · Feed the newborn on demand with both breasts.
    · If engorged, take a warm shower and hand express a small amount of milk prior to feeding.
    · Ensure a good latch.
    · Break the suction with your finger.
    · Do not use soap on the nipples.
    · Use breast milk or lanolin cream to promote nipple healing if necessary.

The nurse reminds the person to call their provider or clinic if they notice areas of redness or heat in the breasts. The
non-breast-feeding person should wear a supportive bra and avoid breast stimulation. The nurse encourages
application of cold packs to the breasts if engorged.

Contraception
During prenatal care, the health-care provider and the pregnant person should discuss postpartum contraception.
The nurse inquires what contraception the person has chosen and reinforces use of that contraception. If the person
has not chosen a contraceptive method, the nurse encourages the person to discuss this with the health-care
provider prior to discharge. The nurse explains that the person can become pregnant even while breast-feeding
during the postpartum period. For more information on contraception, see Chapter 5 Family Planning.
916 20 · Summary

Summary

20.1 Physiologic Changes During the Postpartum Period

The postpartum period is a time of many changes. The nurse assesses for normal and abnormal changes during the
postpartum period. During the immediate postpartum period, the nurse performs routine postpartum assessments
using the BUBBLEHE acronym. Breast-feeding is initiated, and bonding is encouraged through skin-to-skin contact.
During the 6 weeks postpartum, persons bond with their infant, take on their new role as the caregiver, and
experience changes that restore their body to the prepregnant state. Postpartum healing and transitioning to being
the primary caregiver of a newborn are influenced by resolution of physiologic changes, support systems, and
culture and traditions. During this period, postpartum depression may occur. The nurse assists the postpartum
person in promoting healing and making these transitions.

20.2 Psychosocial Adaptation to Parenthood

Psychologic adjustments occur in both parents during the postpartum period. The postpartum person goes through
phases of focusing on themselves to focusing on their newborn. Siblings also make adjustments to the new person
in their family. Parental adjustment and attachment can be positively or negatively affected by newborn health,
maternal mental health, and family support. Psychosocial concerns such as substance use, poverty, and
discrimination can lead to maladaptation to the parenting role. The nurse can use assessments to determine risk
factors of maladaptation and maladjustment. The nurse can also assist the parents in finding resources to aid in
their situations and plan for alternative support.

20.3 Nursing Care During the Postpartum Period

Nursing care during the postpartum period includes caring for the postpartum person and educating the person,
partner, and family. The nurse assesses the person's physical, mental, and emotional health. Interventions and
education differ depending on route of birth, infant feeding choice, and complications of birth. Interventions and
education are provided to ensure the postpartum person's comfort. The nurse provides individualized care with
special care for populations at higher risk for complications. Consulting with social services can provide needed
resources for the postpartum person. The nurse ensures the person feels confident to care for themselves and their
newborn prior to discharge. Discharge instructions include breast care, peri-care, medications, warning signs,
newborn care, activity restrictions, and sexual health. The nurse encourages the person to contact their health-care
provider with any concerns.

Key Terms

couplet newborn and postpartum person considered as one unit or patient
diaphoresis process of excessive sweating stimulated by a physiologic event or drug reaction
engorgement painful sensation of filling of the breasts, described as a feeling of hard breasts that ache and are hot

    to the touch
foremilk milk low in fat content, released at the beginning of a breast-feeding session
hindmilk milk high in fat and calories, released later in the breast-feeding session
lactogenesis physiologic process of developing the means to secrete milk
lochia alba final postpartum discharge that is yellow-white and consists of white blood cells, epithelial cells, and

    mucus; occurs from approximately day 10 to 28.
lochia rubra bright to dark red discharge during the first few postpartum days that originates at the placental site

    and consists of blood, cervical discharge, and uterine lining
lochia serosa pinkish-brown discharge that lasts approximately 4 to 10 days
Maternal Role Attainment Theory theory suggesting that early skin-to-skin contact, breast-feeding, and

    minimizing time apart promote bonding, decrease maternal anxiety, and allow for maternal role attainment
postpartum blues (also: baby blues) low moods that are common during the first 2 weeks of the postpartum

    period that resolve by themselves without treatment or medication
postpartum depression mood disorder whose symptoms are feelings of extreme stress, detachment from the

    newborn, anxiety, and feelings of being overwhelmed that last longer than 2 weeks and are more severe than
    postpartum blues
sitz bath warm bath for soaking the perineum, which can be used for 15 to 20 minutes multiple times during the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         20 · Assessments 917

    facility stay and after returning home
taking-hold phase phase starting 2 to 4 days after delivery, in which the postpartum person begins to initiate

    actions without relying on the nurse or partner
taking-in phase phase starting 1 or 2 days after birth, in which the postpartum person is concerned with physical

    recovery, adapting to body changes, and caring for the newborn

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. What type of lochia is bright to dark red and occurs on days 1-3 postpartum?
           a. rubra
           b. serosa
           c. placental
           d. alba

    2. What physiologic postpartum change occurs because the uterus shrinks in size, resulting in an increase in
        blood flow?
           a. Edema increases.
           b. Cardiac output increases.
           c. Temperature rises.
           d. Lochia increases.

    3. What is the term for the separation found in the midline of the abdomen after birth?
           a. uterine subinvolution
           b. umbilical hernia
           c. striae
           d. diastasis recti abdominus

    4. The nurse assesses the fundus and finds it to be boggy, elevated >2 fingerbreadths above the umbilicus, and
        deviated to one side. What is the common cause of this finding?
           a. uterine rupture
           b. full bladder
           c. perineal laceration
           d. hematoma

    5. What is the nursing intervention for unilateral edema in a lower extremity and a hot, red area on the leg?
           a. Contact the health-care provider.
           b. Explain this is a normal finding.
           c. Massage calf.
           d. Offer pain medication.

    6. The nurse screens for risk factors such as an infant in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), difficulty in role
        transition, birth complications, unmet social and physical needs, and lack of partner support for what
        complication?
           a. maladaptive parenting
           b. psychosis
           c. postpartum depression
           d. bipolar disorder

    7. The nurse assesses the breasts. What is a warning sign?
           a. colostrum expressed
           b. nipple everted
           c. redness, pain, and heat
918 20 · Assessments

           d. filling with milk

    8. The postpartum person asks for only warm drinks and food. How can the nurse support this cultural tradition?
           a. Explain that nurses do not have control over the food.
           b. Tell the person that cold fluids are better for recovery.
           c. Instruct the person to call the nurse to warm up food or drink.
           d. Educate the person on culture in the United States.

    9. The nurse assesses for signs of depression or postpartum blues. How can the nurse explain the difference?
           a. PPD is less severe and resolves in a few weeks.
           b. Postpartum blues can last up to a year.
           c. PPD is a normal expectation of postpartum.
           d. Postpartum blues symptoms include irritability and sadness.

  10. What theory developed by Ramona Mercer focused on the process of becoming a mother?
           a. Maternal Role Attainment
           b. Postpartum Adapting
           c. Postpartum Maternal Change
           d. Maternal Encouragement

  11. The nurse recognizes the postpartum person is in what stage of Rubin's attachment model when the person is
        concerned with physical recovery and depends on the nurse or partner for help physically?
           a. Taking In
           b. Taking Hold
           c. Postpartum Maternal Change
           d. Attainment of Change

  12. What do ineffective parenting practices put the newborn at risk for?
           a. sleeplessness
           b. reflux
           c. lack of attachment
           d. NICU admission

  13. Postpartum persons who lack attachment with their newborn exhibit what behavior?
           a. intense eye contact
           b. avoid holding the newborn
           c. cuddling
           d. exploring the newborn

  14. The nurse evaluates a postpartum couplet for parent-infant attachment. What finding would be concerning?
           a. The postpartum person is sleepy.
           b. Parents are both caring for the infant.
           c. The parent is disinterested in the infant.
           d. The family is involved.

  15. The person with a cesarean birth has additional nursing concerns beyond those of a person with a vaginal
        birth. What concern should the nurse anticipate for the cesarean birth?
           a. increased risk for DVT
           b. faster recovery
           c. less use of pain medication
           d. less risk for infection

  16. During the first 8 hours postpartum, the nurse will demonstrate how to perform a fundal massage and assist

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      20 · Assessments 919

      with breast-feeding techniques. What other assessment is important at this time?
         a. assessment of partner changing a diaper
         b. assessment of vaginal bleeding
         c. assessment of social support
         d. assessment of family dynamics

17. The nurse educates the non-breast-feeding person on breast discomfort caused by engorgement. What
      instructions would they give?
         a. Massage breasts to release milk.
         b. Apply cold packs and cabbage leaves.
         c. Stand in the warm shower to stimulate letdown.
         d. Do not wear a bra.

18. The nurse educates the postpartum person on bowel discomfort. What instructions would they give?
         a. Limit water intake.
         b. Use laxatives daily.
         c. Ambulate often.
         d. Avoid stool softeners.

19. Research has shown what intervention increases involvement of the adolescent partner postpartum?
         a. involvement of the partner during the prenatal period
         b. involvement of parents in decision making
         c. restricting people in the labor room
         d. providing newborn care in the nursery

20. Research has shown that with lesbian parents, the non-birthing person can feel role resentment, exclusion
      from health-care services, and feelings of neglect. How can the nurse include the non-birthing partner?
         a. Ask the person to leave the room during the newborn assessment.
         b. Educate the person to leave the feeding up to the birthing person.
         c. Demonstrate newborn care to both parents.
         d. Ask the person's family how they feel about their relationship.

21. The nurse is caring for a birth mother who is relinquishing her newborn. What intervention is appropriate for
      the nurse?
         a. Use words like "giving away your child" or "giving up for adoption."
         b. Tell the person not to hold the baby.
         c. Ask the person why she is giving up her baby.
         d. Ask about the patient's expectations for having newborn photos or video.

22. The nurse reviews postpartum discharge instructions regarding sexual health. What information is important
      to review?
         a. Place nothing in the vagina for 4-6 weeks.
         b. Pregnancy cannot occur until 3 months after birth.
         c. Sexual intercourse can resume after discharge from the facility.
         d. Postpartum persons do not have a need for sexual intimacy.

23. What information about pain medication should postpartum discharge instructions include?
         a. Narcotic medications can cause constipation.
         b. Stop taking iron after birth.
         c. Do not take NSAIDs while breast-feeding.
         d. Acetaminophen should be avoided.
920 20 · Assessments

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. Discuss how the nurse can assist patients in addressing cultural traditions during postpartum.

    2. Describe the "taking-in" phase of Rubin's theory.

    3. Describe positive and negative signs of parent-infant attachment.

    4. Discuss how people with substance use disorders are at risk for impaired maternal-newborn attachment.

    5. List several ways the nurse can help the adolescent transition into the parenting role successfully.

    6. Describe the postpartum nursing interventions for persons with a history of abuse.

    7. Prior to the postpartum person being discharged, what would indicate to the nurse that the person is safe and
        ready for discharge?

Reflection Questions

    1. Explain how the postpartum nurse can be culturally sensitive.

    2. Describe discharge teaching for the postpartum person.

    3. Describe the care the nurse provides to the incarcerated postpartum person.

What Should the Nurse Do?

Antonia, a 28-year-old female, has come to the obstetrics and gynecology clinic for her postpartum assessment six
weeks after delivering her first child. Antonia is a first-generation immigrant from Mexico and speaks English as her
second language. She is accompanied by her mother, who primarily communicates in Spanish. Antonia reports
experiencing persistent fatigue, mood swings, and difficulty in sleeping since giving birth. She mentions concern
about her weight loss postpartum and expresses feeling overwhelmed with adjusting to the demands of
motherhood. Antonia has a medical history of gestational diabetes during her pregnancy, which resolved after
delivery. Her vital signs include a blood pressure of 120/80 mm Hg, a heart rate of 80 beats per minute, a
respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and a temperature of 98.6° F (37° C).

    1. Analyze Antonia's symptoms of persistent fatigue and mood swings. How might these symptoms be related to
        both her recent pregnancy and her cultural background?

    2. What immediate actions should a nurse take during the postpartum assessment to address Antonia's
        concerns and promote her well-being, considering both her medical history and cultural background?

Gloria, a 32-year-old female, has presented to the OB-GYN clinic for her 6-week checkup following the birth of her
first child. Gloria appears anxious and reports experiencing persistent feelings of sadness, low energy, and difficulty
with sleeping since giving birth. She describes challenges in bonding with her newborn daughter and expresses guilt
about her perceived inadequacies as a mother. Gloria has a medical history of anxiety disorder, which was managed
with medication before and during pregnancy. Vital signs include a blood pressure of 130/80 mm Hg, a heart rate of
90 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and a temperature of 98.8° F (37.1° C).

    3. As a nursing student, how might you address Gloria's reported difficulties in bonding with her newborn? How
        might you integrate Maternal Role Attainment Theory and Rubin's Puerperal Phases to enhance parent-infant
        attachment during the postpartum period?

    4. Analyze how Gloria's history of anxiety disorder might contribute to her current postpartum experiences.
        What specific aspects of anxiety disorder could influence her psychologic adjustments and parent-infant
        attachment?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. Analyze how the physiologic changes in the postpartum period may differ for a person who had a cesarean
        section compared to a vaginal delivery. How might these differences influence recovery?

    2. How might cultural influences shape a patient's decision to seek or delay seeking postpartum care? What
        strategies can nurses employ to bridge potential gaps in cultural understanding?

    3. As a clinical nurse, how would you address physical and emotional aspects of comfort for a newly postpartum

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            20 · References 921

        patient?

    4. In what ways could you integrate nonpharmacologic interventions to promote maternal comfort in the
        postpartum period, and how would you assess the effectiveness of these interventions?

    5. Generate a comprehensive discharge plan for a postpartum patient and newborn, considering their unique
        needs. How would you ensure that the goals of discharge planning are achieved?

References

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2021). Welcoming a new sibling: How to help your child adjust. Pediatric Patient
   Education. https://doi.org/10.1542/peo_document133

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 183: Postpartum
   hemorrhage. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 130 (4), e168-e186. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000002351

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018). ACOG Committee Opinion No. 732: Influenza
   vaccination during pregnancy. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 131 (4), e109-e114. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000002588

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021a, December). Frequently asked questions: Postpartum
   depression. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/postpartum-depression

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021b). ACOG Committee Opinion No. 830: Incarcerated
   pregnant, postpartum, and nonpregnant individuals. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 138(1), e24-e33. https://doi.org/
    10.1097/AOG.0000000000004429

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022, March). Frequently asked questions: Postpartum
   management. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/postpartum-pain-management

Aprilina, H. D., Krislinggardini, K., Isnaini, N., & Suratmi, S. (2021). The effect of cabbage leaves compress on breast
   engorgement in postpartum mother. Open Access Macedonian Journal of Medical Sciences, 9(4), 124-128.
    https://doi.org/10.3889/oamjms.2021.5777

Association of Women's Health Obstetrics and Neonatal Nursing. (2021). Quantification of blood loss: AWHONN
   Practice Brief No. 13: Quantification of blood loss. Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing,
   50(4), 503-505. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jogn.2021.04.007

Barker, J., Daniels, A., O'Neal, K., & Sell, S. (2017). Maternal-newborn bonding concept analysis. International
   Journal of Nursing & Clinical Practices, 4(1). https://doi.org/10.15344/2394-4978/2017/229

Beck, C. T. (2023). Experiences of postpartum depression in women of color. MCN, the American Journal of Maternal
   Child Nursing, 48(2), 88-95. https://doi.org/10.1097/NMC.0000000000000889

Becker, H., Andrews, E., Walker, L. O., & Phillips, C. S. (2021). Health and well-being among women with physical
   disabilities after childbirth: An exploratory study. Women's Health Issues, 31(2), 140-147. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.whi.2020.10.007

Bina, R., Glasser, S., Honovich, M., Levinson, D., & Ferber, Y. (2019). Nurses perceived preparedness to screen,
   intervene, and refer women with suspected postpartum depression. Midwifery, 76, 132-141. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.midw.2019.05.009

Brunton, L. L., Hilal-Dandan, R., Knollman, B. C. (2018) Goodman & Gilman's: The pharmacological basis of
   therapeutics, 13th edition. McGraw-Hill Education.

Brunton, R., & Dryer, R. (2021). Child sexual abuse and pregnancy: A systematic review of the literature. Child Abuse
   & Neglect, 111, 104802-104802. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2020.104802

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020, December, 31). Rubella (German measles, three-day measles):
   Pregnancy and rubella. https://www.cdc.gov/rubella/pregnancy.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023, May 1). Contraindications to breastfeeding or feeding expressed
   breast milk to infants. https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/breastfeeding-special-circumstances/
922 20 · References

    contraindications-to-breastfeeding.html

Chen, B., Zhao, X., & Hu, Y. (2023). Rehabilitations for maternal diastasis recti abdominis: An update on therapeutic
   directions. Heliyon, 9(10), e20956. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e20956

Curran, T., Meter, D., Janovec, A., Brown, E., & Caban, S. (2021). Maternal adult attachment styles and mother-child
   transmissions of social skills and self-esteem. Journal of Family Studies, 27(4), 491-505. https://doi.org/
    10.1080/13229400.2019.1637365

Dagla, C., Antoniou, E., Sarantaki, A., Iliadou, M., Mrvoljak-Theodoropoulou, I., Andersson, E., & Dagla, M. (2023).
    The effect of antenatal education on expectant fathers' attitudes toward breastfeeding and attachment to the
   fetus. Nursing Reports (Pavia, Italy), 13(1), 243-254. https://doi.org/10.3390/nursrep13010023

Elsevier. (2024). Assessment: Postpartum assessment (maternal-newborn) CE. Reproductive Health.
    https://elsevier.health/en-US/preview/reproductive-health/assessment-postpartum-patients-ce

Emegoakor, F. C., Iyoke, C. A., Ezegwui, H. U., Ezugwu, F. O., Umeora, O. U., & Ibeagha, I.O. (2015). Rate and
   predictors of low serum ferritin levels among healthy parturient women in Enugu, Nigeria. Journal of Blood
   Medicine, 6, 261-267. https://doi.org/10.2147/JBM.S82411

Ernawati, E., Amirah, A., Christrijogo, S., & Aditiawarman, A. (2020). Comparison of post-caesarean section wound
   healing methods based on REEDA scale and platelet lymphocyte ratio. Systematic Reviews in Pharmacy, 11(7),
    314-318.

Farr, R. H. & Vázquez, C. P. (2020). Stigma experiences, mental health, perceived parenting competence, and parent-
   child relationships among lesbian, gay, and heterosexual adoptive parents in the United States. Frontiers in
   Psychology, 11, 445. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00445

Finlayson, K., Crossland, N., Bonet, M., & Downe, S. (2020). What matters to women in the postnatal period: A meta-
   synthesis of qualitative studies. PloS One, 15(4), e0231415. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0231415

Galziowska, K., Szadowska-Szlachetka, Z., & Domal-Drzewicka, R. (2021). Assessment of the risk of postpartum
   depression and the support expected and received by women within a year of giving birth. Zdrowie Publiczne,
   131(1), 62-66. https://doi.org/10.2478/pjph-2021-0012

Garrett, C. C., Azimov, M., Campwala, K., Sarmiento, M., & Linton, K. F. (2018). Breastfeeding practices among
   Hispanic and Non-Hispanic women at the postpartum visit. Journal of Human Lactation, 34(3), 485-493.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/0890334418774765

Gedzyk-Nieman, S. A., & McMillian-Bohler, J. (2022). Inclusive care for birthing transgender men: A review of the
   literature. Journal of Midwifery & Women's Health, 67(5), 561-568. https://doi.org/10.1111/jmwh.13397

Gomes, M. L., Nicida, L. R. de A., de Oliveira, D. C. C., Rodrigues, A., Torres, J. A., Coutinho, A. da T. D., Cravo, B. da S.
    S. de S., Dantas, J. G., Oliveira, T. B., Brandão, P., & Domingues, R. M. S. M (2023). Care at the first postnatal hour
    in two hospitals of the adequate birth project: Qualitative analysis of experiences in two stages of the healthy
   birth research. Reproductive Health, 20(2), 14. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12978-022-01540-5

Griffin, C. M. C., Amorim, M. H. C., Almeida, F. A., Marcacine, K. O., Goldman, R. E., & Coca, K. P. (2022). LATCH as a
   systematic tool for assessment of the breastfeeding technique in maternity. Acta Paul Enferm, 35, eAPE03181.
    https://doi.org/10.37689/acta-ape/2022AO03181

Griggs, K. M., Waddill, C. B., Bice, A., & Ward, N. (2021). Care during pregnancy, childbirth, postpartum, and human
   milk feeding for individuals who identify as LGBTQ. MCN, the American Journal of Maternal Child Nursing, 46(1),
    43-53. https://doi.org/10.1097/NMC.0000000000000675

Haider, M., Memon, S., Tariq, F., Fatima, S., & Hameed, A. (2020). Rhesus isoimmunization: Late-onset hemolytic
   disease of the newborn without jaundice. Cureus, 12(1), e6559. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.6559

Heath, M., Hvass, A. M. F., & Wejse, C. M. (2023). Interpreter services and effect on healthcare--A systematic review
   of the impact of different types of interpreters on patient outcome. Journal of Migration and Health, 7, 100162.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmh.2023.100162

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            20 · References 923

Howat, A., Masterson, C., & Darwin, Z. (2023). Non-birthing mothers' experiences of perinatal anxiety and
    depression: Understanding the perspectives of the non-birthing mothers in female same-sex parented families.
   Midwifery, 120, 103650. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.midw.2023.103650

Husmillo, M. (2013). Maternal role attainment theory. The International Journal of Childbirth Education, 28(2),
    46-48.

Kanakaiah, P., Sudha, M., Kumar, P. K., Gopala Raju, S. V. V., & Jameema, M. A. (2023). A comprehensive analysis of
   physiological changes across trimesters and the puerperium period. International Journal of Academic Medicine
   and Pharmacy, 5(5), 1783-1787.

Kelly, L., Martin-Kerry, J., & Prady, S. (2023). Postnatal depression and homelessness in women living in high-
   income countries: A scoping review. Psychological Studies, 68, 489-501. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s12646-023-00736-4

Khidhir, R., & Ahmed, H. (2022). Comparing result of BUBBLE-HE assessments between home versus health facility
   postnatal nursing interventions. Azerbaijan Medical Journal, 62(8), 4077-4090.

Lagarto, A., & Duaso, M. J. (2022). Fathers' experiences of fetal attachment: A qualitative study. Infant Mental
   Health Journal, 43(2), 328-339.

Lawrence, R. M., & Lawrence, R. A. (2022). Breastfeeding: A guide for the medical profession. Elsevier.

Levis, B., Negeri, Z., Sun, Y., Benedetti, A., & Thombs, B. D. (2020). Accuracy of the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression
    Scale (EPDS) for screening to detect major depression among pregnant and postpartum women: Systematic
   review and meta-analysis of individual participant data. BMJ, 371, m4022. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m4022

Martin, C., Sofinia, H., Viky, M. & Rokibullah. (2022). The physiological changes in the postpartum period after
   childbirth. Asian Journal of Social and Humanities, 1(3), 105-125. https://doi.org/10.59888/ajosh.v1i03.19

McGeough, C., Walsh, A., & Clyne, B. (2020). Barriers and facilitators perceived by women while homeless and
   pregnant in accessing antenatal and or postnatal healthcare: A qualitative evidence synthesis. Health & Social
   Care in the Community, 28(5), 1380-1393. https://doi.org/10.1111/hsc.12972

Milton, S. H. (2024, February 23). Normal labor and delivery. Practice Essentials, Definition, Stages of Labor and
    Epidemiology. Medscape. https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/260036-overview

Moldenhauer, J. S. (2022, January). Postpartum care. https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/gynecology-
    and-obstetrics/postpartum-care-and-associated-disorders/postpartum-care

Morton, A. (2021). Hematological normal ranges in pregnancy. In K. K. Chen (Ed.), Maternal medical health and
   disorders in pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.3843/GLOWM.413403

Neamu, S. D., Novac, M. B., Neamu, A. V., Stanca, I. D., Boldeanu, M. V., Gluhovschi, A., Stanca, L., Dijmrescu, A.
    L., Manolea, M. M., Tristaru, M. R., Mateescu, G. O., & Siminel, M. A. (2022). Fetal-maternal incompatibility in the
    Rh system. Rh isoimmunization associated with hereditary spherocytosis: Case presentation and review of the
   literature. Romanian Journal of Morphology and Embryology, 63(1), 229-235. https://doi.org/10.47162/
    RJME.63.1.26

Norholt, H. (2020). Revisiting the roots of attachment: A review of the biological and psychological effects of
   maternal skin-to-skin contact and carrying of full-term infants. Infant Behavior & Development, 60, 10144.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh.2020.101441

Pachankis, J. E., Mahon, C. P., Jackson, S. D., Fetzner, B. K., & Bränström, R. (2020). Sexual orientation concealment
   and mental health: A conceptual and meta-analytic review. Psychological bulletin, 146(10), 831-871.
    https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000271

Parker, S. E., Ajayi,A., & Yarrington, C. D. (2023). De novo postpartum hypertension: Incidence and risk factors at a
   safety-net hospital. Hypertension, 80(2), 279-287. https://doi.org/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.122.19275

Pezaro, S., Crowther, R., Pearce, G., Jowett, A., Godfrey-Isaacs, L., Samuels, I., & Valentine, V. (2023). Perinatal care
    for trans and nonbinary people birthing in heteronormative "maternity" services: Experiences and educational
924 20 · References

   needs of professionals. Gender & Society, 37(1), 5-171. https://doi.org/10.1177/08912432221138086

Powers, M. E., & Takagishi, J. (2021). Care of adolescent parents and their children. Pediatrics, 147(5), 1.
    https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2021-050919

Pu, Z., Sun, Z., Liu, J., Zhang, J., Cheng, M., Zhang, L., & Zhou, P. (2023). Differences in the content of human milk
   oligosaccharides between foremilk and hind milk. Food Bioengineering, 2(2), 105-113. https://doi.org/10.1002/
    fbe2.12049

Punamäki, R. L., Flykt, M., Belt, R., & Lindblom, J. (2021). Maternal substance use disorder predicting children's
   emotion regulation in middle childhood: The role of early mother-infant interaction. Heliyon, 7(4), e06728.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e06728

Roque, C. L., Morello, L. E., Arora, K. S. (2022). Postpartum contraceptive decision-making of parous teens--a
   qualitative study. Journal of Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology, 35(3), 329-335. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.jpag.2021.10.012

Rosa, A. P., & Astuti, D. A. (2021). Husband's support in the taking-hold phase of postpartum (phenomenology
   study). Open Access Macedonian Journal of Medical Sciences, 9(T4). https://doi.org/10.3889/
    oamjms.2020.5761

Rousseau, J. B., & Friedrichs, J. B. (2021). Providing a safe haven: Staff response to a simulated infant
   relinquishment in the emergency department. Journal of Emergency Nursing, 47(2), 352-358. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.jen.2020.12.005

Rubin, R. (1967). Attainment of the maternal role: Part I. Processes. Nursing Research, 16(3), 237-245.

Safitri, R. D., Wijayanti, K., & Santoso, B. (2022). Cabbage leaves extract gel for breast engorgement during lactation.
   Medisains (Online), 20(3), 77-81. https://doi.org/10.30595/medisains.v20i3.15032

ahin, E., Yildirim, F., & Büyükkayaci Duman, N. (2023). Effect of tea tree oil and coconut oil on nipple crack
   formation in the early postpartum period.Breastfeeding Medicine, 18(3), 226-232. https://doi.org/10.1089/
    bfm.2022.0260

Sangsawang, B., Wacharasin, C., & Sangsawang, N. (2019). Interventions for the prevention of postpartum
   depression in adolescent mothers: A systematic review. Archives of Women's Mental Health, 22(2), 215-228.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s00737-018-0901-7

Stolarczyk, A., Stpiski, P., Sasinowski, L., Czarnocki, T., Dbiski, M., & Macig, B. (2021). Peripartum pubic
   symphysis diastasis--Practical guidelines. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 10(11), 2443. https://doi.org/10.3390/
    jcm10112443

Trombetta, T., Giordano, M., Santoniccolo, F., Vismara, L., Della Vedova, A. M., & Rollè, L. (2021). Pre-natal
   attachment and parent-to-infant attachment: A systematic review. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 620942.
    https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.620942

United States Department of Agriculture and United States Department of Health and Human Services. (2020).
   Dietary guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025, 9th edition. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/

Vallerand, A. H., & Sanoski, C. A. (2023). Davis's drug guide (18th ed.). F. A. Davis.

Varrias, D., Sharma, N., Hentz, R., Ma, R., Gurcillo, D., Kleiman, J., Kossack, A., Wolf, E., Lam, B., Bimal, T., Ansari, U.,
    Coleman, K. M., & Mountantonakis, S. E. (2022). Clinical significance of unexplained persistent sinus tachycardia
   in women with structurally normal heart during the peripartum period. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth, 22, 677.
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-022-05012-3

World Health Organization. (2023, December 20). Infant and young child feeding. https://www.who.int/news-room/
    fact-sheets/detail/infant-and-young-child-feeding

Wu, S. L., Woo, P. J., Yap, C. C., & Lim, G. J. R. Y. (2023). Parenting practices and adolescents' mental health: The
    mediating role of perceived maternal and paternal acceptance-rejection and adolescents' self-efficacy.
   International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 20(2),1052. https://doi.org/10.3390/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            20 · References 925

    ijerph20021052
Yount, S. M., Fay, R. A., & Kissler, K. J. (2021). Prenatal and postpartum experience, knowledge and engagement

   with Kegels: A longitudinal, prospective, multisite study. Journal of Women's Health, 30(6), 891-901.
    https://doi.org/10.1089/jwh.2019.8185
926 20 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 21

Postpartum Complications

FIGURE 21.1 Postpartum Complications Postpartum complications can occur at any time from birth to 6 weeks and even up to 1 year
after birth. These complications can have a tremendous impact on the birthing person, the newborn, and the family. (credit: "First term
Airman, first time father Pt. 3: Welcome to our family!" by Airman 1st Class Travis Beihl/Keesler Air Force Base, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
21.1 Postpartum Infections
21.2 Postpartum Hemorrhage
21.3 Breasts and Breast-Feeding
21.4 Cesarean Birth Discomforts
21.5 Postpartum Mood Disorders and Psychiatric Disorders
INTRODUCTION Ideally, the postpartum period is a time for parents to bond with newborns. It is also a time for the
laboring person to rest and reflect on the labor and birth. In some cases, however, complications occur and interrupt
the routine postpartum course. Some postpartum complications, such as breast-feeding complications, perineal
discomforts, and recovery from cesarean birth, are common. Other complications, such as infections, hemorrhage,
and depression, can be more serious. The nurse plays a vital role in identifying and assisting persons with
postpartum complications and collaborates with other health-care providers to promote the best possible outcomes
for both the birthing person and the newborn.
928  21 · Postpartum Complications

     21.1 Postpartum Infections

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the risk factors and signs and symptoms of wound infections related to birth
         · Explain the risk factors and signs and symptoms of postpartum endometritis
         · Explain the risk factors and signs and symptoms of postpartum urinary tract infections
         · Explain the risk factors and signs and symptoms of postpartum mastitis
         · Explain the risk factors and signs and symptoms of postpartum thrush
         · Develop a plan of care based on the specific postpartum infection the person is experiencing

     Postpartum infections can be caused by multiple factors. Endometritis and wound infections are more likely to occur
     in persons with prolonged rupture of membranes and chorioamnionitis. Urinary tract infections can be caused by
     indwelling catheters. Mastitis can occur with a break in skin integrity from a poor latch. Some of these infections are
     preventable, while others are not. The nurse assesses for signs of postpartum infections and provides education to
     help prevent and decrease the risk for infections.

     Care of the Postpartum Person with a Wound Infection

     Infections occur more often in persons with STIs, chorioamnionitis, prolonged rupture of membranes, and third- or
     fourth-degree lacerations. Infections can be related to trauma or lacerations that occur during birth, allowing the
     introduction of bacteria. Chorioamnionitis can cause wound infections, endometritis, and sepsis (Daifotis et al.,
     2020). Postpartum wound infections can occur from bacteria ascending from the vagina, colonized on the skin, or
     introduced during a cesarean birth. Persons with a body mass index (BMI)  30 have higher risks of developing
     postpartum infections, especially wound infections. Persons with a BMI  40 are at higher risk for morbidity related
     to postpartum infection (Mitchell et al., 2020).

     Signs of postpartum wound infections are the same as those of other laceration or perioperative wound infections.
     Signs include redness and purulent drainage from the laceration, episiotomy, or abdominal incision; fever
     (temperature greater than 100.4° F/38° C); pain; and fatigue. Nursing care of the postpartum person includes
     assessment of the laceration, episiotomy, or incision for signs of infection and pharmacologic treatment of the
     infection per provider's orders. The nurse educates the postpartum person to keep the wound clean and dry, to
     wash hands before and after touching the wound, and to call the health-care provider for worsening signs of
     infection after discharge from the birthing facility, such as increase in purulent drainage, increase in wound pain, and
     increase in fever.

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     Antibiotics for Postpartum Wound Infections

     Ampicillin and gentamicin are often administered to postpartum persons to treat wound infections in the perineum
     and after a cesarean birth. Both of these antibiotics are safe to use if the postpartum person is breast-feeding. The
     postpartum person is provided with instructions to call their health care provider if the signs and symptoms of the
     infection do not improve after 3 to 5 days of antibiotics.

     Ampicillin (Omnipen)

         · Classification: penicillin antibiotic
         · Route/Dosage: PO: 250 or 500 mg; IM: 1-2 g; IV: 1-2 g
         · Indications: treatment of infections caused by gram positive and negative infections
         · Mechanism of Action: kills the bacteria by interfering with cell wall synthesis during replication
         · Contraindications: hypersensitivity to any penicillin; renal disease
         · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: nausea, vomiting, rash, hives, urticaria, pancytopenia,
         · Nursing Implications: The nurse ensures the postpartum person understands it is important to take all of the

             antibiotic. The nurse monitors the patient's vital signs, CBC, and culture reports.
         · Parent/Family Education: Call health care provider for difficulty breathing, dark urine, severe diarrhea,

     Access for free at openstax.org
21.1 · Postpartum Infections                                                                                          929

        wheezing, chest tightness, fever, itching, swelling of face, lips, tongue, or throat

Gentamicin (Garamycin)

    · Classification: aminoglycoside antibiotic
    · Route/Dosage: IM or IV: 1 mg/kg/day
    · High Alert/Black Box Warning: gentamicin toxicity is associated nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity
    · Indications: treatment of infections caused by gram positive and negative infections
    · Mechanism of Action: kills the bacteria by inhibiting protein synthesis in susceptible bacteria
    · Contraindications: hypersensitivity to gentamicin; renal disease
    · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: rash, hives, urticaria, tinnitus, dizziness, vertigo, seizures
    · Nursing Implications: The nurse ensures the postpartum person understands it is important to take all of the

        antibiotic. The nurse monitors the patient's vital signs, CBC, and culture reports.

(Vallerand & Sansoski, 2023)

Care of the Postpartum Person with Endometritis

Infection of the uterus that occurs in the postpartum period is postpartum endometritis. It occurs more often with
chorioamnionitis, prolonged rupture of membranes, and cesarean birth (Elsevier, 2024). Symptoms of postpartum
endometritis include uterine tenderness or pain with fundal massage, foul-smelling lochia, increased bleeding, and
fever. The nurse will administer antibiotics and antipyretics according to the health-care provider's orders. The
nurse monitors the patient for signs of worsening infection (severe uterine pain, increase in odor of lochia, rising
fever). Endometritis can lead to sepsis (Shields et al., 2023). The nurse closely monitors the postpartum person for
early signs of sepsis (increased or decreased white blood cell [WBC] count, fever, chills, low body temperature,
tachycardia, dizziness, decreased urine output, and discolored skin). Onset of altered mental state and hypotension
are signs of worsening sepsis (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2023b). When providing discharge
instructions to the postpartum person diagnosed with endometritis, the nurse educates the person on finishing their
medications once discharged, continuing peri-care, handwashing, the importance of getting rest, and contacting
their health-care provider if signs of worsening infection appear.

  CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

  Recognize Cues: Postpartum Endometritis

  The nurse will recognize the cues of postpartum endometritis by:

     1. assessing the fundus
             recognizing pain or tenderness
             recognizing increased bleeding

     2. assessing vital signs
             recognizing fever (temperature 100.4° F/38° C)

     3. assessing lochia
             recognizing foul-smelling lochia

     4. assessing level of coping
             recognizing the postpartum person is extremely tired
             recognizing the person is complaining of malaise
             recognizing the person is not wanting to get out of bed

Care of the Postpartum Person with a Urinary Tract Infection

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) occur in 2 percent to 4 percent of births and are the most common postpartum
infection (Gundersen et al., 2018). UTIs occur more often in those with a urinary catheter during labor. However,
some postpartum persons experience urinary retention after birth, and this can contribute to UTIs. The nurse
assesses for signs of overdistention of the bladder or urinary retention during the postpartum period, such as
palpable bladder, uterine atony and displacement, and frequently voiding in small amounts.
930  21 · Postpartum Complications

     Signs of a UTI include frequency, urgency, dysuria, hematuria, fever, and pain. The nurse assesses the postpartum
     person for signs the UTI has ascended to the kidneys by noting costovertebral angle tenderness (CVAT), high fever,
     nausea, and chills. The health-care provider is notified of these signs, and many times a urine culture and sensitivity
     are ordered (Milton, 2024). The nurse administers antibiotics and antipyretics per the health-care provider's orders
     and monitors the culture and sensitivity reports. Education provided to the postpartum person includes encouraging
     increased water intake and frequent urination, finishing all antibiotics after discharge from the birthing facility,
     importance of perineal care and handwashing, and instructions to call the health-care provider for worsening
     symptoms (increase in fever, increase in suprapubic or flank pain, and flu-like symptoms).

     Care of the Postpartum Person with Mastitis

     Inflammation and/or infection of the breast, or mastitis, occurs most often while breast-feeding. Causes of mastitis
     include clogged ducts, engorgement, hyperlactation, nipple trauma, decreased immune system, or poor
     handwashing routine. Clogged ducts occur with constricting clothes or compression of the breast and cause milk to
     collect and create a painful, firm area. If the inflammation and milk stasis continue, mastitis can occur. Another
     cause of mastitis is an incorrect nursing latch that causes cracks or fissures in the nipple (ahin et al., 2023). Such
     breaks in skin integrity allow bacteria to enter the nipple.

     Symptoms of mastitis include fever, chills, flu-like symptoms, and a painful, hot, reddened area of the breast (Figure
     21.2). The nurse assesses the patient while breast-feeding for a good latch and examines nipples for cracking or
     redness. The nurse or lactation consultant can assist the patient to establish a good latch (See 21.3 Breasts and
     Breast-Feeding and Chapter 24 Care of the Typical Newborn for more information on LATCH). The nurse provides
     education regarding nipple integrity, explaining the importance of establishing a good latch and, if the latch hurts, to
     remove the baby and relatch. The nursing person should examine the nipples for cracking or bleeding. The person
     can use nipple ointment for faster healing in hopes of preventing mastitis. For the patient with mastitis, the nurse
     should encourage nursing every 2 to 3 hours to empty breasts for comfort and to avoid engorgement. If the breasts
     are too painful for nursing, the patient can pump to empty the breasts and maintain milk supply. The nurse can
     teach the patient to apply a cool (or warm) compress to the reddened area and to use nonsteroidal anti-
     inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or acetaminophen (Tylenol) to decrease pain (Louis-Jacques et al., 2023). Increasing
     water intake is important to maintain milk supply. Prompt evaluation by the health-care provider is important, as
     antibiotics are routinely ordered and should be started soon after the diagnosis to prevent progression to breast
     abscess.

     FIGURE 21.2 Mastitis This breast shows classic signs of the redness and inflammation of mastitis. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
     OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Care of the Postpartum Person with Thrush

     Thrush is a yeast (fungal) infection of the breast that causes a red rash around the nipple. Thrush causes the nipple
     to itch and burn and can cause shooting breast pain upon latching. Thrush present in the newborn's mouth can be
     passed between the newborn and the breast-feeding person; therefore, both must be treated with an antifungal
     medication. The nurse assesses the breast and nipple after a nursing session to observe for signs of nipple trauma
     (cracking, redness, pain), a risk factor for developing thrush (Louis-Jacques et al., 2023). When the nurse observes
     nipple thrush, education is provided to the breast-feeding person to allow nipples to dry before putting on a bra or

     Access for free at openstax.org
21.1 · Postpartum Infections                                                                                           931

nursing pads, to change nursing pads as soon as they are damp, and to wash hands well prior to every nursing. Wet,
dark areas are perfect media for yeast, especially with milk present to feed the yeast. Once thrush is resolved, the
breast-feeding person should continue to monitor the newborn's mouth for any signs of thrush in the future and
contact the pediatrician and their health-care provider to initiate treatment for them both as soon as possible if
thrush is detected.

Nursing Interventions for the Person Experiencing a Postpartum Infection

As discussed previously, nursing interventions begin with prevention of postpartum infections. Postpartum
infections account for 5 percent to 10 percent of the morbidity and mortality of postpartum persons (Boushra &
Rahman, 2023). The importance of handwashing and perineal care is reinforced. The nurse also encourages the
postpartum person to get as much sleep as possible, eat a healthy diet with plenty of protein, and boost the immune
system with fruits, vegetables, vitamin C, and vitamin D. Pelvic rest (avoiding sex, tampons, or douching) to prevent
infections is reviewed at discharge. Sitz baths are encouraged, as they promote cleansing and healing of the
perineum (Milton, 2024).

Recognizing the signs of infection and treating it promptly decreases the risk of morbidity and mortality from
postpartum infections. During nursing assessments, a temperature of 38° C/100.4° F is considered a fever and
should be addressed. Tachycardia can be another sign of infection. Infections of the perineum or incision are
assessed using the REEDA scale (redness, edema, ecchymosis, discharge, and approximation; see Table 20.4)
(Ernawati et al., 2020). Uterine infections are often recognized during a fundal massage that causes pain or a fundus
that is not involuted properly. Nausea and vomiting and other flu-like symptoms are additional signs of infection.

Caring for the person with a postpartum infection includes administering antibiotics per the health-care provider's
orders. Breast-feeding persons should continue to breast-feed because the majority of antibiotics used to treat
postpartum infections are not contraindicated. Monitoring the person's pain and administering pain medication are
important interventions. The nurse is aware that increasing pain could signal worsening of the infection. Reviewing
lab results for WBCs can help determine improvement or worsening of an infection. Prompt notification of the
health-care provider is essential if the nurse notices signs of sepsis.

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

QSEN: Evidence-Based Practice of Sepsis

The California Maternal Quality Care Collaborative (CMQCC) has developed a screening system for maternal sepsis
that was adopted by the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (Shields et al., 2023). The evidence shows that early
recognition of maternal sepsis decreases maternal mortality. The CMQCC recommends the following initial sepsis
screen:

The screen is positive if 2 of 4 criteria are met:

    · oral temperature <36° C (98.8° F) or  38° C (100.4° F)
    · heart rate >110 beats per minute
    · respiratory rate >24 breaths per minute
    · WBCs >15,000/mm3 or <4,000mm3 or >10 percent bands

Nurses can help decrease maternal morbidity and mortality by using evidence-based screening such as this sepsis
screen.

Discharge teaching for the person with a postpartum infection includes teaching the person when to take any
prescribed medications, whether to take the medications with or without food, which food(s) to avoid during
antibiotic therapy, and the importance of completing the antibiotic regimen. Teaching also includes watching for
signs of worsening infection and indications to contact their health-care provider, such as pain, fever, increased
lochia, foul-smelling discharge, breakdown of perineal wound, purulent discharge from the incision, painful
urination, and abdominal pain. Persons should be instructed to ask for help with housework and childcare, as rest is
important for healing.
932  21 · Postpartum Complications

     21.2 Postpartum Hemorrhage

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Differentiate between immediate (early) postpartum hemorrhage and secondary (late) postpartum
             hemorrhage

         · Analyze the risk factors and causes of postpartum hemorrhage
         · Explain the management of a postpartum hemorrhage
         · Develop a nursing diagnosis that would be appropriate for a person experiencing a postpartum

             hemorrhage

     Postpartum hemorrhage (PPH) is one of the most common complications of birth, occurring after 1 percent to 5
     percent of births. PPH is defined by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG; 2017) as 1,000
     mL of blood loss within 24 hours of birth for both vaginal and cesarean births. However, if 500 mL of blood is lost
     after a vaginal birth, this indicates a need for intervention.

     Detection of Postpartum Hemorrhage

     Labor and postpartum nurses must be aware of risk factors, prevention, and treatment of PPH. Risk factors include
     large for gestational age (LGA) infant, multiple gestation, grand multiparity, prolonged labor, chorioamnionitis,
     prolonged or precipitous labor, and placenta previa or placental abruption. Facilities have instituted a PPH risk-
     assessment tool to be used in recognizing those at risk for PPH (Faysal et al., 2023). This tool allows the nurse to
     prepare and monitor for a potential PPH. Some providers practice active management of the third stage of labor,
     meaning the health-care provider may apply umbilical cord traction to deliver the placenta quickly, order oxytocin
     (Pitocin) to be administered after the birth of the placenta, and begin uterine massage after delivery of the placenta
     (ACOG, 2017). Estimating blood loss is difficult because blood is mixed with amniotic fluid. The nurse plays a role in
     early detection of PPH by performing quantitative blood loss (QBL), the process of weighing and measuring the
     amount of blood lost during the birth and immediately postpartum. Many birthing facilities have a rapid response or
     hemorrhage team the nurse can activate during PPH cases. A multidisciplinary team is vital in treating PPH and
     preventing maternal mortality.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     The Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses (AWHONN) provides guidelines for quantifying
     blood loss during childbirth. Accurate measurement of blood loss is crucial for identifying postpartum hemorrhage
     and ensuring timely interventions. This video describes how to accurately quantify blood loss (https://openstax.org/
     r/77bloodloss) during childbirth.

     Morbidity and Mortality Specific to Postpartum Hemorrhage in the United States
     Approximately 11 percent of maternal deaths in the United States are caused by PPH; unfortunately, 54 percent to
     93 percent of those deaths may have been preventable (ACOG, 2019). ACOG notes that some preventable cases are
     due to health-care providers underestimating the amount of blood loss and delaying treatment of PPH. This led to
     ACOG (2019) recommending that quantitative blood loss be assessed at all births.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Global Results of Postpartum Hemorrhage

     Postpartum hemorrhage causes 25 percent of all maternal deaths globally and is the leading cause of maternal
     mortality in low-income countries (Yeshitila et al., 2021). In low-income countries such as Ethiopia, delay in
     receiving care for obstetric complications is a major risk factor for maternal mortality. Non-pneumatic anti-shock
     garments (NASGs) are used in low-resource areas to prevent shock and death from postpartum hemorrhage. NASGs
     are neoprene and Velcro devices applied to the legs, similar to a sequential compression device (Figure 21.3). The
     NASG is then applied to the pelvis and abdomen to compress those areas and increase blood flow to the heart,

     Access for free at openstax.org
21.2 · Postpartum Hemorrhage                                                                                                                933

lungs, and brain. This device can prevent hypovolemic shock while transporting the postpartum person to a higher
level of care. In Ethiopia, the NASG was introduced in 2011 and has reduced maternal deaths from postpartum
hemorrhage by 79 percent (Yeshitila et al., 2021). In low-income areas, this device has made an overwhelming
difference for birthing women.

FIGURE 21.3 Non-pneumatic Anti-shock Garments The non-pneumatic anti-shock garment is placed to increase blood to the heart,
lungs, and brain after a postpartum hemorrhage. (credit: "Non-pneumatic Anti-Shock Garment" by Alison El Ayadi, Elizabeth Butrick, Jillian
Geissler, and Suellen Miller/ResearchGate.net, CC BY 2.0).

Early (Primary) Postpartum Hemorrhage
Postpartum hemorrhage that occurs after the birth of the placenta up to 24 hours postpartum is considered early
PPH or primary PPH. It is more common than secondary, or late, PPH. Common causes of PPH are the four
T's--tone, trauma, tissue, and thrombin--with uterine atony being the most common cause of early PPH (Salati et al.,
2019). Because of the increased blood volume of the pregnant person, classic signs of hypovolemia may not occur
until a significant hemorrhage has occurred. See Chapter 19 Complications of Labor and Birth for further discussion
of early (primary) postpartum hemorrhage.

Late (Secondary) Postpartum Hemorrhage
Postpartum hemorrhage that occurs after the first 24 hours up to 12 weeks postpartum is considered late PPH or
secondary PPH. The most common cause of late PPH is subinvolution, which is the inability of the uterus to return
to its original size. At the 6-week follow-up, subinvolution is diagnosed when the patient's uterus is larger than
expected and the lochia has not progressed to lochia alba. Retained placenta or membranes can be another cause
of late PPH and can also lead to infection and bleeding. Just as coagulation disorders can cause early PPH, these
disorders can also cause late PPH. The nurse will give the patient anticipatory guidance and signs of when to call
their health-care provider if late PPH were to occur.

Recognizing Postpartum Hemorrhage
Nurses caring for postpartum patients need to monitor for and recognize the signs and symptoms of postpartum
hemorrhage before the patient is compromised. Two important nursing actions are monitoring blood loss and
recognizing the signs and symptoms of hypovolemia. Both of these actions provide nurses with cues to diagnose
fluid volume deficit.

Quantitative Blood Loss
Measuring quantitative blood loss (QBL) has been recommended for all births by ACOG (2019) because estimated
blood loss is inaccurate. Research has shown that blood loss is underestimated with larger blood loss and
934  21 · Postpartum Complications

     overestimated with smaller blood loss (ACOG, 2019). To perform QBL, birthing facilities must provide scales for
     weighing sponges and drapes that allow quantification of blood loss. Research has also found that facilities using
     QBL have reduced rates of maternal morbidity, decreased time until escalation of care, and increased team
     awareness of the need for emergency intervention (AWHONN, 2021).

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Determining Quantitative Blood Loss

     The Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses (AWHONN) recommends the following
     education and supplies be utilized for determining QBL:

       1. using standardized items to calculate QBL
       2. ensuring all labor and postpartum rooms and operative suites have access to scales and PPH carts
       3. attaching a laminated list of the dry weight of sponges and pads to all scales for accurate measurement
       4. ensuring electronic charting automatically deducts dry weights from wet weights
       5. providing laminated staging algorithms in each room or on the PPH cart
       6. practicing simulation drills for PPH with all members of the interprofessional team
       7. debriefing after each PPH to identify areas of needed education

     (AWHONN, 2021)

     Signs and Symptoms of Hypovolemia
     The blood loss from postpartum hemorrhage results in hypovolemia. Early symptoms and signs of hypovolemia
     include feeling weak, dizzy, and anxious; decreased blood pressure; and increased pulse and respiratory rates.
     Severe hypovolemia causes tachycardia, hypotension, decreased oxygen saturation, thirst, restlessness, low body
     temperature, and decreased urinary output (Figure 21.4). The postpartum person becomes pale and diaphoretic,
     confused, and loses consciousness as the hypovolemia becomes critical. The pregnant person has 50 percent more
     blood volume than the nonpregnant person (Agrawal et al., 2018). As a result, the postpartum person may not
     exhibit signs of hypovolemia until they have lost a significant amount of blood. Therefore, the nurse monitors blood
     loss closely for all postpartum patients, especially for those persons at higher risk for PPH.

     Access for free at openstax.org
21.2 · Postpartum Hemorrhage                                                                                                         935

FIGURE 21.4 Hypovolemic Shock These are symptoms and signs of hypovolemic shock. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)

Causes of Postpartum Hemorrhage

As mentioned earlier, the causes of postpartum hemorrhage can be summarized using the four T's of tone, trauma,
tissue, and thrombin. See Chapter 19 Complications of Labor and Birth for further discussion of the four Ts.

Tone
Tone refers to the tone of the uterus. To stop bleeding from the placental site, the uterine muscles contract to
strangulate the spiral arteries that are feeding blood to the placenta. If the uterine muscles are not contracted, the
fundus is soft and boggy, and the spiral arteries are free to pump blood and cause rapid blood loss. Risk factors
associated with PPH secondary to uterine atony include a large number of previous births, chorioamnionitis,
prolonged labor with oxytocin (Pitocin) use, general anesthesia, macrosomic babies, multiple gestations, and
polyhydramnios. A full bladder can also impede the uterus from contracting (Milton, 2024).

Trauma
Trauma refers to lacerations in the reproductive tract, uterine rupture, hematomas, and uterine inversion. All these
circumstances can cause rapid blood loss. Hematomas might not be identified immediately, but the postpartum
person will report increased pain, and vital signs will show a decrease in blood pressure and an increase in heart
rate. Risk factors for PPH secondary to trauma include precipitous birth, delivery of an LGA infant, poor nutritional
status, use of oxytocin during labor, uterine tachysystole, and the use of vacuum extractor or obstetric forceps. Risk
factors leading to uterine inversion are excessive traction on the umbilical cord and fundal placenta implantation
(Milton, 2024).

Tissue
Tissue refers to retained placental tissue. The retained tissue can be a large cotyledon or a small piece of
membrane. This tissue interrupts the uterus from contracting and leads to PPH. Risk factors for retained placenta
are early preterm birth (less than 32 weeks' gestation), extra placental lobes, placenta accreta, and a history of
uterine surgery. Retained tissue can also lead to postpartum infection (Shields et al., 2023).
936  21 · Postpartum Complications

     Thrombin
     Thrombin refers to coagulation disorders. Disorders in the activation or amount of thrombin include von Willebrand
     disease and thrombocytopenia. Other bleeding disorders include lack of required features of the clotting cascade
     (ACOG, 2017). Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) can also lead to PPH because of the inability of the
     blood to clot. See Chapter 19 Complications of Labor and Birth for further discussion of DIC. Risk factors for
     coagulation issues are intrauterine fetal demise, placental abruption, sepsis, DIC, and genetic coagulation disease
     (ACOG, 2017).

     Management of Postpartum Hemorrhage

     Management of PPH differs for early and late PPH. Late PPH is managed in the office or perhaps in the emergency
     department and many times is treated with antibiotics or methylergonovine (Methergine). If retained placental
     products are suspected, dilation and curettage may be performed. Management of early PPH occurs in the birthing
     room and will depend on the cause of the hemorrhage. Because uterine atony is the most common cause of early
     PPH, interventions to induce uterine contractions are quickly performed.

     Fundal Massage
     Fundal massage is the technique of massaging the uterus to stimulate contractions to decrease postpartum
     bleeding. The nurse places one hand on the fundus and the other hand guards the uterus. The hand on the fundus
     massages until the uterus becomes firm. When the uterus contracts, it stops the blood from being pumped by the
     spiral arteries (Bilgin & Komurcu, 2020). This is almost always the first intervention for postpartum bleeding. Figure
     21.5 demonstrates fundal massage.

     FIGURE 21.5 Fundal Massage The nurse massages the fundus to induce uterine contractions to control postpartum bleeding. (attribution:
     Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Oxytocin
     Oxytocin (Pitocin) is the first-line medication to treat PPH. The usual dose is 10 to 40 units in 500 to 1,000 mL of
     intravenous (IV) fluid (ACOG, 2017). During PPH, oxytocin is infused as a bolus. It can also be administered
     intramuscularly (IM) with the usual dose of 10 units when IV access is not available. The goal is to stimulate
     contractions to treat uterine atony. The nurse explains to the postpartum person that strong uterine contractions
     will occur due to oxytocin administration but that the medication will treat or prevent PPH. See Chapter 19
     Complications of Labor and Birth for further information regarding oxytocin.

     Access for free at openstax.org
21.2 · Postpartum Hemorrhage                                                                                           937

Misoprostol
Misoprostol (Cytotec) is a prostaglandin used for cervical ripening or labor induction. It is also used to treat PPH
because it induces uterine contractions. The usual dose for PPH is 600 to 1,000 mcg orally, rectally, or sublingually
(ACOG, 2017). Even though it is a prostaglandin, misoprostol does not cause reactive airway constriction or an
asthma flare. It can be given to persons with hypertension. Therefore, it is a safe prostaglandin to be administered
to most postpartum persons. Misoprostol can, however, cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, chills, some rise in blood
pressure, and fever. These symptoms are not severe and resolve over several hours.

Methylergonovine
Methylergonovine (Methergine) is also a uterotonic. It produces sustained uterine contractions to help treat PPH. It
is the only uterotonic that causes sustained versus rhythmic contractions. The usual dose is 0.2 mg IM for early PPH
(ACOG, 2017). It should not be given IV. It should also not be given to persons with hypertension or preeclampsia.
Methylergonovine can be used for late PPH and subinvolution, but it is administered orally for several days. The side
effects of methylergonovine include nausea, vomiting, and hypertension.

Carboprost
Carboprost (Hemabate) is a strong prostaglandin that induces uterine contractions. The usual dose is 250 mcg IM
(ACOG, 2017). It can also be administered into the muscle of the uterus by the health-care provider in a severe case
of PPH. Carboprost has serious side effects, and the nurse should inform the postpartum person that the following
side effects may occur: nausea, vomiting, fever, diarrhea, chills, and bronchospasm. The nurse may medicate the
person with an antipyretic and antidiarrheal, as prescribed, to possibly prevent these side effects. Carboprost
should not be given to a person with asthma due to its bronchospasm side effect.

Tranexamic Acid
Tranexamic acid, or TXA (Cyklokapron), is an antifibrinolytic that can reduce mortality from PPH by reducing
complications from the clotting cascade (ACOG, 2017). TXA blocks the breakdown of clots; prevents bleeding
complications, such as DIC; and has very few side effects. The usual dose is 1 g in 100 mL of IV fluid administered
over 10 minutes. It should be given within 3 hours of birth and is prescribed in conjunction with a uterotonic.

Intrauterine Tamponade
When PPH continues despite uterotonic administration and bimanual massage, compression of the uterus through
bimanual compression or intrauterine tamponade may be the next intervention; the uterine tamponade system is
inserted by the health-care provider (ACOG, 2017). Two systems of intrauterine tamponade are available in the
United States, the Bakri Balloon and the Jada System. If neither is available, some health-care providers will pack
the uterus with gauze. The Bakri Balloon is designed to be used as a tamponade during a PPH (Figure 21.6). The
balloon is placed in the uterus and inflated by the health-care provider. Acting as a tamponade, the balloon
compresses the inside of the uterus to stop the bleeding.
938  21 · Postpartum Complications

     FIGURE 21.6 Bakri Balloon The Bakri Balloon is used as a tamponade in the uterus during a PPH. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
     OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

             LINK TO LEARNING

     This video from Cook Medical, the manufacturer of the Bakri (https://openstax.org/r/77bakriballoon) balloon,
     explains how it is inserted.
     The Jada System is a device that uses an intrauterine vacuum to contract the uterus around the device to stop the
     bleeding. It is also placed by a health-care provider. The system is then connected to a vacuum device or wall
     suction (Figure 21.7).

             LINK TO LEARNING

     This video from Jada (https://openstax.org/r/77JadaSystem) explains how the system is inserted and how it works.

     FIGURE 21.7 Jada System for Intrauterine Tamponade The Jada System is inserted by the health-care provider to treat PPH by causing
     the uterus to contract around the device to stop the uterus from bleeding. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY
     4.0 license)

     Access for free at openstax.org
21.2 · Postpartum Hemorrhage                                                                                               939

Hysterectomy
Hysterectomy is the last procedure if all other interventions to control a PPH have failed. The uterus is removed, and
the blood vessels feeding the uterus are tied off and cauterized. Because the uterus is removed, a hysterectomy
results in permanent sterilization (Kallianidis et al., 2021). The risk of surgical complications is increased, including
infection, further blood loss, bladder and ureteral injuries, and damage to the bowel. The postpartum person will
need a great amount of emotional support from the nurse after an unexpected hysterectomy. The nurse will provide
postsurgical care and education, including encouragement of ambulation, teaching about signs of infection of the
incision, pain control, and help with breast-feeding to avoid pain from the surgical site.

Nursing Assessment and Diagnosis

Nursing assessment for PPH begins by determining risk factors prior to birth. Several tools have been developed to
measure a postpartum person's risk for PPH (Lagrew et al., 2022). Assessment for PPH continues until discharge.
The nurse will watch for bladder distention that could cause uterine atony and assist the patient in emptying the
bladder in those cases. The nurse encourages the patient to void frequently (every 2 hours), performs QBL
throughout the postpartum hospitalization, monitors vital signs for symptoms of hypovolemia, performs fundal
assessment of the tone of the uterus and massages the fundus when needed, and assesses the perineum for signs
of hematoma (Elsevier, 2024). When caring for a patient who had a cesarean birth, the nurse assesses the abdomen
and incision for bleeding. Nursing diagnoses made according to these assessments include fluid volume deficit,
impaired tissue perfusion, and risk for excessive bleeding.

Fluid Volume Deficit
Postpartum hemorrhage causes the postpartum person to have a deficiency in fluid volume. The nurse will assess
for signs of dehydration (increased thirst, weakness, tachycardia, decreased urine output). The nurse will administer
a rapid bolus of IV fluids or a blood transfusion to replace the lost fluid volume as prescribed by the health-care
provider. When a blood transfusion is ordered, the nurse will also monitor for signs of a transfusion reaction and
fluid overload. Urine output is monitored and should be at least 30 mL/hr. If the person does not have an indwelling
urinary catheter, the nurse may insert one to monitor output more closely, when ordered.

Impaired Tissue Perfusion
The nurse will monitor capillary refill and oxygen saturation to assess for decreased tissue perfusion. During a PPH,
the vessels of the extremities contract to shunt blood to the lungs, heart, and brain. Therefore, peripheral perfusion
is decreased. A warm blanket is wrapped around the person to keep the body and extremities warm. The nurse
positions the person with elevated legs and keeps the person on bed rest. Supplemental oxygen can be
administered and titrated based on the oxygen saturation, as prescribed.

Risk for Excessive Bleeding
The nurse assesses for signs of excessive bleeding from the uterus, incision, and potential sites of hematomas. The
nurse also assesses for cues that bleeding continues to be excessive. These cues include worsening vital signs,
change in neurologic status, shortness of breath, pallor, and soaking a peripad in less than 1 hour. Lab results (CBC
and clotting studies) are monitored often. Fundal assessment and massage are performed frequently to ensure the
uterus continues to stay contracted (firm).

  UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

  Labor and Delivery: Part 3

  See Labor and Delivery: Part 2 for a review of the patient data.

  After 20 hours of labor, Brianne had a vaginal delivery of a male infant with mild shoulder dystocia (shoulders
  delivered within 30 seconds). Infant birth weight is 3,995 g. Placenta delivered spontaneously and intact by
  inspection. A second-degree vaginal laceration was repaired. Quantitative blood loss is 450 mL. The postpartum
  admitting nurse received the past medical history during the SBAR (situation, background, assessment, and
  recommendation tool) from the labor and birth unit.
940  21 · Postpartum Complications

     Past medical   36 years old, G1 P1
     history        Allergy to penicillin
                    A negative, antibody screen negative
     Nursing notes  Rubella nonimmune
                    Negative tests for STIs at initial prenatal visit and 36 weeks' gestation
                    GBS positive and treated during labor
                    Gestational diabetes diagnosed at 26 weeks
                    Husband, Trey, present for labor and birth, very supportive

                    Postpartum Admission Assessment

                    Postpartum Data          Data Obtained at Admission to the Floor

                    Maternal BP              128/84

                    Maternal TPR             99.6°F, 88, 18

                    Pain/location            2/perineal

                    Breasts                  Soft/nipples intact

                    Location of fundus       Midline/2 finger breadths below umbilicus

                    Consistency of fundus    Firm

                    Color of lochia          Rubra

                    Amount of lochia         Moderate

                    Abnormal odor to lochia  Absent

                    Labial edema             Present

                    Laceration               Intact

                    Perineum                 Soft, no bruising

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                21.2 · Postpartum Hemorrhage              941

Flowchart          Vital Signs
                   Admission to L&B Unit
                   BP 128/74; Temp 98.2 (F), Pulse 84, Resp 18
                   10 hours after admission
                   120/64; 98.4°F, 76, 20
                   14 hours after admission
                   124/68; 99.8°F, 80, 20
                   1 hour after birth
                   118/68; 99.4°F, 84, 18

Provider's orders  Transfer to mother/baby unit
                   IV 1,000 mL LR with 20 units oxytocin (Pitocin) at 125 mL/hr
                   May discontinue IV fluids when patient is tolerating regular diet and voiding without
                   difficulty
                   Regular diet
                   Continue pad count to monitor cumulative QBL (quantitative blood loss)
                   Ice pack to perineum for 24 hours
                   Ibuprofen 600 mg po every 6 hours prn pain
                   May get out of bed and shower with assistance when stable and has recovered from
                   epidural
                   RhoGAM workup if Rh negative
                   Administer rubella vaccine before discharge if nonimmune

1. The nurse assesses the patient 2 hours after admission to the mother/baby unit.

                   Postpartum Data     Current Data

                   Maternal BP         124/64

                   Maternal TPR        99.4 °F, 92, 20

                   Pain/location       4/uterine cramping

                   Breasts             Soft/nipples intact

                   Location of fundus  Deviated to right/2 finger breadths above umbilicus

                   Consistency of fundus Boggy

                   Color of lochia     Rubra

                   Amount of lochia    Saturated peripad and passed two walnut-sized clots

                   Abnormal odor to lochia absent

                   Labial edema        present

                   Laceration          intact

                   Perineum            soft, no bruising
942  21 · Postpartum Complications

     What are the priority nursing actions at this time? Select three that apply.

       a. Administer ibuprofen 600 mg po now.
       b. Discuss the purpose of Rho(D) immune globulin.
        c. Insert a Foley catheter to empty the bladder.
       d. Educate the patient on signs and symptoms of preeclampsia.
       e. Determine the patient's QBL.
        f. Educate the patient on the importance of ice to the perineum for the first 24 hours.
       g. Massage the patient's uterus.
       h. Assist the patient to the bathroom to void.

     2. The nurse performs the priority nursing actions and obtains new patient data on Brianne. Identify if the
         new patient data demonstrate that nursing actions were effective, unchanged, or ineffective.

     Patient Data  Data Obtained prior to Nursing      New Patient Data after    Effective, Ineffective,
                   Actions                             Nursing Actions           or Unchanged

     Pain/location 5/uterine cramping                  2/uterine cramping        a. effective
                                                                                 b. ineffective
                                                                                 c. unchanged

     Location of   Deviated to right/2 finger breaths  Midline/at the umbilicus  a. effective
     fundus        above umbilicus                                               b. ineffective
                                                                                 c. unchanged

     Consistency   Boggy                               Firm                      a. effective
     of fundus                                                                   b. ineffective
                                                                                 c. unchanged

     Color of      Rubra                               Rubra                     a. effective
     lochia                                                                      b. ineffective
                                                                                 c. unchanged

     Amount of     Saturated peripad and passed        Saturated ¼ of the        a. effective
     lochia        two walnut-sized clots              peripad                   b. ineffective
                                                                                 c. unchanged

     Laceration    Intact                              Intact                    a. effective
                                                                                 b. ineffective
                                                                                 c. unchanged

     Perineum      Soft, no bruising                   Soft, no bruising         a. effective
                                                                                 b. ineffective
                                                                                 c. unchanged

     21.3 Breasts and Breast-Feeding

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the difficulties a person learning to breast-feed may experience
         · Provide education for a person attempting to breast-feed a preterm neonate
     Breast-feeding persons are taught to wear supportive bras, feed newborns on demand, ensure a good latch, and air-

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         21.3 · Breasts and Breast-Feeding                943

dry nipples. Breast-feeding can be complicated because the breast-feeding person and the newborn must work
together to ensure a good latch, empty the breast, and stimulate the breasts to make more milk. The nurse provides
support and education to help breast-feeding proceed without difficulties. When difficulties do arise, the nurse
develops interventions to help overcome them to promote a successful breast-feeding relationship.

Breast-Feeding Difficulties

Breast-feeding difficulties can occur at the initiation of breast-feeding or later in the postpartum period. Ineffective
latch can be corrected by the nurse or lactation consultant. Cracked and sore nipples are most often the
consequence of an ineffective latch. Breast engorgement usually occurs on postpartum day 3 to 5 (ACOG, 2022).
Inadequate supply can occur anytime during the breast-feeding relationship. Once the person and infant are
discharged home, community resources are available to assist in breast-feeding, such as lactation consultants, La
Leche League, and WIC.

Ineffective Latch
To transfer milk, the infant must have an effective latch. Signs of a good latch include the nipple feeling comfortable
and pain free, the infant's chest being against the breast-feeding person's chest, the infant's head being straight and
not turned to the side, and the infant's mouth being wide prior to latching. The areola, not just the nipple, should be
in the infant's mouth. The nurse encourages the person to try to relax and deep breathe. Signs of an inadequate
latch include painful, cracked nipples; nipples shaped irregularly after nursing; and lack of emptying of the breast. If
the ineffective latch continues, the person will eventually have inadequate milk supply (Griffin et al., 2022).

The LATCH screen (shown in Table 21.1) helps the nurse determine if the infant is getting a good latch to avoid
nipple trauma and inadequate supply. The higher the score on the LATCH screen, the better the latch.

Score       0                           1                       2

Latch       Sleepy, no latch            Holds nipple in mouth,  Holds nipple and areola in mouth, tongue
                                        sucks only when         below nipple, lips flanged, sucks
                                        stimulated              rhythmically

Audible     None                        Rarely when sucking     Frequently when sucking
swallowing

Type of     Inverted                    Flat                    Everted

nipple

Comfort     Severe pain with sucking    Moderate pain with      No pain with sucking
            Cracked, bruised, or        sucking                 Nipples intact
            bleeding nipples            Nipples reddened,
            Blisters on nipples         bruised or blisters
                                        present

Hold        Requires assistance to      Minimal assistance      Patient able to correctly position and
            position and maintain hold  needed to position or   hold baby
            of baby                     hold baby

TABLE 21.1 Determining the LATCH Score When Breast-Feeding

        LINK TO LEARNING

This website from Health for Under 5s (https://openstax.org/r/77HealthUnder5) provides information, photos, and a
video that explain and demonstrate an effective latch for breast-feeding.
944  21 · Postpartum Complications

     Cracked, Sore Nipples
     Nipples can become very sore and cracked as the dyad of the breast-feeding person and newborn are learning to
     breast-feed. The best prevention is ensuring a good latch. Treatment for cracked nipples can be air-drying after
     nursing, applying nipple ointment, using breast milk on the nipple, and using nipple shells to keep the nipple from
     brushing against the bra (Coentro et al., 2021).

       CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

       Take Action: Ensuring a Good Latch

       The nurse can educate and provide help to the breast-feeding person to ensure a good latch is achieved. The
       nurse provides the following education to the patient.

          1. Squeeze the breast like a hamburger or sandwich to reduce the size of the breast and make the nipple
               small enough for your baby's mouth.

          2. Touch the baby's nose or upper lip with your nipple.
          3. Allow the baby to open the mouth wide.
          4. Place the nipple inside the mouth, pointing to the roof of the baby's mouth.
          5. Make sure the baby's head is free to move back and forth.
          6. To unlatch the baby, use your pinky finger to break the seal on the baby's mouth prior to removing the

               baby from the breast.

     Engorgement
     When the breast becomes very full of milk, it is called engorgement. It usually occurs when the colostrum
     transitions into mature milk. However, engorgement can occur at any time during the breast-feeding relationship,
     especially if feedings are skipped. Symptoms of engorgement include firm, swollen, hard, painful breasts. The breast
     might feel warm and look shiny from swelling. The nipple can become flat from the engorgement. To relieve
     pressure and pain, the breast-feeding person can apply a warm compress or get into a warm shower and hand
     express enough milk to allow the nipple to protrude and the breast to soften. The nurse explains that the newborn
     will have difficulty latching if the nipple is flat and the breasts are full. The patient can also apply a cool compress for
     5 to 10 minutes between feedings to decrease inflammation, and can take NSAIDS for pain relief. The nurse also
     explains that the person should not pump or express to empty the breast, as that will increase milk production and
     engorgement (Mitoulas & Riccardo, 2022).

     Inadequate Supply
     Many breast-feeding persons are concerned with inadequate milk supply. Signs of adequate milk supply include
     breasts feeling softer as the baby nurses, appropriate numbers of wet and dirty diapers, and appropriate infant
     weight gain (see Chapter 24 Care of the Typical Newborn). If the health-care provider is concerned about
     inadequate milk supply, the nurse can encourage the breast-feeding person to nurse every time the baby is hungry,
     being sure to nurse every 2 to 3 hours (or 8 to 12 times per day) (CDC, 2023a). The nurse will evaluate the latch to
     ensure the newborn is deep enough on the areola to drain the breast. Recommend avoiding bottles and pacifiers.
     The nurse encourages the person to get plenty of rest, eat a good diet, drink plenty of liquids, and keep the newborn
     skin-to-skin as much as possible. The breast-feeding person can also pump between feedings to stimulate the
     breast to make more milk.

     Breast-Feeding a Preterm Neonate

     Breast milk is essential for the health of the premature infant. Breast milk helps prevent infections, is easy to digest,
     and protects against necrotizing enterocolitis. However, premature infants may not be able to breast-feed after
     birth. Normal suck and swallow coordination does not mature until 34 to 36 weeks' gestation. To stimulate and
     maintain the milk supply until the infant can breast-feed, the breast-feeding person should attempt to empty the
     breasts every 2 to 3 hours. The nurse can help the postpartum person hand express into a cup. The nurse reassures
     the person that the colostrum, while not large in amount, is the perfect amount for the newborn. If the newborn
     needs more milk, donor milk might be provided. Donor milk is milk that is provided to milk banks and then
     pasteurized. Donor milk protects preterm infants by decreasing the risk for necrotizing enterocolitis (inflammation of
     the intestine leading to necrosis) (Tran et al., 2020). Once the mature milk is present, the breast-feeding person can

     Access for free at openstax.org
21.4 · Cesarean Birth Discomforts                                                                                       945

pump and provide milk to the newborn. As the premature infant grows, the nurse will assist the breast-feeding
person to latch and nurse the baby.

        LINK TO LEARNING

The Human Milk Bank (https://openstax.org/r/77HumanMilkBank) offers information and resources about milk
banks, which provide donor milk that is used by preterm or low birth weight infants when breast-feeding is not
available.

While the infant is in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), the pumped milk can be given to the newborn in
different ways. Milk can be given through a feeding tube until the newborn is strong enough to suck. Once the
newborn is able to suck, the newborn can attempt to nurse. Sometimes, the newborn will start to feed on the breast,
and then the nurse will gavage-feed the newborn if they become too tired while sucking. The newborn can remain
skin-to-skin with a parent during tube-feeding and bottle-feeding to allow for bonding and to stimulate the breasts
to increase milk supply. The NICU nurse works with the family to balance quiet time with feeding time.

        REAL RN STORIES

Nurse: Patricia, BSN, RN
Years in Practice: 4
Clinical Setting: Mother/baby unit
Geographic Location: Georgia

In my facility, the lactation consultant was not available to assist with breast-feeding twenty-four hours a day. The
night nurses on the mother/baby unit were expected to provide lactation assistance. I remember this one newborn
who was latching on one breast but was refusing to latch on the other. The birthing person was becoming frustrated.
She would be going back to the mission in remote Guatemala to be with the rest of her family within the next four to
six weeks, and it was important for breast-feeding and the milk supply to be established. I noticed when I was doing
the shift assessment on the newborn that he had a very prominent tonic neck reflex with his head facing the left.
The newborn latched on well to the right breast using the traditional cradle hold. I suggested the birthing person use
the clutch hold when switching the baby to the left breast at the next feeding. When I performed my next rounds
and walked into the room, she was smiling because the newborn was latched on and nursing well on the left breast
using the clutch hold.

21.4 Cesarean Birth Discomforts

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Describe the postpartum recovery after a cesarean birth
    · Plan the nursing education provided to a postpartum person who experienced a cesarean birth before

        being discharged home

Postpartum recovery after a cesarean birth includes many of the same assessments as a vaginal birth and
postoperative surgeries. Vital signs, breasts, location and tone of the fundus, lochia, extremities, and level of pain
are all assessed. Additional assessments of the postpartum person after a cesarean birth include the dressing over
the incision for the first 24 hours and the incision itself after that, nausea and vomiting and abdomen, deep vein
thrombosis (DVT), mobility, and the lungs for signs of infiltrates if general anesthesia was used. Pain and discomfort
will be increased in persons after a cesarean birth.

Discomforts Related to Cesarean Births

The nurse recognizes certain discomforts related to cesarean birth, such as abdominal pain, incision pain, increased
constipation and gas, and difficulty with ambulation. Education provided to the postpartum person includes
education on and remedies for these discomforts. The nurse encourages ambulation, pain management prior to the
946  21 · Postpartum Complications

     pain becoming extreme, eating a healthy diet, and asking for help with activities of daily living.

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     Culture, Breast-Feeding, and Cesarean Birth

     The breast-feeding rates in China show a 6-month exclusive rate of only 27.8 percent. Chinese people with a history
     of cesarean birth have even lower rates of breast-feeding at 6 months. Hu et al. (2020) found that people in China
     having a cesarean birth had a decreased willingness to breast-feed and more difficulty in breast-feeding than those
     having a vaginal birth. Because the cesarean rate in China increased to 35.9 percent, educating people about the
     importance of breast-feeding is essential. In this study, patients scheduled for cesarean section were provided
     additional breast-feeding education during their postpartum stay. Results showed the intervention group had higher
     breast-feeding rates up to 4 months postpartum, fewer cracked nipples, and fewer reports of insufficient milk
     supply. Education made a significant difference to the persons and infants in this study.

     (Hu et al., 2020)

     Gas Pain
     Gas pain is common after a cesarean birth. Anesthetics used during surgery slow the bowels and decrease
     peristalsis. This leads to constipation and difficulty in passing gas. Also, opening of the peritoneum during surgery
     allows air to become trapped in the abdomen. That air must be absorbed and released as flatulence. The nurse
     encourages early and frequent ambulation and avoidance of extremely cold liquids to help release gas. Simethicone
     is often prescribed to relieve gas pain by aiding in gas release (Elsevier, 2024).

     Incisional Pain
     Pain related to cesarean birth is mostly incisional pain. As in any surgery, postpartum persons will feel increased
     incisional pain with movement, coughing, and ambulation. When coughing, the person is encouraged to splint the
     incision by placing a pillow over the lower abdomen to decrease pain (Figure 21.8). The nurse also encourages the
     person to ambulate slowly and to splint the incision when getting in and out of bed. Some health-care providers will
     order an abdominal binder to act as a splint.

     Access for free at openstax.org
21.4 · Cesarean Birth Discomforts                                                                                                              947

FIGURE 21.8 Managing Incision Pain after Cesarean Birth (a) Splinting the incision with a pillow helps to reduce the incisional
discomfort when coughing and deep breathing or moving after a cesarean birth. (b) Instructing the postpartum patient in how to get in and
out of bed helps to decrease incisional discomfort after a cesarean birth. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)

Pain medication will be ordered by the health-care provider. The nurse will assess pain frequently and administer
medications as needed. A morphine injection (Duramorph) may be used if spinal anesthesia was administered for a
cesarean birth. A patient-controlled analgesia pump may be used, which slowly administers pain medication and
allows the patient to give themselves a bolus when pain is intense. Some health-care providers will insert a catheter
into the incision. The catheter is connected to a pain ball pump that administers a steady flow of pain medication
directly to the incision to control pain. Figure 21.9 shows a pain pump used after cesarean birth.
948  21 · Postpartum Complications

     FIGURE 21.9 Pain Pump The pain pump catheter is threaded along the incision to slowly release pain medication to reduce incision pain.
     (credit: "ON-Q® PainBuster®" by unknown/Braun, Public Domain)

     Sleep Difficulties
     Sleep can be difficult after a cesarean birth because of incisional and gas pain. The postpartum person experiences
     pain at the incision while turning or moving. This can disrupt sleep. Breast-feeding or holding the newborn can also
     cause incisional pain and difficulty in sleeping. The nurse encourages relaxation techniques, deep breathing, and
     relaxation imagery to help the person release stress prior to sleeping. The nurse assesses pain and provides pain
     medications prior to pain becoming severe and interfering with sleep (Elsevier, 2024). The nurse can cluster
     assessments and interventions to decrease the number of sleep interruptions. They can also encourage the patient
     to take naps and ask the family to limit interruptions.

     Incisional Healing
     Incisions from cesarean births heal differently, depending on the type of incision. The majority of cesarean births
     involve low, transverse incisions. These incisions heal faster with less pain than vertical incisions. For incisions
     closed with staples, the staples will be removed several days after the surgery. Other incisions are closed with
     suture that is dissolvable and will not need removal of stitches. Still other incisions are closed using surgical glue.
     Almost all cesarean birth incisions are covered with a dressing immediately after surgery. The dressing most often is
     removed the next day to allow for airflow to the incision. The nurse assesses the incision and instructs the
     postpartum patient to keep the incision clean and dry.

     Restrictions Related to Surgery
     After surgery, ambulation is encouraged. Exercise, however, is restricted until the patient is seen by the health-care
     provider at the 6-week postpartum checkup. The nurse discourages lots of stair climbing and housework. Sexual
     intercourse is restricted with a cesarean birth until the patient is seen for follow-up. While persons are taking pain
     medications, driving a car is restricted (Elsevier, 2024).

     When to Follow Up
     Postpartum follow-up will be determined by the health-care provider, if complications occur, and if staples need

     Access for free at openstax.org
21.4 · Cesarean Birth Discomforts                                                                                                             949

removing. For staple removal, the person is usually seen within the first few days after discharge. Otherwise,
persons are usually seen in the office between 2 and 6 weeks to evaluate the incision, screen for postpartum
depression, discuss contraception, and perform a postpartum assessment. In addition, some health-care providers
see the person for follow-up again between 10 and 12 weeks for an annual gynecologic exam.

Nursing Education for the Birthing Person Experiencing a Cesarean Birth

For persons experiencing a cesarean birth, the nurse provides routine postpartum education, education on pain
medications, along with education on restrictions and recommendations related to the procedure.

Opioid Medication
Opioid medication causes drowsiness and sleepiness. The nurse encourages the postpartum patient to rest and
focus on caring for themselves and the newborn. The nurse explains that while taking opioid pain medications, the
postpartum person should not drive a car. Driving is safe once the person has transitioned to only acetaminophen or
ibuprofen.

Lifting Restrictions
Lifting is restricted to the weight of the newborn for the first 6 weeks postpartum. Persons are discouraged from
lifting older children. The nurse encourages the family to assist the older child to sit next to the postpartum person
in a chair or on the couch.

Importance of Fluids
Increased water intake helps to increase breast milk and prevent dehydration. Persons experiencing a cesarean
birth are at higher risk for blood clots. Dehydration can increase that risk even more.

Pillow on the Lap
The person can use a pillow or an abdominal binder to splint the incision while moving or getting out of bed. The
pillow can also be used to assist in holding the newborn. When the person coughs or sneezes, the pillow is also used
for splinting to prevent pain (see Figure 21.8).

Football Hold for Breast-Feeding
Breast-feeding can be painful if the newborn is held against the incision. The nurse will demonstrate different ways
to hold the newborn while nursing. Football hold allows the newborn to avoid contact with the incision but still nurse
with a good latch. The newborn is held to the person's side supported by pillows. The hand supports the baby's
head and turns the baby to face the breast (Figure 21.10).

FIGURE 21.10 Breast-Feeding Position to Minimize Cesarean Incision Pain This illustration shows a postpartum person using the
football, or clutch hold, when nursing. Note how a pillow under the newborn assists in bringing the newborn to the breast for a better latch
and also provides a cushion to keep the newborn away from direct contact with the abdominal incision after a cesarean birth. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
950  21 · Postpartum Complications

     Importance of Ambulating
     Ambulation after cesarean section is important for several reasons. Ambulation keeps the blood moving in the
     extremities helping to prevent venous stasis and DVTs. Ambulation aids in relieving gas pain and preventing
     constipation in the postpartum person. Ambulation also aids in recovery by increasing circulation and helping to
     decrease edema.

     21.5 Postpartum Mood Disorders and Psychiatric Disorders

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Compare and contrast postpartum depression and baby blues
         · Summarize the signs and symptoms a postpartum person might experience related to postpartum

             psychiatric disorders
         · Develop a nursing care plan that reflects knowledge of current clinical therapy and nursing and

             preventive management for the person experiencing a postpartum psychiatric disorder

     The postpartum period can be an exciting time of change and adaptation. For some patients, however, change can
     trigger alterations in psychosocial functioning and coping. Lack of sleep, pain, feelings of being overwhelmed, and
     changing hormone levels in the postpartum patient can cause baby blues. If these symptoms do not resolve,
     postpartum depression (PPD) can occur. Postpartum nurses assess for baby blues and PPD. Nursing interventions
     are aimed at prevention and care of these psychologic changes.

     Baby Blues versus Depression

     The baby blues are described as an adjustment disorder (Alba, 2021); symptoms include anxiety, irritability, crying,
     and insomnia. Baby blues occur more often in first births, generally beginning on postpartum day 2 or 3. A
     distinguishing factor between postpartum blues and postpartum depression (PPD) is that PPD lasts for at least 14
     days (Galziowska et al., 2021). Furthermore, PPD is debilitating and causes extreme sadness, anxiety,
     hopelessness, and inability to perform simple tasks. PPD also causes issues with bonding and attachment with the
     newborn.

     Risk Factors for Postpartum Depression and Anxiety
     The nurse evaluates for risk factors of postpartum psychiatric disorders, such as a history of psychologic disorders
     before and during pregnancy, history of previous PPD or postpartum psychosis (PPP), a sick infant in the NICU, birth
     complications, and lack of support. Table 21.2 lists other risk factors for depression during pregnancy and
     postpartum.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                              21.5 · Postpartum Mood Disorders and Psychiatric Disorders              951

Timing             Risk Factors

During pregnancy   Maternal anxiety
                   History of depression
                   Lack of social support
                   Life stress
                   Unintended pregnancy
                   Medicaid insurance
                   Intimate partner violence
                   Child abuse
                   Lower income
                   Lower education
                   Smoking
                   Single status
                   Poor relationship quality

During postpartum  Depression during pregnancy
                   Anxiety during pregnancy
                   Experiencing stressful life events during pregnancy or the early postpartum period
                   Traumatic birth experience
                   Preterm birth/infant admission to neonatal intensive care
                   Low levels of social support
                   Previous history of depression
                   Breast-feeding problems

TABLE 21.2 Risk Factors for Depression during Pregnancy and Postpartum (ACOG, 2018)

Postpartum Psychosis
The mood disorder that occurs suddenly and can be very dangerous, with symptoms occurring within a few hours to
weeks after birth, is postpartum psychosis (PPP). PPP is characterized by delusional thinking, hallucinations, and
other psychotic symptoms (Alba, 2021). Other symptoms are manic elation, deep anxiety and depression, fear, and
guilt (Alba, 2021). PPP is considered an emergency because paranoid thoughts can lead to homicide, infanticide, or
suicide. The incidence of PPP is 0.89 to 2.6 per 1,000 births worldwide (Forde et al., 2020). When patients progress
from PPD to PPP, some persons are admitted to inpatient recovery facilities to aid in safe, faster recovery.

Impact of Postpartum Depression and Anxiety on the Family
Postpartum psychiatric disorders cause the person who gave birth to feel immense loss, fear, and guilt. They have
difficulty in bonding with the infant, which can have long-term behavioral and developmental effects on the
newborn. Infants have breast-feeding difficulties, sleep problems, and potentially failure to thrive (Alba, 2021).
Partners are also affected by postpartum psychiatric disorders and are at increased risk of developing depression
and anxiety when the postpartum person experiences PPD. Partners can feel teary, stressed, sleep deprived, and
experience lack of concentration and ability to support the family. The partner relationship can suffer from these
disorders as well.

Maternal Morbidity and Mortality
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the prevalence of postpartum depression in the
United States ranges from 9.7 percent to 23.5 percent, with an average of 13.2 percent. (Bauman et al., 2020).
Campbell et al. (2021) noted that approximately 20 percent of postpartum deaths are attributed to suicide
associated with peripartum depression or psychosis. This study reveals that underlying depression is the major risk
factor for increased suicidal ideation and attempts. Campbell et al. (2021) also note that Maternal Mortality Review
Committees, local and state committees that review deaths associated with pregnancy and postpartum, have
brought awareness to suicide. The study also found that intimate partner violence was an increased risk factor for
maternal suicide and depression.
952  21 · Postpartum Complications

     Depression Screening throughout Pregnancy and Postpartum
     The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG, 2018) recommends screening for perinatal
     depression at least once during the prenatal and postpartum periods using a validated tool. Several validated tools
     are available for use. The most common PPD screening tool is the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS). In
     pregnant and postpartum persons with current depression or anxiety, it is recommended to monitor closely for
     suicidal thoughts and psychosis. Health-care providers should initiate therapy and referrals for positive screens.

     During the postpartum period, the nurse reviews the person's history for current depression or anxiety, notes any
     antidepressants the person is taking, as well as any previous history of PPD or PPP. Nurses utilize screening tools to
     assess for PPD. Positive screens are reported to the health-care provider for further evaluation and treatment (Lui &
     Yang, 2021). The nurse also informs the postpartum person that their pediatrician will screen for PPD at their well-
     infant visits.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     The Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) (https://openstax.org/r/77PPDDepresScle) is one tool used to
     detect PPD.

     Medications throughout Pregnancy
     Medications used to treat depression and some anxiety disorders usually consist of selective serotonin reuptake
     inhibitors (SSRIs). Yue et al. (2023) noted that SSRIs are prescribed at a lower rate for pregnant persons than for
     nonpregnant persons. They attributed this discrepancy to the perception of patients or health-care providers that
     medications for mental illness cause fetal harm. Some health-care providers will decrease the dose or wean the
     patient off SSRIs during pregnancy because of this perception. Studies have shown that persons who stop
     antidepressants during pregnancy have a 68 percent chance of major depression returning (Yue et al., 2023). A
     suggestion made by researchers is that health-care providers should make decisions on the use of SSRIs on an
     individual basis because not enough evidence is available to determine safety or harm to the fetus from
     antidepressant use (Besag & Vasey, 2023).

     For postpartum persons, the most common medications for PPD are sertraline (Zoloft), fluoxetine (Prozac),
     paroxetine (Paxil), and citalopram (Celexa) (Kaufman et al., 2022). Newer medications for PPD include two
     neuroactive steroids: zuranolone (Zurzuave), an oral medication used for 14 days, and brexanolone (Zulresso), an IV
     medication given over 60 hours. All medications pass through breast milk; however, the benefits of these
     medications outweigh the risk for breast-feeding. Other treatments for PPD include cognitive behavioral therapy
     (CBT), an evidence-based therapy that helps people change their thinking patterns); acupuncture; and hormonal
     supplementation. Again, it is recommended for health-care providers to treat postpartum persons individually due
     to the lack of research on the efficacy and safety of antidepressants and their effects on breast-feeding and PPD.

     Rebalancing of Hormones and Adjusting to the New Family
     Rapid changes in estrogen, progesterone, and prolactin levels occur immediately after birth. This rapid change is the
     cause of some cases of PPD. Medications have been introduced to provide a gentler decrease in estrogen and
     progesterone. Adjusting to a new family dynamic is another common cause of psychosocial disturbance for
     postpartum persons. They must adjust to their new role, as must the other members of the family. Cognitive
     behavioral therapy can help the family talk through their concerns and fears to help make those adjustments easier.

     Nursing Care Plan for the Person Experiencing Postpartum Psychiatric Disorders

     Treatment for postpartum psychiatric disorders includes psychotherapy, medications, and social support. The nurse
     is in a unique position to assess the patient for signs of PPD and develop interventions to assist with treatment.
     Nurses can provide support and education and can help destigmatize PPD.

     Nursing Assessment and Diagnosis
     Nurses assess all postpartum persons for risk factors associated with PPD and perform a risk assessment, such as
     the EPDS. The nurse assesses the family's perception of the birth and any labor or birth complications. During
     routine assessments, the nurse evaluates for signs of PPD or lack of coping. The nurse assesses newborn bonding,

     Access for free at openstax.org
                      21.5 · Postpartum Mood Disorders and Psychiatric Disorders                                        953

partner participation, social support, and family relationships throughout the postpartum period. When the nurse
recognizes signs of PPD, the nurse diagnoses ineffective coping, impaired bonding, risk for impaired parenting, and
risk for self-harm. When caring for the postpartum person with a history of psychiatric disorders, it is important for
the nurse to discuss suicide and other harmful behaviors. The nurse can also provide information regarding help
lines, such as the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) (1-800-662-4357) or the
National Maternal Mental Health Hotline, which patients can call or text 1-833-TLC-MAMA (1-833-852-6262) for a
free, confidential hotline in English and Spanish for pregnant persons and new parents, 24/7.

Nursing Plan and Implementation
The nurse describes the signs and symptoms of PPD and discusses any concerning symptoms with the patient and
family. The nurse explains the difference between baby blues and PPD and lists reasons why the patient and/or
family should call their health-care provider (Table 21.3). The nurse encourages the family to have a plan for support
when the non-birthing partner returns to work or when family members return to out-of-town locations. Social
services can be consulted if the family lacks support, either emotionally or financially. The nurse provides referrals
to community resources when necessary.

Disorder    Symptoms                                                 Treatment

Baby blues  · short-term drop in mood (2-3 days); should be over     · sleeping when the baby is
               by 2 weeks                                               sleeping

            · symptoms less severe                                   · eating nutritious food
            · 80% of birthing persons affected                       · exercising, going for a
            · not associated with depression prior to pregnancy
            · mood swings from happy to sad                             walk
            · feel irritable, exhausted, overwhelmed, anxious        · accepting help, not
            · does not cause despair
                                                                        worrying about chores

Postpartum  · occurs longer than several days and can occur up to 1  · counseling
depression     year after birth                                      · medications
                                                                     · asking for help
            · symptoms more severe
            · 10% of birthing persons affected
            · higher risk if depression occurred prior to pregnancy
            · anxiety or panic attacks
            · feel worthless, sad, alone; cannot eat, bond with the

               baby, or take care of the baby
            · feel an overwhelming despair

TABLE 21.3 Differences between Baby Blues and Postpartum Depression

        LINK TO LEARNING

Watch this TEDx talk from Auburn Harrison (https://openstax.org/r/77AuburnHarison) that encourages society to
talk about postpartum depression.
954 21 · Summary

Summary

21.1 Postpartum Infections

Postpartum infections can occur with both vaginal and cesarean birth. The nurse assesses for signs of infection
beginning in recovery directly after birth until discharge home. The nurse is aware that infection can progress quickly
and cause morbidity and mortality. Education on prevention of infection is key and also begins in recovery and ends
in discharge instructions.

21.2 Postpartum Hemorrhage

Postpartum hemorrhage is an emergency that is treated by a multidisciplinary team. The nurse is the first line in
prevention of PPH by recognizing risk factors and close monitoring of uterine consistency and lochia, encouraging
frequent voiding, and assessing the incision and perineum. Nurse monitoring often interrupts the postpartum
person's ability to rest. When a PPH occurs, the nurse monitors vital signs, performs fundal massage, calls for
additional assistance, and prepares for administration of medications or blood products. The nurse assesses for a
full bladder, hematoma, boggy uterus, or trauma to the reproductive tract. With the nursing interventions directed at
preventing and minimizing blood loss, the nurse assists in decreasing the morbidity and mortality related to
postpartum hemorrhage.

21.3 Breasts and Breast-Feeding

Breast-feeding persons need emotional and physical support while learning to breast-feed, especially when
difficulties arise. The nurse provides education, support, and treatment for these difficulties. The nurse ensures a
good latch, treats cracked nipples, educates regarding engorgement and mastitis, and supports the person with an
infant in the NICU. The nurse also provides lactation referrals and community resources for assistance with breast-
feeding.

21.4 Cesarean Birth Discomforts

Nurses are aware of the discomforts related to recovery after a cesarean birth. The nurse educates the postpartum
person on common discomforts and relief measures. The nurse demonstrates how to hold the newborn to prevent
incision pain. The nurse also provides discharge instructions to promote healing and rest in the postpartum period.

21.5 Postpartum Mood Disorders and Psychiatric Disorders

The nurse assesses the postpartum person for signs and symptoms of PPD and PPP. Assessment for those disorders
begins during pregnancy and continues through postpartum discharge. The difference between baby blues, PPD,
and PPP are explained to the postpartum person. If signs of these disorders are recognized, the nurse notifies the
health-care provider and social services to begin treatment prior to discharge home. The nurse helps to prevent PPD
by providing support and anticipatory guidance on the many adaptations occurring during postpartum.

Key Terms

cognitive behavioral therapy evidence-based therapy that helps people change their thinking patterns
early PPH (also: primary PPH) hemorrhage that occurs after birth of the placenta up to 24 hours postpartum
late PPH (also: secondary PPH) hemorrhage that occurs after the first 24 hours up to 12 weeks postpartum
mastitis inflammation and/or infection of the breast
postpartum endometritis infection of the uterus in the first 6 weeks after birth
postpartum psychosis (PPP) mood disorder that occurs suddenly and can be very dangerous, with symptoms

    occurring within a few hours to weeks after birth; characterized by delusional thinking, hallucinations, and other
    psychotic symptoms
primary PPH (also: early PPH) hemorrhage that occurs after birth of the placenta up to 24 hours postpartum
quantitative blood loss (QBL) process of weighing and measuring the amount of blood loss during the birth and
    immediate postpartum period
secondary PPH (also: late PPH) hemorrhage that occurs after the first 24 hours up to 12 weeks postpartum
subinvolution inability of the postpartum uterus to return to its original size

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         21 · Assessments 955

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. What postpartum infection is caused by STIs and chorioamnionitis?
           a. mastitis
           b. pneumonia
           c. cesarean wound infection
           d. postpartum endometritis

    2. What postpartum infection can be transferred between the breast-feeding person and newborn if both are
        not treated appropriately?
           a. wound infection
           b. urinary tract infection
           c. thrush
           d. mastitis

    3. What assessment finding suggests a possible infection?
           a. painful fundal massage
           b. breast-feeding every 2-3 hours
           c. pulse 72
           d. WBCs 10,000

    4. What assessment data increases the risk of postpartum infection?
           a. precipitous labor
           b. urinary retention
           c. breast-feeding
           d. intact perineum

    5. What nursing intervention does the nurse include in the plan of care for a person with mastitis?
           a. Provide antipyretic.
           b. Stop antibiotics when redness is resolved.
           c. Encourage the person to stop breast-feeding.
           d. Start an IV and prepare for signs of sepsis.

    6. What nursing intervention does the nurse include in the plan of care for a person with a wound infection?
           a. Reassure the postpartum person that infection will resolve without antibiotics.
           b. Assess for REEDA.
           c. Call health-care provider when temperature is 99.0° F.
           d. Scrub the incision vigorously with soap and water.

    7. What nursing intervention does the nurse include in the plan of care for a person with a perineal laceration
        infection?
           a. Demonstrate the use of a urinary catheter.
           b. Provide an abdominal binder.
           c. Encourage use of the peri-bottle for cleaning front to back.
           d. Discourage use of pain medications.

    8. What nursing intervention does the nurse include in the plan of care for a person with postpartum
        endometritis?
           a. Monitor for signs of sepsis.
           b. Discourage breast-feeding.
           c. Avoid fundal assessment.
           d. Increase family visiting hours.
956 21 · Assessments

    9. What is characteristic of an early (primary) PPH?
           a. occurs after 12 weeks postpartum
           b. is not an emergency
           c. often occurs due to uterine atony
           d. is diagnosed after the person is discharged

  10. What is characteristic of a late (secondary) PPH?
           a. occurs within the first 24 hours
           b. is caused by subinvolution of the uterus
           c. does not occur after cesarean births
           d. cannot be treated with Methergine

  11. When referring to the 4 T's of PPH, what does tissue refer to?
           a. Placental tissue or membranes are retained.
           b. Tissue of the perineum is torn.
           c. Tissue of the uterus is torn.
           d. Tissue is not perfused.

  12. What is a risk factor for uterine atony?
           a. small for gestational age
           b. primipara
           c. multiple gestation
           d. intrauterine growth restriction

  13. What is a risk factor for PPH found in the prenatal record?
           a. primipara
           b. rubella nonimmune
           c. von Willebrand disorder
           d. history of appendectomy

  14. The nurse notices the uterus is boggy and the bladder is full. What intervention should the nurse perform
        next?
           a. Call for help.
           b. Start IV bolus.
           c. Get the person out of bed to walk to restroom.
           d. Massage the fundus and assess the lochia.

  15. The nurse notices the person with a PPH looks pale and their capillary refill is >3 seconds. What intervention
        can the nurse initiate?
           a. Wrap the person in a warm blanket.
           b. Put a pulse oximeter on the patient's finger.
           c. Sit the person up at 90 degrees.
           d. Start an IV bolus.

  16. What assessment finding would indicate a fluid volume deficit?
           a. skin tenting with testing of skin turgor
           b. hypertension
           c. bradycardia
           d. bounding pulse

  17. What nursing diagnosis would be appropriate for the person with a coagulation disorder?
           a. risk for hypertension
           b. risk for bleeding

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      21 · Assessments 957

         c. risk for fluid overload
         d. risk for breast-feeding failure

18. What is the most common reason for cracked, sore nipples?
         a. hungry infant
         b. pumping
         c. ineffective latch
         d. lack of supportive bra

19. What is a symptom of engorgement?
         a. protuberant nipples
         b. shiny, hard breast
         c. insufficient milk production
         d. soft, lumpy breast

20. The nurse develops a plan to increase a patient's milk supply. What is an intervention they can implement?
         a. Pump between nursing sessions.
         b. Nurse every 6 hours.
         c. Keep newborn in bassinet between sessions.
         d. Offer a pacifier when newborn cries.

21. The nurse educates the person with a newborn in the NICU. What guidance does the nurse provide?
         a. Breast milk is not good for a premature baby.
         b. Premature babies breast-feed easily.
         c. Skin-to-skin contact helps both baby and breast-feeding person.
         d. A bottle is recommended for all feedings.

22. What is one difference between recovery from a cesarean birth versus a vaginal birth?
         a. Breast-feeding is discouraged after cesarean birth due to pain medications taken.
         b. Lochia will be heavier after a cesarean birth.
         c. Pain with movement is more intense after a cesarean birth.
         d. Gas pain is more intense after a vaginal birth.

23. The nurse educates the person recovering from a cesarean birth on how to care for the incision. What
      education is discussed?
         a. Scrub the incision well twice daily.
         b. Remove the dressing the day after birth.
         c. Staples will be removed the day after birth.
         d. Vertical incisions heal faster with less pain.

24. Why does the nurse encourage ambulation in a patient who has experienced a cesarean birth?
         a. Ambulation helps to prevent DVT.
         b. Ambulation causes the person to lose weight in the hospital.
         c. Ambulation helps with breast-feeding.
         d. Ambulation decreases peristalsis.

25. What is a risk factor for PPD?
         a. vaginal birth
         b. family support
         c. traumatic birth
         d. breast-feeding

26. What symptom can partners of persons with PPD experience?
958 21 · Assessments

           a. depression
           b. psychosis
           c. bipolar disorder
           d. mania

  27. What symptom differentiates baby blues from PPD?
           a. Baby blues last longer than 14 days.
           b. Baby blues cause hallucinations.
           c. Baby blues occur in the first few days of the postpartum period.
           d. Baby blues are treated with inpatient therapy.

  28. What intervention by the nurse can help with PPD?
           a. encouraging the partner to let the postpartum person learn to take care of themself
           b. encouraging the family to have support available for the person and partner
           c. telling the person not to breast-feed if taking antidepressants
           d. keeping the newborn in the nursery most of the day and night

  29. What important assessment should the nurse perform on all postpartum persons?
           a. Screen for PPD with the EPDS.
           b. Screen for drug use with a urine drug screen.
           c. Screen for breast-feeding failure.
           d. Screen for contraception contraindications.

  30. The nurse is taking the postpartum patient's vital signs. The newborn is across the room in the bassinet, and
        the postpartum person refuses to hold the newborn. What should the nurse do?
           a. Call CPS for risk of child abuse.
           b. Ask the person if they are feeling depressed, hopeless, afraid, or overwhelmed.
           c. Ask the health-care provider to order an antidepressant.
           d. Discuss how good parents hold and talk to their newborns.

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. Describe the signs and symptoms of a postpartum UTI.
    2. The nurse educates the postpartum person to wash their hands well after changing the newborn's diaper.

        What other education does the nurse provide to help prevent postpartum infection?
    3. List the characteristics of secondary, or late, hemorrhage.
    4. List the medications used to manage PPH and their side effects or contraindications.
    5. Describe an ineffective latch.
    6. List the additional nursing assessments that are performed for a person with a cesarean birth.
    7. Describe the risk factors during pregnancy that could lead to postpartum depression.
    8. Describe the difference between baby blues and PPD.
    9. List three nursing diagnoses pertaining to postpartum psychiatric disorders.

Reflection Questions

    1. Describe the discharge education the nurse will provide for a person with a postpartum infection.
    2. Explain the risk factors for PPH using the 4 T's.
    3. What education would the nurse provide to the breast-feeding person with a newborn in the NICU?
    4. Discuss the education provided to the person after having a cesarean birth.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            21 · References 959

    5. Describe how the nurse assesses the postpartum person for PPD.

Critical-Thinking Questions about Case Studies

    1. Refer to Labor and Delivery: Part 3.
        Brianne is now 12 hours' postpartum and is requesting pain medication and states the pain is currently 5/10
        (on a scale of 1 to 10) and located in her perineum. What additional data does the nurse need to obtain at this
        time?

    2. Refer to Labor and Delivery: Part 3.
        What potential problem(s) related to the birth does the nurse anticipate?

    3. Refer to Labor and Delivery: Part 3.
        What can the nurse do to prevent Brianne from having complications from the anticipated diagnosis?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. Develop a plan of care for a person who has a wound infection after a cesarean birth.

    2. Develop a plan of care for a person whose QBL is currently 750 mL after a vaginal delivery.

    3. What factors might contribute to a breast-feeding person's difficulties in feeding a premature baby? How can
        the nurse interpret these factors?

    4. What immediate interventions can the nurse implement to support breast-feeding a preterm neonate during
        time spent in the NICU?

    5. Develop a video demonstrating abdominal splinting when coughing and deep breathing, getting in and out of
        bed, and getting in and out of a chair.

    6. Develop a nursing care plan for preventive management of a postpartum psychiatric disorder.

References

Abenvova, M., Myssayev, A., Kanya, L., Turliuc, M. N., & Jamedinova, U. (2022). Prevalence of postpartum
    depression and its associated factors within a year after birth in Semey, Kazakstan: A cross sectional study.
   Clinical Epidemiology and Global Health, 16, 101103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cegh.2022.101103

Agrawal, T., Kalra, R., & Suryavanshi, A. (2018). Evaluation of complications during third stage of labour among
   women delivering at tertiary care center. International Journal of Reproduction, Contraception, Obstetrics and
   Gynecology, 7(7), 2706-2713. https://doi.org/10.18203/2320-1770.ijrcog20182867

Alba, B. P. (2021). CE: Postpartum depression: A nurse's guide. The American Journal of Nursing, 121(7), 32-43.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/01.NAJ.0000756516.95992.8e

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2017). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 183: Postpartum
   hemorrhage. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 130(4), e168-e186. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000002351

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018). ACOG Committee Opinion No. 757: Screening for
   perinatal depression. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 132(5), e208-e212. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000002927

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2019). ACOG Committee Opinion No. 794: Quantitative blood
   loss in obstetric hemorrhage. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 134(6), e150-e156. https://doi.org/10.1097/
    AOG.0000000000003564

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2021). ACOG Committee Opinion, No. 820: Breastfeeding
   challenges. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 137(2), e42-e53. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000004253

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022, March). Frequently asked questions: Postpartum
   management. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/postpartum-pain-management

Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses. (2021). Quantification of blood loss: AWHONN
   Practice Brief Number 13. Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing, 50(4), 503-505.
960 21 · References

    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jogn.2021.04.007

Bauman, B. L., Ko, J. Y., Cox, S., D'Angelo, D. V., Warner, L., Folger, S., Tevendale, H. D., Coy, K. C., Harrison, L., &
   Barfield, W. D. (2018). Vital Signs: Postpartum depressive symptoms and provider discussions about perinatal
   depression. MMWR Morbidity Mortality Weekly Report, 69, 575-581. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/
    mmwr.mm6919a2

Besag, F. M. C., & Vasey, M. J. (2023). Should antidepressants be avoided in pregnancy? Drug Safety, 46(1), 1-17.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s40264-022-01257-1

Bilgin, Z., & Komurcu, N. (2020). Comparison of the effects of three different methods in reducing primary
   postpartum hemorrhage. Clinical and Experimental Health Sciences, 10(4), 400-406. https://doi.org/10.33808/
    clinexphealthsci.741409

Boushra, M., & Rahman, O. (2023, July 10). Postpartum infection. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK560804/

Campbell, J., Matoff-Stepp, S., Velez, M. L., Cox, H. H., & Laughon, K. (2021). Pregnancy-associated deaths from
    homicide, suicide, and drug overdose: Review of research and the intersection with intimate partner violence.
   Journal of Women's Health, 30(2), 236-244. https://doi.org/10.1089/jwh.2020.8875

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023a, March 21). Newborn breastfeeding tips. https://www.cdc.gov/
    nutrition/infantandtoddlernutrition/breastfeeding/newborn-breastfeeding-basics.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023b, August 24). What is sepsis? https://www.cdc.gov/sepsis/what-
    is-sepsis.html

Coentro, V. S., Perrella, S. L., Lai, C. T., Rea, A., Murray, K., & Geddes, D. T. (2021). Impact of nipple shield use on
   milk transfer and maternal nipple pain. Breastfeeding Medicine, 16(3). https://doi.org/10.1089/bfm.2020.0110

Daifotis, H. A., Smith, M. M., Denoble, A. E., & Dotters-Katz, S. K. (2020). Risk factors for postpartum maternal
   infection following spontaneous vaginal delivery complicated by chorioamnionitis. American Journal of
   Perinatology Reports, 10(2), e159-e164. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0040-1709983

Elsevier. (2024). Assessment: Postpartum assessment (maternal-newborn) CE. Reproductive Health.
    https://elsevier.health/en-US/preview/reproductive-health/assessment-postpartum-patients-ce

Ernawati, E., Amirah, A., Christrijogo, S., & Aditiawarman, A. (2020). Comparison of post-caesarean section wound
   healing methods based on reeda scale and platelet lymphocyte ratio. Systematic Reviews in Pharmacy, 11(7),
    314-318.

Faysal, H., Araji, T., Ahmadzia, H. K. (2023). Recognizing who is at risk for postpartum hemorrhage: Targeting anemic
   women and scoring systems for clinical use. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology MFM, 5(2S),
    100745. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajogmf.2022.1007452

Forde, R., Peters, S., & Wittkowski, A. (2020). Recovery from postpartum psychosis: A systematic review and
   metasynthesis of women's and families' experiences. Archives of Women's Mental Health, 23(5), 597-612.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s00737-020-01025-z

Galziowska, E., Kiciska, K., Szadowska-Szlachetka, Z., & Domal-Drzewicka, R. (2021). Assessment of the risk of
   postpartum depression and the support expected and received by women within a year of giving birth. Zdrowie
   Publiczne, 131(1), 62-66. https://pjph.eu/issues/volume131/a12

Griffin, C. M., Amorim, M. H., Almeida, F. A., Marcacine, K. O., Goldman, R. E., & Coca, K. P. (2022). LATCH as a
   systematic tool for assessment of the breastfeeding technique in maternity. Acta Paulista de Enfermagem, 35.
    https://doi.org/10.37689/acta-ape/2022AO03181

Gundersen, T. D., Krebs, L., Loekkegaard, E. C. L., Rasmussen, S. C., Glavind, J., & Clausen, T. D. (2018). Postpartum
   urinary tract infection by mode of delivery: A Danish nationwide cohort study. BMJ Open, 8(3), e018479.
    https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2017-018479

Hu, L., Ding, T., Hu, J., & Luo, B. (2020). Promoting breastfeeding in Chinese women undergoing cesarean section

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            21 · References 961

   based on the health belief model: A randomized controlled trial. Medicine (Baltimore), 99(28), e20815-e20815.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000020815

Kallianidis, A. F., Maraschini, A., Danis, J., Colmorn, L. B., Deneux-Tharaux, C., Donati, S., Gissler, M., Jakobsson, M.,
    Knight, M., Kristufkova, A., Lindqvist, P. G., Vandenberghe, G., van den Akker, T., & INOSS (the International
    Network of Obstetric Survey Systems). (2021). Management of major obstetric hemorrhage prior to peripartum
   hysterectomy and outcomes across nine European countries. Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica,
   100(7), 1345-1354. https://doi.org/10.1111/aogs.14113

Kaufman, Y., Carlini, S. V., & Deligiannidis, K. M. (2022). Advances in pharmacotherapy for postpartum depression: A
    structured review of standard-of-care antidepressants and novel neuroactive steroid antidepressants.
   Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology, 12, 20451253211065859. https://doi.org/10.1177/
    20451253211065859

Lagrew, D., McNulty, J., Sakowski, C., Cape, V., McCormick, E., & Morton, C. H. (2022). Improving health care
   response to obstetric hemorrhage: A California Maternal Quality Care Collaborative Toolkit.
    https://www.cmqcc.org/sites/default/files/HEMToolkit_03252022%20Errata%207.2022%20%282%29.pdf

Liu, H., & Yang, Y. (2021). Effects of a psychological nursing intervention on prevention of anxiety and depression in
   the postpartum period: A randomized controlled trial. Annals of General Psychiatry, 20(2). https://doi.org/
    10.1186/s12991-020-00320-4

Louis-Jacques, A. F., Berwick, M., & Mitchell, K. B. (2023). Risk factors, symptoms, and treatment of lactational
   mastitis. JAMA, 329(7), 588-589. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2023.0004

Milton, S. H. (2024, February 23). Normal labor and delivery. Practice essentials. Medscape.
    https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/260036-overview

Mitchell, C. J., Adkins, L., Tucker, A., Brown, H., Siegel, A., & Dotter-Katz, S. (2020). Impact of excess weight gain on
   risk of postpartum infection in class III obesity. American Journal of Perinatology Reports, 10(3), e213-e216.
    https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0040-1715165

Mitoulas, L. R., & Riccardo, D. (2022). Breast pumps and mastitis in breastfeeding women: Clarifying the
   relationship. Frontiers in Pediatrics, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2022.856353

ahin, E., Yildirim, F., & Büyükkayaci Duman, N. (2023). Effect of tea tree oil and coconut oil on nipple crack
   formation in the early postpartum period. Breastfeeding Medicine: The Official Journal of the Academy of
   Breastfeeding Medicine, 18(3), 226-232. https://doi.org/10.1089/bfm.2022.0260

Salati, J. A., Leathersich, S. J., Williams, M. J., Cuthbert, A., & Tolosa, J. E. (2019). Prophylactic oxytocin for the third
   stage of labour to prevent postpartum haemorrhage. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 4(4),
    CD001808. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001808.pub3

Shields, A. D., Plante, L. A., Pacheco, L. D., & Louis, J. M. (2023). Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine Consult Series
   #67: Maternal sepsis. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 229(3), B2-B19. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.ajog.2023.05.019

Shorey, S., Chee, C. Y. I., Ng, E. D., Chan, Y. H., Tam, W. W. S., & Chong, Y. S. (2018). Prevalence and incidence of
   postpartum depression among healthy mothers: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Psychiatric
   Research, 104, 235-248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2018.08.001

Tran, H. T., Nguyen, T. T., & Mathisen, R. (2020). The use of human donor milk. The BMJ, 371, m4243.
    https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m4243

Vallerand, A. H., & Sanoski, C. A. (2023). Davis's drug guide (18th ed.). F. A. Davis.

Yeshitila, Y. G., Bante, A., Aschalew, Z., Afework, B., & Gebeyehu, S. (2021). Utilization of non-pneumatic anti-shock
    garment and associated factors for postpartum hemorrhage management among obstetric care providers in
   public health facilities of Southern Ethiopia. PloS One, 16(10), e0258784-e0258784. https://doi.org/10.1371/
    journal.pone.0258784
962 21 · References

Yue, M., Kus, L., Katta, S., Su, I., Li, L., Haas, D. M., & Quinney, S. K. (2023). Pharmacokinetics of antidepressants in
   pregnancy. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 63(S1), S137-S158. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcph.2282

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 22

Immediate Care of the Newborn

FIGURE 22.1 First Assessment The newborn is assessed by a nurse seconds after birth. (credit: "Image of Baby, Birth and Healthy Baby"
by Sanjasy/Pixabay, CC0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
22.1 Apgar Scoring
22.2 Physiological Adaptation and Transition
22.3 Neutral Thermal Environment
INTRODUCTION From a fetal perspective, the process of birth is a crisis. In the womb, the fetus was snuggled in a
soft, warm, dark, and quiet world. The placenta provided nutrition and oxygen continuously. Suddenly, the
contractions of labor and vaginal childbirth forcibly squeeze the fetus through the birth canal, limiting oxygenated
blood flow during contractions and shifting the skull bones to accommodate the small space. After birth, the
newborn's system must make drastic adjustments to a world that is colder, brighter, and louder, and where they will
experience hunger and thirst. They first must successfully transition to a dry and inhospitable outside world. This
includes regulating their own body temperature and breathing independently. It is critical for the nurse to
understand the transition to extrauterine life.

22.1 Apgar Scoring

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Describe the purpose of the Apgar scoring assessment
    · Define the questions the neonatal nurse needs to ask before an infant is born in the birth room
    · Demonstrate all steps to complete an Apgar assessment
Immediately after birth, assessment of the newborn's overall physical condition is imperative to provide the most
964  22 · Immediate Care of the Newborn

     appropriate care for them. The Apgar assessment is performed by a member of the team caring for the newborn.
     The results of the assessment completed by the nurse will be shared with the provider and/or team. Though the
     newborn's Apgar cannot predict morbidity and mortality, it can describe their condition and provide a record and
     evaluation of their fetal-to-neonatal transition.

     In 1953, Virginia Apgar, MD, created a tool for assessing the newborn at 1 minute and again at 5 minutes post birth.
     This assessment included heart rate, respiration, reflex irritability, muscle tone, and color, all of which evaluate the
     response of the neonate when transitioning from life inside the uterus, or intrauterine life, to life outside the uterus,
     or extrauterine life. The tool is called the Apgar score (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
     [ACOG], 2015) (Figure 22.2). This assessment score does not predict any neurologic outcome of the neonate, nor
     does it predict mortality or morbidity. However, if the score is less than 7 at 5 minutes post birth, both the American
     College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) and the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommend that
     another Apgar assessment be performed at 10 minutes (ACOG, 2015). A low score reflects the need for additional
     resuscitation effort.

     FIGURE 22.2 Virginia Apgar Dr. Virginia Apgar created the Apgar assessment tool to increase the survival rate of newborn babies. (credit:
     "Dr. Virginia Apgar welcoming world's newest guest" by Al Ravenna, World Journal Tribune/Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs
     Division, NYWT&S Collection, LC-USZ62-131540, Public Domain)

     The nurse who assesses the newborn in the labor and delivery room is often referred to as the baby nurse or the
     nurse responsible for the neonate. The labor nurse must continue to assist the birthing person after birth; therefore,
     an additional nurse comes into the room at the time of birth and is responsible for the newborn after birth, a second
     patient who requires individualized care. The neonatal nurse's role includes ensuring a fully stocked, correctly
     calibrated radiant warmer set to a safe temperature with all items necessary to facilitate resuscitation if needed and
     to assist with the transition to extrauterine life. Prior to delivery, the neonatal nurse needs to know the answers to
     the following questions:

         · How many babies are expected?
         · What is the gestational age of the newborn(s)?
         · What is the status (ruptured or intact) of the amniotic membranes, and what is the color of the amniotic fluid?
         · Were there any complications during pregnancy, labor, and/or birth?
         · Are there any untreated maternal risk factors, including group B streptococcus (GBS)-positive status, lack of

             prenatal care, hypertension, or hyperglycemia?

     Access for free at openstax.org
22.1 · Apgar Scoring                                                                                                       965

    · What, if any, medications is the birth parent taking or receiving prior to delivery?
    · Were there any congenital findings that would put the newborn at an increased risk at delivery?

The answers to those questions will prepare the nurse for what to expect when the newborn is delivered.

    · If there are multiple newborns, each will need a neonatal nurse.
    · If this is a preterm newborn, the nurse will need to notify the neonatal intensive care (NICU) team to join the

        room. Not all facilities offer this level of support and instead will have supportive personnel present to assist
        with resuscitative efforts. Up to four additional trained staff may be needed for complex birthing situations.
    · In some cases, the amniotic fluid shows evidence of meconium, the neonate's first bowel movement
        consisting of amniotic fluid, mucus, lanugo, and bile. Meconium staining indicates the newborn passed the
        stool while in utero and is therefore at risk for aspirating. The nurse will need to monitor the newborn's airway
        more closely at birth.
    · If other complications occurred during labor and birth, the nurse will need to adjust the plans for postdelivery
        care based on the complications.

These items must be taken into consideration as the nurse prepares to evaluate the neonate after the birth.

Newborn Muscle Tone (Activity)

The tension of healthy muscles that contribute a slight resistance to passive displacement of a limb is called muscle
tone (Simon et al., 2023). The nurse assesses the degree to which the newborn is moving their extremities from
flexion to extension. To receive the full 2 points for muscle tone/activity in this category, the newborn will have
spontaneous, active movements in all extremities. If their arms and legs are flexed with little movement, the score
will be a 1. If there is no movement and the newborn appears floppy with very little muscle tone, they will be given a
score of zero for this category. This and every category will be reassessed in 5 minutes for any improvements.

        LINK TO LEARNING

This video explains the use of the Apgar score (https://openstax.org/r/77APGAR) and reinforces the content with
NCLEX practice questions.

A healthy term newborn will have elbows and hips that are flexed and have knees flexed up toward the abdomen,
thus scoring 2 points on the Apgar assessment. A preterm or ill newborn may have more flaccid extremities and will
therefore have points deducted from the Apgar score because they demonstrate less flexion in their muscle tone.

Pulse or Heart Rate

The nurse will auscultate the newborn's heart rate at the apex or palpate at the junction of the umbilical cord and
the skin. The average heart rate of a newborn is 110 to 160 beats per minute (bpm) (Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, 2022). If the heart rate is greater than 100 bpm, the nurse will score the newborn 2 points on the
Apgar and go on to the next step of the assessment. However, if the newborn does not have a heartbeat or if the
heart rate is less than 100 bpm, the nurse will need to initiate neonatal resuscitation immediately and call for more
personnel, including the neonatal intensive care team, if the health system offers that level of support. A heart rate
of less than 100 bpm receives a score of 1 on the Apgar assessment, whereas a score of zero indicates no heartbeat
was found while auscultating or palpating.

Newborn Reflex Irritability or Grimace

The grimace response, or reflex irritability, also known as grimace response, describes the newborn's response to
stimulation from the nurse. For example, the nurse will assess the response from the newborn when they rub the
soles of the newborn's feet or back with a baby blanket to stimulate them. A normal newborn will cry or become
agitated, while a compromised newborn won't have much response. A cry or agitated response from a newborn to
stimulation will receive the full 2 points; newborns who have mild reactions will receive a 1 on the Apgar
assessment. Newborns who have an absent response to stimulation will receive a zero score.
966  22 · Immediate Care of the Newborn

     Appearance of Newborn Skin Color

     The nurse will assess the newborn for cyanosis, specifically on the trunk, and for pallor of the skin. Newborns will
     generally have acrocyanosis, cyanosis found only on the hands and feet, which is an expected finding that may last
     up to a week. Observation of acrocyanosis requires a score of 1 on the Apgar assessment. A newborn who is born
     pale or completely cyanotic is scored zero. The rare newborn who is completely pink is scored with a 2.

     Respiration

     The nurse must pay careful attention to how the newborn is breathing, observing particularly for any adventitious
     breath sounds, any retractions or grunting, or a complete absence of breath sounds. Ideally, the nurse wants to see
     a newborn crying vigorously, and the nurse will work to dry and stimulate a newborn until the vigorous cry is
     achieved. Lack of spontaneous respiratory effort requires immediate intervention. (See Table 22.1 for a summary of
     the Apgar chart.)

              Indicator                  0 Points                1 Point              2 Points

     A Activity (muscle tone)            Absent, loose, flaccid  Arms and legs        Spontaneous, active motion with
                                         without activity;       flexed with little   flexed muscle tone resisting
                                         floppy tone             movement             extension

     P Pulse                             Absent                  Less than 100        Greater than 100 beats per
                                                                 beats per minute     minute

     G Grimace (reflex or                Zero response to        Limited response     Crying, movement, pulling away
           irritability in response to   stimulation             to stimulation       upon stimulation
           stimulation)

     A Appearance (skin color) Pale or blue                      Pink, but            Entirely pink
                                                                 extremities are
                                                                 blue

     R Respirations                      Not breathing           Slow and irregular,  Crying vigorously
                                                                 weak or gasping

     TABLE 22.1 Apgar Chart

     Apgar Scoring and Escalating the Level of Care

     If a newborn has a 1-minute Apgar score of 6 or below, care is escalated as needed. A 5-minute Apgar score may be
     improved because of earlier assistance or, if it is under 7, may require the nurse to continue escalated care.
     Immediate care often means the 5-minute Apgar shows an improved newborn transition response. The nurse will
     need to continue resuscitative efforts by adding a 10-minute Apgar score and possibly initiating respiration therapy
     (more on that topic follows). If a neonate, whether term or preterm, is having difficulty breathing and is without
     proper muscle tone, they should be brought to the radiant warmer immediately post birth and given additional
     assessment (Hammer, 2021). Neonates who are having difficulties early in the transitional period need to have a
     thermometer attached to them to assess thermoregulation. These neonates need to stay between 36.5° C and
     37.4° C (97.7° F and 99.3° F), as the risk for hypothermia is increased in newborns who are already struggling with
     the transition to life.

             LINK TO LEARNING

     This video shows the original creator of the Apgar assessment, Dr. Virginia Apgar, teaching a new nurse to complete
     the assessment on a newborn (https://openstax.org/r/77TeachAPGAR) using all five assessment criteria.

     Access for free at openstax.org
         22.1 · Apgar Scoring                                                                                         967

The newborn found to have insufficient respiratory effort or increased work of breathing can be supported with
nursing interventions to assist during transition. These interventions include nasal suctioning with a bulb syringe,
monitoring their oxygen saturations with a pulse oximeter, and repositioning to best maintain an open airway. If
these supportive measures do not result in improved respiratory effort, positive pressure can be provided.

UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Newborn Care: Part 1

Brianne delivered a male infant, Marcus, vaginally. The delivery was complicated by shoulder dystocia. Apgar
score was 5 at one minute and 9 at five minutes; birth weight, 3995 g (8 lbs 14 oz); length, 21 inches (52.5 cm).

PMH      Maternal Medical History
             · Not currently taking any over-the-counter medications or herbal preparations
             · Negative history for STIs.
             · Denies any surgeries
             · Denies any previous pregnancies

         Social History
         Parents live in a two-bedroom apartment on the second floor in a building with only a freight
         elevator. They have a small dog named Candy.
         Prenatal History
         BP range 118-128/64-80
         Fundal Height at 36 weeks 40 cm
         Gestational Diabetes
         36 years old, G1 P1
         No known allergies

Nursing  Delivery Summary
Notes    After 20 hours of labor, Brianne had a vaginal delivery of a male infant with mild shoulder
         dystocia. Infant birth weight is 3995 g (8 lbs 14 oz). Placenta delivered spontaneously and
         intact by inspection. A second-degree vaginal laceration was repaired. Quantitative blood loss
         450 mL
         Father, Trey, present for labor and birth, very supportive
         Marcus was dried off immediately after birth with warm blankets, and a hat was placed on his
         head. After the umbilical cord was clamped and cut, Marcus was placed directly on Brianne's
         chest to begin skin to skin. Marcus and Brianne were covered with a warmed blanket.
968  22 · Immediate Care of the Newborn

     Flow        Newborn assessment data at 30 minutes of age
     Chart       Temp: 97.8º F (ax)
                 Heart rate: 160 bpm
                 Resp: 66 breaths
                 Pulse oximetry: 92%
                 Color: pink with acrocyanosis
                 Respirations: shallow, irregular
                 Nasal flaring
                 Marcus has not been interested in nursing.
                 Capillary glucose: 42

     Provider's  Observe in Labor and Birth unit
     Orders      VS every 30 minutes ×2, then hourly ×2, then every 4 hours
                 Erythromycin ointment to both eyes within 1 hour of birth
                 Phytonadione 1 mg IM anterior thigh within 1 hour of birth
                 Encourage skin-to-skin contact until temperature stable
                 Breast feed on demand
                 Monitor intake and output until discharge
                 Initial bath at 4 hours of age

     1. The nurse assesses Marcus at 30 minutes of age. Highlight the cues that demonstrate Marcus is having
         respiratory difficulty.

     2. Which data obtained during the newborn assessment is of most concern?
            a. Respirations of 66
            b. Pulse oximetry of 92%
            c. Nasal flaring
            d. Capillary glucose of 42

     Positive pressure ventilation is a form of respiratory therapy that involves the delivery of room air or a mixture of
     oxygen and room air by bag-valve mask into the lungs (Potchileev et al., 2022). Use of the mask requires the nurse
     to form a tight seal around the newborn's mouth and nose. This is done by making a "C" shape with the thumb and
     first finger around the mask of the bag-valve mask and applying firm but gentle pressure to the newborn's face while
     delivering breaths to the newborn at a rate of 30 to 60 per minute (Figure 22.3). The bag-valve mask should be
     connected to the oxygen flowmeter using 100% oxygen or blended oxygen and a self-inflating bag (Hammer, 2021).
     Positive pressure ventilation is initiated if the neonate is apneic, is gasping for air, or has a heart rate of less than
     100 bpm. The nurse provides supportive care by way of thermoregulation, stimulation, and oxygenation. After
     effective respirations and circulation, thermoregulation is the most critical factor for successful transition to
     extrauterine life. Immature physiologic and anatomic states of the newborn put them at increased risk for
     hypothermia because they are unable to maintain their own safe body temperature. Additionally, the nurse will need
     to call a specially trained team, whether that is a neonatal resuscitation team or a pediatric provider, to assess the
     newborn. All nurses who choose to work in an obstetrics unit will eventually be trained in neonatal resuscitation and
     know these steps, so that if a newborn needs additional assistance with transition, the nurse will be qualified to help
     while waiting for the NICU team to arrive. Figure 22.4 shows the steps in the neonatal resuscitation algorithm.

     Access for free at openstax.org
22.1 · Apgar Scoring                                                                                                                   969

FIGURE 22.3 Neonatal Bag-Valve Masks Neonatal bag-valve masks are smaller than adult bag-valve masks but made in a similar fashion.
The nurse uses their thumb and first finger in a "C" shape to ensure the mask forms a tight seal around the neonate's mouth and nose.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
970  22 · Immediate Care of the Newborn

     FIGURE 22.4 Neonatal Assessment Algorithm This is the neonatal resuscitation (NRP) guideline algorithm that is used to guide
     immediate resuscitation in the immediate postbirth period. CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure; ETT, endotracheal tube; GA,
     gestational age; HR, heart rate; IV, intravenous; PPV, positive pressure ventilation; UVC, umbilical venous catheter. (attribution: Copyright
     Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Access for free at openstax.org
22.2 · Physiological Adaptation and Transition                                                                          971

        LINK TO LEARNING

This video shows what neonatal resuscitation (NRP) looks like (https://openstax.org/r/77NRP) in action. Every nurse
who works on a labor and delivery or a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) will be certified by the unit in NRP.

22.2 Physiological Adaptation and Transition

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Describe the newborn's physiologic adaptation to extrauterine life
    · Identify cardiac and respiratory physiologic adaptation changes that occur during the transition to

        extrauterine life and stabilization
    · Compare and contrast neonatal periods of reactivity in the immediate period post birth

For the nurse to understand and recognize abnormal events in the newborn immediate period after birth, they must
first understand the normal changes in physiology that occur within the first several hours of life. In those first
hours, tremendous respiratory and circulatory adaptations occur to allow the newborn to transition from
intrauterine life to extrauterine life. This transition is the most complex physiologic adaptation that occurs in any
human body system in their lifetime. The nurse responsible for monitoring the newborn needs to have a solid
knowledge base about normal physiologic adaptation and accurate assessment skills to recognize any alteration in
normal adaptation.

Fetal Circulation

While the fetus is in utero, the placenta acts as a gas-exchange organ. The fetal lungs are bypassed during
development in the womb. Oxygen from the birthing person's blood crosses the placenta and enters the fetal
bloodstream through the umbilical vein. The oxygenated blood in the umbilical vein bypasses hepatic circulation
and is delivered to the inferior vena cava (IVC) via the ductus venosus. The ductus venosus is a fetal shunt allowing
oxygenated blood in the umbilical vein to bypass the liver. The oxygenated blood is then shunted from the right
atrium to the left atrium through a second shunt called the foramen ovale (Elshazzly et al., 2022). From the left
atrium, the oxygenated blood then travels to the left ventricle and into coronary arteries and the aorta (Elshazzly et
al., 2022). A tiny amount of blood from the right atrium bypasses the foramen ovale and flows through the right
atrium to the right ventricle into the pulmonary artery to perfuse the fetal lungs and promote lung development.
Most of the blood goes from the pulmonary artery directly to the aorta via a third shunt, the ductus arteriosus. From
there, the oxygenated blood is delivered to the fetus's systemic circulation (Elshazzly et al., 2022). Figure 10.18
summarizes fetal circulation.

Many changes occur at the time of birth. The fetal circulation structures become unnecessary as the birthing person
draws closer to the actual birthing event. Two main triggers induce the structural changes: cessation of blood flow
within the placenta and initiation of respiration. The structural changes that occur are listed in Table 22.2, and
Figure 22.5 compares fetal and neonatal circulation.
972  22 · Immediate Care of the Newborn

     Structure    Structural Change            Pathophysiology of Change
                        Occurring

     Systemic     Lung expansion                   · The placenta has low-resistance circulation. When that is lost, it
     circulation                                       causes systemic vascular resistance to increase. At the same
                                                       time, the lungs expand, are exposed to high oxygen
                                                       concentration for the first time, increase pulmonary blood flow,
                                                       and allow the blood vessels in the lungs to dilate.

                                                   · This combination of vasodilation and increased pulmonary
                                                       blood flow causes decreased pulmonary vascular resistance,
                                                       enhancing the performance of all major body systems.

                                               (Elshazzly et al., 2022)

     Ductus       This duct stays open at      Once the umbilical cord is cut, the process of duct closing begins.
     venosus      the time of birth, which     Mechanical pressure and a redistribution of blood in the neonate's
                  allows umbilical vein        body and changes in the cardiac output occur.
                  catheterization, if          In simpler terms, closure of this duct forces perfusion of the fetal
                  needed.                      liver. Anatomic closure of this duct occurs within 2 weeks after birth,
                  Shortly after birth, this    at which time the structure is known as the ligamentum venosum
                  duct will begin to narrow    connected to the round ligaments of the liver.
                  and shrink.
                  The duct will close
                  completely during the
                  first week of life in most
                  full-term neonates but
                  will take longer in
                  preterm neonates.

     Foramen      Increased pressure in the    In utero, pressure is greater in the right atrium, with the foramen
     ovale        left atrium attempts to      ovale open, allowing blood to shunt from the right atrium to the left.
                  reverse blood flow and       Decreased pulmonary vascular resistance and decreased umbilical
                  closes this shunt, making    venous return to the right atrium also cause a decrease in right atrial
                  it a one-way valve.          pressure. Pressure gradients are now reversed, allowing left atrial
                                               pressure to be greater than right atrial pressure, causing the foramen
                                               ovale to close 1-2 hours after birth. Anatomic closure occurs in about
                                               half of all 6-month-olds, while one-quarter of the adult population
                                               have a patent foramen ovale (PFO), though they are unaware of it.

     Ductus       Due to increased             · Closure of the ductus arteriosus is caused by an increase in
     arteriosus   systemic vascular               oxygen or newborn blood PaO2, the partial pressure of arterial
                  pressures and increased         oxygen, which then triggers constriction. While in utero, the
                  left atrial pressure, a         placenta had produced prostaglandins that triggered
                  reversal of blood flow and      vasodilation of the same vessel.
                  aorta-to-pulmonary
                  artery (or left-to- right)   · With the loss of the placenta and an increase in blood flow,
                  shunting occurs, closing        prostaglandin levels drop dramatically, leaving unopposed
                  the shunt. It will              vasoconstriction.
                  functionally close within a
                  few days after birth.        · Anatomic closure of the ductus arteriosus starts within hours of
                                                  birth and completes 2-3 months later.

     TABLE 22.2 Structural Changes Occurring as Fetal Circulation Transitions to Newborn Circulation Sources for data: Marty et al.,
     2022; Pradbit & Forshing, 2022; Hampton et al., 2022; Elshazzly et al., 2022.

     Access for free at openstax.org
22.2 · Physiological Adaptation and Transition                                                                                                973

FIGURE 22.5 Comparison of Fetal and Neonatal Circulation Fetal circulation: During fetal development, the ductus arteriosus shunts the
blood away from the lungs and directly into fetal circulation through the aorta. Neonatal circulation: At birth, the foramen ovale and the
ductus arteriosus are both forced closed because of increased systemic vascular resistance due to loss of the placental blood flow. (credit:
modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Ductus Venosus
The primary function of the ductus venosus is to direct oxygenated blood from the umbilical vein to the inferior vena
cava and eventually to the left heart for circulation. This duct also supplies oxygenated blood to the fetal liver
(Pradbit & Forshing, 2022). Fetal hydrops, chromosomal aberration, in utero heart failure, and portal vein absence
can be caused by absence or dysfunction of the ductus venosus (Pradbit & Forshing, 2022).

Ductus Arteriosus
The ductus arteriosus is a shunt that allows the fetal circulation to avoid the lungs by shunting blood from the right
ventricle, bypassing pulmonary circulation and entering the descending aorta. Progressive increase in oxygenation
(increased partial pressure of oxygen [PO2]) and elimination of prostaglandin as a ductal relaxant cause the
functional closure of the ductus arteriosus. At the time of birth, the newborn's lungs fill with air, causing pulmonary
vascular resistance and leading to blood flowing from the right ventricle to the lungs for oxygenation. The shunt then
constricts due to increased arterial oxygen tension and the decreased flow-through, causing anatomic closure
within 2 to 3 weeks.

Foramen Ovale
The foramen ovale directs intra-arterial blood flow from right to left in the fetal heart, bypassing the fetal lungs from
the right atrium directly into the left atrium. The blood travels through the foramen ovale to the left atrium through
the mitral valve to the left ventricle and out to the aorta and body. It finally flows to the ascending aorta, entering the
systemic circulation.

Neonatal Circulation

Neonatal circulation is the same as adult circulation, once the newborn has completed the transition to extrauterine
life. However, some things can go wrong, and the nurse needs to be able to identify those issues through
assessment and accurate history taking. Some cardiac defects that a newborn might experience can be congenital
(i.e., related to family history), so it is important that the nurse knows to assess for family congenital defects, cardiac
issues, or issues during the pregnancy. During the postpartum period, the nurse must monitor the newborn for any
signs or symptoms of cardiopulmonary dysfunction, such as apnea, cyanosis, and respiratory distress.
974  22 · Immediate Care of the Newborn

     Patent Ductus Arteriosus and Murmur
     When the ductus arteriosus of the newborn remains open after birth, it is called a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
     (Figure 22.6). As a result, blood flows from the descending aorta, across the PDA, and into pulmonary circulation,
     which can cause pulmonary edema (Gillam-Krakauer & Mahajan, 2022). The nurse will hear a murmur upon
     assessment of a newborn with a PDA, which will sound like a continuous, machine-like rumble below the clavicle,
     radiating to the back. Clinical manifestations will appear as tachycardia, bounding peripheral pulses, possible
     increased respiratory distress, and hypoxia, if pulmonary edema is present (Gillam-Krakauer & Mahajan, 2022).

     FIGURE 22.6 Patent Ductus Arteriosus A patent ductus arteriosus allows blood to bypass circulation to the lungs. (credit: modification of
     work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Patent Foramen Ovale and Murmur
     The foramen ovale closes completely in only about 75 percent of newborns (Marty et al., 2022). In the other 25
     percent, a patent foramen ovale occurs. A patent foramen ovale (PFO) appears as a flap-like opening between the
     atrial septum secundum and primum at the fossa ovalis (Hampton et al., 2022) (Figure 22.7). Because left atrial
     pressure in the heart is higher than right atrial pressure, only a minuscule amount of blood may be shunted back to
     the right atrium, usually without any clinical significance for the newborn. This is generally a benign finding during
     the newborn period. However, if it persists into adulthood, it can lead to right-to-left shunting of deoxygenated blood
     and be symptomatic or asymptomatic.

     Access for free at openstax.org
22.2 · Physiological Adaptation and Transition                                                                                   975

FIGURE 22.7 Patent Foramen Ovale A patent foramen ovale (PFO) allows blood to flow between the right and left atria. (credit:
modification of work from Anatomy and Physiology 2e. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

However, the nurse may hear a murmur upon auscultation during a cardiac assessment that sounds like a quiet,
muffled extra heart sound at the apex. Neonates have a 75 percent chance that these are transient and not
associated with any other anomalies (Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 2022). Nonetheless, the nurse will report
this finding to the health-care provider on call for the newborn.

Patent Ductus Venosus and Murmur
Failure of the ductus venosus to close leads to a condition called patent ductus venosus, which causes
galactosemia, or galactose in the blood. This is an inherited disorder preventing the newborn from breaking down
the sugar galactose, causing a buildup to toxic levels in their bloodstream. These newborns must avoid dairy
products, breast milk, and most baby formulas. Additional problems from lack of closure of the ductus arteriosus
are hypoxia, hepatic dysfunction, and encephalopathy with hyperammonemia, high levels of ammonia in the blood
that cause brain damage (Marty et al., 2022).

        LINK TO LEARNING

This video from the Khan Academy shows a visual interpretation of the fetal to neonatal transition in circulation
(https://openstax.org/r/77fetalcirculatn), including all the changes that happen during the moments immediately
after birth.

Cardiopulmonary Adaptation

Many additional changes occur in the cardiopulmonary system after birth of the newborn. Late in gestation, the
newborn completes lung development, fluid secretion in the lungs decreases, and surfactant production increases.
In the lungs, surfactant is a phospholipid that lowers alveolar surface tension, prevents alveolar collapse at
expiration, and maintains functional residual capacity. Production of catecholamines, causing fetal pulmonary
epithelial cells to reabsorb fluid from alveolar spaces, is caused by the onset of labor (Rehman & Bacha, 2022). The
first breath of air initiates a sequence of events that helps to expand the lungs, establish lung volume, clear the
airways of amniotic fluid, and help the newborn transition from fetal circulation to newborn circulation. The first
breath generates a high negative pressure system, filling the alveoli with air and removing any fluid in those spaces.
Once the neonatal lungs expand fully with high concentrations of room air, pulmonary vascular resistance falls,
which triggers pulmonary vasodilation increasing blood flow to the newly inflated lungs (Rehman & Bacha, 2022).

Approximately 10 percent of neonates do not sustain effective respiratory effort in the immediate transition period.
976  22 · Immediate Care of the Newborn

     Respiratory distress is a common complication seen in the neonatal period and is a major cause of morbidity and
     mortality (Reuter et al., 2014). The cause of neonatal respiratory distress varies, but the result is inadequate
     ventilation and impaired oxygenation, accompanied by retained carbon dioxide and alterations in acid-base balance.
     Respiratory distress syndrome can be an isolated incident that requires supportive care, or it can be a product of a
     functional abnormality of the pulmonary system that requires more intensive care. Table 22.3 shows common
     causes of neonatal respiratory distress, clinical findings, and their causes.

     Diagnosis     Cause                  Incidence                                Clinical Signs

     Meconium      Aspiration of          2%-10% of term and postterm infants      · Progressive disorder
     aspiration    meconium during        exposed to meconium-stained                 with symptoms
     syndrome      vaginal or cesarean    amniotic fluid; 5%-30% of postterm          increasing from
     (MAS)         birth that interferes  and term births have meconium-              inflammation to
                   with surfactant        stained amniotic fluid                      inability to ventilate/
                   activity                                                           oxygenate

                                                                                   · Tachypnea, grunting,
                                                                                      nasal flaring,
                                                                                      retracting, hypoxemia,
                                                                                      acidosis

     Transient     Failure to clear lung  0.3%-0.5% of term and late-preterm       Self-limiting condition
     tachypnea of  fluid by usual         infants                                  presenting with tachypnea
     the newborn   mechanism              Onset within the first 24 hours of life  and no other abnormalities,
     (TTN)                                                                         lasting 12-72 hours

     Respiratory   Insufficient           Inversely related to gestational age:    Tachypnea, grunting, nasal
     distress      surfactant production  Less than 28 weeks: 60%                  flaring, retracting,
     syndrome                             Older than 34 weeks: 5%                  hypoxemia, hypercarbia,
     (RDS)                                                                         respiratory acidosis
                                                                                   beginning soon after birth

     Persistent    Failure to relax the   1:500-1:5000 live births                 Tachypnea, grunting, nasal
     pulmonary     pulmonary              Affects term and postterm newborns       flaring, retracting,
     hypertension  vasculature after      due to pulmonary and nonpulmonary        hypoxemia, hypercarbia,
     of the        breathing oxygen at    issues, though many times is idiopathic  respiratory acidosis; often
     newborn       birth                  in nature                                hypoxic and intractable
     (PPHN)

     TABLE 22.3 Common Causes of Neonatal Respiratory Distress in the Immediate Care Period (Hermansen & Mahajan, 2015)

             REAL RN STORIES

     Nurse: Clare, BSN
     Years in practice: 5
     Clinical Setting: OBGYN unit of an academic medical center hospital
     Geographic location: Urban center

     I was assigned to be the baby nurse for a scheduled cesarean section of a 35-year-old cisgender woman G1P0 at 36
     weeks and zero days' gestation. She had placenta previa with an active bleed over the prior 48 hours.

     Upon arrival in the preoperative area, the fetal heart tones were 130 to 135 bpm, with moderate variability, no
     accelerations, and no decelerations. The patient, Kelsey, was experiencing no contractions. The clinical team
     determined that a cesarean section was necessary, and the patient agreed.

     Access for free at openstax.org
22.2 · Physiological Adaptation and Transition                                                                          977

I helped my coworker Kaitlyn, a labor and delivery nurse, prepare the patient for the cesarean section by educating
the patient and her partner about all the things they might see and hear in the operating room. My coworker placed
Kelsey into a hospital gown, started an 18-gauge intravenous line in her right antecubital space, and initiated
lactated Ringer's solution at 125 mL/hour. Kelsey received consultations from the anesthetist and her obstetrical
surgeon, and then it was time to deliver the baby.

In the operating room, the decision was made that there should be two nurses responsible for the neonate because
of the preterm gestational age of the baby. In addition, the main nurse called the neonatal intensive care unit to
notify them that there was a preterm delivery happening in labor and delivery just in case they were needed.
Furthermore, because the presence of placenta previa increases the risk of postpartum hemorrhage, I called my
charge nurse and asked her to come to the cesarean section with a postpartum hemorrhage kit. I also asked the
blood bank for two units of packed red blood cells in Kelsey's correct blood type to be placed on hold for her
following the provider's orders.

Once the surgery was underway, I monitored the fetal heart tones, watching for any signs of distress, and prepared
the radiant warmer for the arrival of the baby. I made sure to have all the equipment that I would need, including the
following: suction connected to the wall; oxygen with bag-valve mask and neonatal-size mask; nasal bulb; warm
blankets; laryngoscope and ET tubes appropriate for a 35-week fetus; pulse oximetry; temperature sensor; hat; and
diaper.

The baby arrived, was given to me, and placed under the radiant warmer. The neonate was very small, had very poor
tone, was pale and cyanotic, gasping for breaths, had shallow breathing, but responded to stimulation and had a
heartbeat of 140. I immediately started stimulating and drying the baby off while my coworker auscultated for
breath sounds and placed a pulse oximeter on the neonate's foot. After getting a pulse ox reading of 40 percent, my
coworker rolled a baby blanket into a log and placed it under the neonate's neck to point the chin of the neonate
toward the ceiling. This allowed the infant's jaw and airway to fall open, which facilitated more efficient breathing.
The airway was assessed and cleared using a bulb syringe. At that point, Apgar scores for the neonate were 7. Blow-
by oxygen was provided, and I continued stimulating and drying the baby. The baby continued to gasp for breaths,
was still pale, and had poor tone; the heart rate was 145, and the newborn responded to stimulation. At 5 minutes,
the Apgar scoring total was still 7, and I called the NICU for additional assistance. The baby was placed in an
incubator and taken to the NICU for help with transition. The neonate's distress was likely due to early gestational
age and being small. The infant is 5 pounds, 3 ounces and named Genevieve.

Hematologic Adaptation

The hematologic adaptations of the newborn happen because of the dramatic changes in circulation and
oxygenation that occur after placental detachment. Mean hemoglobin levels in cord blood are 15 g/dL (Eslami et al.,
2012), and hemoglobin and hematocrit levels in the newborn will continue to rise in the first several hours post
birth. Higher than normal hemoglobin and hematocrit levels will usually self-correct by day 3 to 5. This is when the
movement of plasma from intravascular to extravascular spaces is completed (Eslami et al., 2012).

Oxygen Saturation Levels in the Newborn
Blood oxygen in the immediate newborn is significantly lower than in a newborn that is 24 hours old (Lara-Canton, et
al., 2022). Partial pressures of the oxygen gradient between maternal, placental, and fetal blood are thought to be
the driving force that regulates fetal oxygen supply. In the uterus, the fetus grew in a relatively low oxygen
environment due to fetal hemoglobin's high affinity for oxygen (Lara-Canton, et al., 2022) and due to the mixing
nature of the fetal circulatory system. Delayed cord clamping has been associated with improved fetal-to-neonatal
transition and increased newborn oxygen saturation levels by 85 percent to 90 percent (Lara-Canton, et al., 2022).
Delayed cord clamping at birth can also lead to fewer episodes of tachycardia in the immediate transition period for
the newborn. As seen in Table 22.4, in the period immediately following birth, oxygen saturation rates of 60 percent
to 65 percent are expected in the newborn, rising to 85 percent to 90 percent at 10 minutes post birth, according to
the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), American Heart Association (AHA), and the Guidelines for Neonatal
Resuscitation (NRP) (Hammer, 2021).
978  22 · Immediate Care of the Newborn

                                         Time after Birth Oxygen Saturation Level

                                         1 min   60%-65%

                                         2 min   65%-70%

                                         3 min   70%-75%

                                         4 min   75%-80%

                                         5 min   80%-85%

                                         10 min  85%-95%

                                                           TABLE 22.4 Target Preductal SpO2 after Birth

     American Academy of Pediatrics, American Heart Association and Guidelines for Neonatal Resuscitation (NRP) all
     agree that the guidelines for saturation of peripheral oxygen (SpO2) should be used to determine the need for
     initiating supplemental oxygen or increasing/decreasing its concentration (Hammer, 2021).

             PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

     The Vitamin K Injection

     Neonates do not have enough vitamin K stored in their bodies at birth because very little of it passes from the
     birthing person through the placenta. Therefore, newborns need a supplement to increase clotting factors and to
     prevent hemorrhagic disasters and vitamin K deficiency bleeding. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends
     that all newborns receive a one-time intramuscular shot of vitamin K within 6 hours after birth. Neonates who do not
     receive the vitamin K injection are at 81 times greater risk of developing vitamin K deficiency bleeding than
     neonates who receive this intramuscular injection, compared to 1/100,000 when vitamin K is given at birth (Hand &
     Noble, 2022)

     Generic Name: phytonadine, phytomenadione

     Trade Name: Mephyton

     Class/Action: vitamin, fat soluble

         · Route/Dosage: oral, subcutaneous (SubQ; administer undiluted), intramuscular (IM; 1 mg/0.5 mL),
             intravenous (IV; 1 mg/minute)
               Oral: May be administered with or without food in older children and adults. Parenteral formula may also
                   be used for small oral doses or situations in which tablets cannot be swallowed.
               Parenteral: Limit IV administration to situations where an alternative route of administration is not
                   feasible and the benefit of therapy outweighs the risk of hypersensitivity reactions. Allergic reactions have
                   occurred with IM and SubQ injections.

         · High Alert/Black Box Warning:
         · Indications: Prophylaxis and treatment of vitamin K deficiency bleeding (formerly known as hemorrhagic

             disease of the newborn (injection only).
         · Mechanism of Action: Promotes liver synthesis of clotting factors (II, VII, IX, X): however, the exact

             mechanism of this stimulation is unknown. Menadiol is a water-soluble form of vitamin K; phytonadione has a
             more rapid and prolonged effect than menadione; menadiol sodium diphosphonate (K4) is half as potent as
             menadione (K3).
         · Contraindications: Hypersensitivity to phytonadione or any component of the formula.
         · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: Table 22.5 lists adverse drug reactions derived from product labeling unless
             otherwise specified.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               22.2 · Physiological Adaptation and Transition            979

Category          Adverse Reaction

Cardiovascular    Chest pain, flushing, hypotension, tachycardia, weak pulse

Central nervous   Dizziness
system

Dermatologic      Diaphoresis, eczematous rash, erythema, erythematous rash, pruritic plaques of the
                  skin, urticaria

Gastrointestinal  Dysgeusia

Hepatic           Hyperbilirubinemia

Hypersensitivity  Anaphylactic reaction (anaphylaxis)

Local             Injection site reaction (pain, swelling, tenderness)

Respiratory       Cyanosis, dyspnea

Miscellaneous     Lesion (scleroderma-like)

TABLE 22.5 Adverse Drug Reactions of Vitamin K Administration

· Nursing Implications: Witness parental consent. Review patient education with the family. Administer the IM
   injection in the middle vastus lateralis muscle. Document in the patient's chart.

· Parent/Family Education: The nurse will provide education to the parents before providing intramuscular
   injection to neonate. It is mandatory that while providing this information to the parents the nurse provide a
   written information statement to them so that they can follow along and make an informed decision.

Newborn Coagulation
Platelet values in a neonate are comparable to those of an adult patient; however, the neonate is at risk for
complications with platelet function. If the neonate was born to a birthing person who experienced severe
hypertension or HELLP syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet count), or a birthing person
with idiopathic isoimmune thrombocytopenia, the newborn is at increased risk for a platelet dysfunction called
transient neonatal thrombocytopenia, or thrombocytopenia (decreased platelets) that develops in neonates. (See
Chapter 19 Complications of Labor and Birth for a discussion of HELLP syndrome in depth.) The absence of vitamin
K in the newborn gut causes a quick decrease in coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X after birth. Vitamin K levels do
slowly increase but do not reach adult levels for several weeks, which is one reason a vitamin K injection in the
immediate period after birth is recommended. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that all newborns
receive a one-time intramuscular injection of vitamin K within 6 hours after birth. The intramuscular administration
of vitamin K (Aquamephyton) effectively prevents vitamin K deficiency disease of the newborn, as well as excessive
bleeding after circumcision for the newborn males who have this procedure. (Hand & Noble, 2022).

Newborn Transitional Period

The neonate shows a very predictable pattern of behavior during the first several hours after birth. Based on these
periods of reactivity, the nurse plans activities with the birthing person and the neonate to maximize the attachment
between them. The three periods of reactivity the neonate will experience are the first period of reactivity, the
period of decreased responsiveness, and the second period of reactivity (Hernandez & Thilo, 2005).

First Period of Reactivity
The first period of reactivity begins with birth and lasts around 30 minutes. In this period, the nurse can expect to
see alertness, activity, and responsiveness to interaction from the neonate to the birthing person, their partner,
nurses, clinicians, and anyone else who interacts with them (Hernandez & Thilo, 2005). This is an optimal time for
980  22 · Immediate Care of the Newborn

     the nurse to teach the birthing person about breast-feeding. The neonate is often rooting for food, very interested in
     their environment, and open to attempting the first latch session during this time. (Hernandez & Thilo, 2005). When
     this period is over, the neonate will fall into a deep sleep.

     The Period of Decreased Responsiveness
     In the period of decreased responsiveness, the neonate will be in a deep sleep or have marked decrease in activity
     for 30 minutes to 2 hours. Their muscle tone will return to normal; they will have fast, shallow respirations (60
     breaths per minute) with no dyspnea occurring. The nurse will note that the color of the neonate is pink with
     excellent perfusion and capillary refill of less than 3 seconds. During assessment, the nurse will note a heart rate
     between 100 and 120 beats per minute, and the neonate will be less responsive to external stimuli (Hernandez &
     Thilo, 2005). Additionally, the nurse may assess spontaneous jerks and twitches or an occasional Moro reflex;
     however, the neonate will return to rest very quickly (Hernandez & Thilo, 2005).

     The Second Period of Reactivity
     The third and final stage of newborn transition is called the second period of reactivity. This is when the nurse will
     note the return of responsiveness from the neonate, lasting from 2 to 8 hours. The neonate will experience periods
     of tachycardia and abrupt changes in tone, color, and bowel sounds. The neonate can experience an excess of oral
     mucus, sometimes appearing as vomiting, gagging, and choking on amniotic fluid left over from birth. This is an
     expected finding, and the nurse will reassure the parents and educate them that this may occur for the next 7 days
     as the newborn clears their airways. Upon assessment during this time, the nurse will note that the neonate often
     has passed their first meconium stool. During this final stage of reactivity, the nurse will also notice that the neonate
     demonstrates increased hunger cues, making this an excellent time for another breast-feeding session. During
     increased alert periods, parent-infant bonding can be established.

     Abnormal Transition
     Neonatal assessment findings indicating abnormal transition include the following:

         · Persistent tachycardia, longer than the first hour of life; fixed bradycardia
         · Diffuse and persistent rales upon auscultation, retractions, grunting, nasal flaring lasting longer than the first

             hour of life
         · Persistent cyanosis and pulse oximetry less than 90 percent on room air and requirements for supplemental

             oxygen after the first hour of life
         · Episodes of prolonged apnea (longer than 20 seconds) and bradycardia (less than 80 beats/min)
         · Marked pallor
         · Temperature instability persistently after 2 to 3 hours of life lower than 36.5º C (97.7º F)
         · Poor capillary refill (greater than 3 seconds)
         · Unusual neurologic behavior (lethargy, hypotonia, excessive tremors, jitteriness, inconsolable crying, poor

             feeding)
         · Excessive oral secretions (choking, excessive drooling, cyanosis with coughing) (Fraser, 2002)

     When the nurse identifies a neonate who is experiencing abnormal transition, they must support the newborn in
     whatever area the newborn is having difficulty moving through. Suctioning for an open airway, maintaining a stable
     neutral temperature, or encouraging skin-to-skin would all be independent nursing interventions, while persistent
     desaturations and marked pallor may require a specialist and further diagnostic evaluation. The nurse needs to
     know when the newborn requires interventions beyond independent nursing interventions.

     22.3 Neutral Thermal Environment

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Illustrate the importance of maintaining a neutral thermal environment when caring for a newborn
             patient

         · Compare and contrast all four ways that a newborn can lose heat and verbalize ways a nurse can help
             maintain a neutral thermal environment

         · Discuss the importance of the Ten Step Warm Chain and how it impacts the care given to a neonate
         · Summarize the signs and symptoms of cold stress and how to care for a newborn with cold stress

     Access for free at openstax.org
22.3 · Neutral Thermal Environment                                                                                                981

One of the most vital goals for a nurse caring for a neonate is providing support to maintain their temperature while
they transition from intrauterine to extrauterine life.

Thermoregulation in the Newborn

The thermal balance created by the loss of heat to the environment at a rate equal to the heat being produced is
called thermoregulation. Neonates have a poor ability to maintain thermoregulation because they have very little
brown adipose tissue that stores the energy useful for creating heat. The neonate is also unable to shiver, which is a
reflex helpful in raising temperatures. Maintaining a thermoneutral environment, between 36.5° C (97.7° F) and 37°
C (98.6° F), throughout the transitional period is essential for a neonate. An appropriate temperature environment
can be maintained via radiant warmer, swaddling (Figure 22.8), and skin-to-skin contact with the birthing person,
the partner, or available extended family (Fraser, 2014).

FIGURE 22.8 The Swaddled Newborn This newborn is swaddled appropriately to encourage thermoregulation. (credit: "Baby Wrapped in
White Cloth" by Jonathan Borba/Pexels, Public Domain)

Heat Loss in the Newborn

Neonates can experience heat loss in the hospital or home environment in four ways: radiation, evaporation,
convection, and conduction. Neonates are homeothermic, meaning that they attempt to stabilize their core internal
temperature despite significant temperature variations in their environment (Fraser, 2014; Trevisanuto & Sedin,
2016). A neutral thermal environment is the minimum temperature range necessary for heat production to
maintain normal body temperature (Fraser, 2014; Trevisanuto & Sedin, 2016) (Figure 22.9). Term and postterm
neonates require higher environmental temperatures than adults to maintain a neutral thermal environment,
between 20° C and 22° C (68° F and 72° F).
982  22 · Immediate Care of the Newborn

     FIGURE 22.9 Neutral Thermal Environment for the Neonate Newborns have a very narrow therapeutic range for the neutral thermal
     environment. Exceeding that in either direction can raise metabolic needs and may cause death (Al-Taweel, 2006). (attribution: Copyright
     Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

     Several neonatal characteristics affect thermal stability:
         · Heat transfer from the newborn's organs to skin surface is increased compared to that of adults because of
             the neonate's decreased subcutaneous fat and large body surface-to-weight ratio (Fraser, 2014; Trevisanuto
             & Sedin, 2016).
         · The blood vessels in the neonate are closer to the skin than those of an adult. This causes the circulating
             blood to be more readily influenced by environmental temperatures, thus influencing the hypothalamic
             temperature-regulating center in the brain (Trevisanuto & Sedin, 2016).
         · Newborns rely on nonshivering thermogenesis for heat production via metabolism of brown adipose tissue
             (Fraser, 2014).
         · At birth, the newborn prefers to stay in a fixed posture, decreasing the surface area exposed to the
             environment, reducing heat loss (Trevisanuto & Sedin, 2016).

     Evaporation
     One of the most common ways that a neonate experiences heat loss in the birthing room and on the postpartum unit
     is evaporation, which is heat loss that occurs when liquid is converted to vapor. The amniotic fluid and/or blood on
     the infant holds water that cools the neonate when exposed to the cooler environment (Figure 22.10). Evaporation
     can also occur if the neonate is tachypneic and exhaled moisture or water is escaping from the respiratory tract.
     Radiant warming beds and phototherapy can also cause evaporation heat loss (Fraser, 2014; Interprofessional
     Education and Research Committee of the Champlain Maternal Newborn Regional Program, 2013). Neonates are at
     particular risk of heat loss via evaporation at the time of birth and during their newborn bath. In the birthing room,
     the nurse can use warmed blankets to dry the neonate, discarding wet ones and replacing them with dry ones as
     needed. At the newborn bath, the nurse exposes only the necessary areas of the neonate and ensures that they
     have had stable temperatures before bathing.

     Access for free at openstax.org
22.3 · Neutral Thermal Environment                                                                                                       983

FIGURE 22.10 Heat Loss due to Evaporation Immediately after birth, this newborn starts to lose heat via evaporation due to being wet in
a cold room. Therefore, the nurse will begin drying them off with a warm blanket. (credit: "Image of Baby, Newborn and Child" by Engin
Akyurt/Pixabay, CC0)

Convection
The loss of heat from the body surface to the surrounding air by a current, like a fan in a room, is called convection.
This can be caused by a fan, an air-conditioned room, removing a neonate from an incubator for a procedure or
feeding, or even unwarmed oxygen in a mask. The impact on the neonate depends on the amount of time they are
exposed to the cooled air, the velocity of the moving air, the temperature difference between the neonate's skin and
the air, and the amount of body surface exposed. (Lubkowska et al., 2019).

Conduction
The loss of heat when in direct contact with a cooler surface is called conduction. Nurses caring for a newborn can
prevent this loss of heat by warming their hands, using warm blankets on scales and examination tables before
placing the newborn on them, warming stethoscopes, and prewarming the warmer or incubator (Isolette) prior to
placing the infant on the bed. Placing a neonate skin-to-skin with the birthing person, their other parent, or an
extended family member is a very effective way to warm the neonate and prevent conductive heat loss.

Radiant Heat Loss
Another way that a neonate experiences heat loss is through radiation, which is heat loss occurring from transfer of
heat to cool solid objects not in direct contact with the newborn. The walls or windows in a room, for example, can
transfer heat from the neonate's body if the crib or incubator is placed too close to a cold space (Fraser, 2014;
Interprofessional Education & Research Committee, 2013). If a nurse places a bag of ice near the newborn in the
crib or incubator while preparing to draw blood gases, that will increase radiant heat losses. Placing a hat on the
newborn conserves heat, decreasing radiant heat loss. The nurse and parents must be very aware of where the
newborn is placed because radiant heat loss for a newborn can happen quickly.

Figure 22.11 summarizes the methods of heat loss.
984  22 · Immediate Care of the Newborn

     FIGURE 22.11 Neonatal Heat Loss Convection, conduction, evaporation, and radiation are four ways neonates lose heat in the transitional
     period. (credit: modification of work "Danderyd Hospital newborn baby" by SCA Svenska Cellulosa Aktiebolaget/Wikimedia Commons, CC
     BY 2.0)

             CULTURAL CONTEXT

     South African Cultural Attitudes about Neonatal Baths

     In the Vhembe District, Limpopo province of South Africa, indigenous people do not bathe newborns only for
     hygienic purposes. They mix indigenous herbs with the bath water for protection from evil spirits carried by people,
     as well as general well-being and relaxation. The traditional bath that occurs in the first three to four days of life,
     gumululo, contains three traditional medicines that are boiled with water and added to the bath in place of soap.
     The bath is given to neonates to make them strong and protect them. At the end of the bath, they offer a small
     amount of the bath water to the neonate to drink (Tuelo & Mulaudzi, 2021).

     Ten-Step Warm Chain

     The ten-step warm chain was developed in 1997 by the World Health Organization in advocating for a more
     standardized approach to support thermal stability in the newborn (World Health Organization, 1997). While not the
     standard of care in the United States, the ten-step model is still widely used in low-resource countries. The ten
     steps include

       1. warm delivery room,
       2. immediate drying,
       3. skin-to-skin contact,
       4. breast-feeding,
       5. bathing and weighing postponed,
       6. appropriate clothing and bedding,
       7. mother and baby together,
       8. warm transportation,

     Access for free at openstax.org
22.3 · Neutral Thermal Environment                                                                                      985

  9. warm resuscitation, and
10. training/awareness-raising (World Health Organization, 1997).

According to the ten-step warm chain, the delivery room should be at least 25° C (77° F) with no drafts, with no fans
moving air around, and with all supplies needed to keep the newborn warm prepared ahead of time (World Health
Organization, 1997). At no time should the birthing person, visitors, or nurses change the temperature of the
delivery room. Immediately after the birth, the nurse can prevent heat loss in the neonate by drying the newborn
with a warm blanket or cloth to prevent evaporation (World Health Organization, 1997) After drying the infant, the
nurse will place the newborn on a warm surface, such as skin-to-skin with the birthing person's chest or abdomen or
in the radiant warmer to prevent conductive heat losses. This is when the nurse should encourage the birthing
parent to initiate breast-feeding, according to the ten-step warm chain (World Health Organization, 1997). Bathing
must wait until at least 6 hours post birth or by 24 hours of age and when the newborn's temperature has been
consistently stable (Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses [AWHONN], 2019; World Health
Organization, 1997). Bathing should be done quickly with warm water. The newborn should be dried thoroughly,
dressed in appropriate clothing, and given to the birthing person to be kept warm. If transportation is necessary,
skin-to-skin with the birthing person is safest and recommended. If that is not possible, the next best option is a
fully clothed newborn, swaddled, and in the arms of another adult or a transport device (World Health Organization,
1997).

Cold Stress in the Newborn

When a neonate loses more heat in a period than they can reproduce, they experience cold stress (AWHONN et al.,
2023), which requires them to use compensatory mechanisms (increased respirations and nonshivering
thermogenesis) to maintain core body temperature. When a neonate experiences excessive heat loss, they use
stores of energy to compensate and maintain core temperature in the normal range. An increase in metabolic heat
production above the basal metabolism that is not associated with muscle activity is called nonshivering
thermogenesis (NST). This occurs mostly through metabolizing brown fat and, to a much lesser degree, through the
metabolization of skeletal muscle, the liver, the brain, and white fat. Brown fat mass peaks at birth and decreases in
size over the first few weeks of life. Its metabolism is initiated with a catecholamine release. A newborn's
responsiveness to the release of catecholamines is increased by cutting the umbilical cord. Cutting the cord, release
of catecholamines, and the stimulation of brown fat tissue are the driving factors in neonatal thermogenesis (Dattani
& Gevers, 2016).

The metabolic consequences of cold stress are increased oxygen and glucose requirements and decreased cardiac
output causing a decreased pulmonary blood flow leading to pulmonary hypertension and decreased surfactant
production. These consequences result from activation of the sympathetic nervous system and are potentially fatal
if not caught and reversed in time. Because of these major metabolic changes, the neonate goes into respiratory
distress, sometimes experiences intraventricular hemorrhage, and has a higher risk of mortality than newborns who
have not experienced cold stress (AWHONN et al., 2023). Preterm neonates and those who experienced intrauterine
growth restriction are at increased risk for cold stress and higher mortality due to their decreased adipose tissue,
brown fat, and glycogen available for metabolism (Gardner, 2020).

Causes of Cold Stress
As discussed earlier, heat loss can occur in a neonate from four different mechanisms: evaporation, convection,
conduction, and radiation. The ways in which a neonate can lose heat during the immediate care period are
numerous, and only some of the most frequent are listed here. Through evaporation, the newborn loses heat quickly
immediately post birth in the birthing room and must be dried vigorously by the nurse, wrapped in a warm blanket,
or placed skin-to-skin with the birthing person. Heat loss can also be caused by newborn baths, and for this reason,
it is generally recommended that the bath be given between 6 hours and 24 hours after birth, when the newborn has
had multiple temperatures over 37.5° C (99.5° F). Baths should use warm water and be as short as possible. The
nurse should plan to use appropriate rewarming measures after bathing, including skin-to-skin contact (New, 2019).
Placing the crib too close to a drafty window or a cold wall accelerates neonatal heat loss, as does having a ceiling
fan or circulating fan in the room.

Signs and Symptoms of Cold Stress
It is critical that the nurse be aware of the signs and symptoms of cold stress developing in the neonate so that they
986  22 · Immediate Care of the Newborn

     can recognize subtle changes. The most obvious sign is an axillary temperature reading below 36.5° C (97.7° F).
     (See Chapter 23 Newborn Assessment for a discussion of taking axillary temperatures in the newborn.) Neonates
     should have temperatures monitored often during the first hour after birth and every 4 hours after that. Beyond a
     low axillary temperature, a neonate experiencing cold stress will appear acrocyanotic, irritable, and hypotonic
     (Gardner, 2020). Additionally, the neonate will become hypoglycemic due to the increased metabolic demand on
     their body brought on by the cold stress.

             CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

     Neonatal Cold Stress: Management

     Management of hypothermia in a neonate is vital to keep them thermodynamically stable. The nurse caring for the
     neonate needs to know the steps to take to correct hypothermia before it escalates to cold stress.

     1. Radiant Warmer: Warmers limit heat loss because of ease of access and constant temperature monitoring and
     control. During the immediate care period, neonates are subjected to many interventions that require them to be
     away from the birthing person and away from skin-to-skin temperature protection. Therefore, anytime the neonate
     is away from that protection, they should be wrapped in warm blankets, wear a hat, and be placed under the radiant
     warmer.

     2. Handling and Temperature: Neonate temperatures should be monitored hourly for the first 4 hours post birth
     and then every 4 hours after that if they are stable. If they are not stable, temperatures need to be monitored more
     frequently while corrective measures are being taken. Temperatures should be taken before an intervention is done
     and then after. If the nurse uses corrective measures to increase a hypothermic neonate's temperature, they should
     always recheck the temperature and document any change.

     3. Glucose monitoring: Infants that are small-for-gestational age or large-for-gestational-age, will need blood
     glucose monitoring every 4 hours. Knowing that metabolic requirements increase for neonates in hypothermic
     states, the nurse will recognize that if a neonate is hypoglycemic, the nurse should also check their temperature.

     4. Clothing: Neonates are sensitive to changes in airflow and evaporation, as well as changes in environment, and
     should be dressed and swaddled appropriately in the first 28 days. Hats, T-shirts or footed pajamas, and warm
     blankets are the very least they should be dressed in to ensure temperature regulation.

     5. Respiratory Changes: Two of the first signs of cold stress are irritability and changes in respiration, so thorough
     and accurate assessment of the respiratory system is key to recognizing subtle changes in the neonate. Assessment
     of the respiratory system will be done hourly in the first 4 hours and after that every 4 hours until discharge.
     (Fellows, 2010)

     Prevention and Management of Cold Stress
     Prevention of cold stress is the focus for the nurse and includes keeping the neonate dry after birth and wrapped in
     warm blankets or in skin-to-skin contact with the birthing person if possible. If the newborn's temperature is
     unstable with skin-to-skin contact, the nurse will swaddle the newborn in warm blankets and place them under the
     radiant warmer, rechecking their temperature in 30 minutes. If the neonate is already experiencing cold stress, the
     nurse will check the blood glucose of the newborn with a point of care machine and work diligently to rewarm the
     baby with swaddling and radiant warmer. Other interventions include ensuring that the newborn is dry and has a hat
     on their head, that all steps of the ten-step warm chain have been followed, and that a health-care provider has
     been notified of this critical change for the newborn.

     When to Call for Help
     The nurse will call the pediatrician or the NICU for help if, upon recheck in 30 minutes, the newborn's temperature is
     still below 36.5°C; the infant loses consciousness; or the infant experiences respiratory distress signs, such as
     grunting, nasal flaring, retractions, tremors, or jitteriness along with inconsolable crying. Close glucose monitoring
     may be required for at-risk neonates because symptoms can be subtle.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              22 · Summary 987

Summary

22.1 Apgar Scoring

Assessing a newborn as they transition from intrauterine to extrauterine life is a critical job for the nurse. To do it
competently, the nurse must know what normal newborn behavior is in order to recognize what is not normal. The
nurse auscultates newborn heart tones quickly and efficiently and recognizes lung sounds that are normal. The
nurse also recognizes and reports sounds that are adventitious, and has situational awareness in the birthing room
to quickly assess newborn tone, color, respiratory effort, and reflex responses in the first moments after birth. Most
postbirth moments now occur on the birthing person's chest or abdomen (as discussed in the Chapter 23 Newborn
Assessment chapter) unless there is an emergency or the newborn needs additional attention. The nurse who
assesses for Apgar scores has a challenging role and needs their assessment skills to be effective and accurate.
With competence and capability, a nurse can make a huge difference in this new person's life.

22.2 Physiological Adaptation and Transition

The neonatal transition period is an important time for careful assessment, early recognition of neonatal distress,
and initiation of proper management. Successful transition from the intrauterine to extrauterine environment
provides a solid foundation for continued normal neonatal transition. The nurse providing surveillance of the
neonatal transition has a responsibility to keep the neonate safe, but also to keep the neonate with the birthing
person, if possible, to achieve parent-newborn attachment in the first hours of life. Recognizing normal changes that
occur in the newborn provides a foundation for initial, ongoing, and supportive care. It is critical for the nurse to
perform accurate and frequent assessments to have early recognition of deviations from normal. Generally, within
the first 4 hours after birth, the nurse will determine if the neonate has transitioned successfully or will need
additional support. The infant should be monitored carefully during the first 4 hours of life. In general, however, the
initial resuscitation period (the first 10 minutes or so of life) are the most critical.

22.3 Neutral Thermal Environment

Neonatal hypothermia and cold stress are a global concern, significantly affecting neonatal morbidity and mortality,
especially for newborns who are premature or experienced growth restriction. Neonates have a limited ability to
thermoregulate, and they experience heat loss rapidly in the immediate care period through four different avenues:
radiation, evaporation, conduction, and convection. Prevention is the key to avoiding cold stress. By understanding
thermoregulation, cold stress, and the complications and causes of cold stress, the nurse can be well equipped to
prevent this fatal complication.

Key Terms

acrocyanosis cyanosis occurring only on the hands and feet, an expected finding in a newborn, that lasts up to a
    week

Apgar assessment standardized assessment to evaluate the response of the newborn's transition to extrauterine
    life based on heart rate, respiration, reflex irritability, muscle tone, and color at 1 minute and 5 minutes post birth

cold stress occurs when excessive heat loss requires the infant to use compensatory mechanisms (increased
    respirations and nonshivering thermogenesis) to maintain core body temperature

conduction heat loss occurring from direct contact with a cooler surface
convection heat loss occurring when heat is transferred from the body surface to the surrounding air by a current
encephalopathy with hyperammonemia high levels of ammonia in the blood that cause brain damage
evaporation heat loss that occurs when liquid is converted to vapor
extrauterine life life outside the uterus
first period of reactivity initial episode of neonatal behavior beginning at birth, lasting about 30 minutes, and

    characterized by activity, alertness, responsiveness, and interaction with anyone nearby
galactosemia buildup of galactose in the blood
homeothermic attempting stabilization internally despite significant temperature variations in the environment

    the neonate is presently in
intrauterine life life inside the uterus
meconium first stool the newborn passes, consisting of amniotic fluid, mucus, lanugo, and bile
muscle tone tension of healthy muscles that contributes a slight resistance to passive displacement of a limb
988 22 · Assessments

neutral thermal environment the temperature range necessary for heat production to be at a minimum to
    maintain normal body temperature

nonshivering thermogenesis increase in metabolic heat production above the basal metabolism that is not
    associated with muscle activity

patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) cardiac defect that occurs when a fetal anatomic shunt, the ductus arteriosus,
    fails to close after birth

patent foramen ovale (PFO) cardiac defect that occurs when a fetal anatomic shunt, the foramen ovale, fails to
    close after birth

period of decreased responsiveness secondary episode of neonatal behavior, lasting about 30 minutes to 2
    hours, characterized by a marked decrease in motor activity, decreased vital signs, and deep sleep

radiation heat loss occurring from transfer of heat to cool solid objects not in direct contact with the newborn
reflex irritability newborn's response to stimulation from the nurse
second period of reactivity third and final episode of neonatal behavior lasting about 2 to 8 hours, characterized

    by increased activity, alertness, oral secretions, and an interest in feeding and parental-neonatal bonding; this is
    the final stage in neonatal transition
ten-step warm chain standardized program developed in 1997 by the World Health Organization to support
    thermal stability in the newborn
thermoregulation maintenance of thermal balance by the loss of heat to the environment at a rate equal to the
    heat being produced
transient neonatal thrombocytopenia condition of decreased platelets that develops in neonates

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. The Apgar assessment tells the nurses and clinicians on the labor and delivery unit what information about
        the newborn?
           a. The Apgar assessment and score tells the team how the newborn is doing neurologically and physically
                after the birth.
           b. The Apgar assessment and score predicts the newborn's overall morbidity and mortality moving
                forward after birth.
           c. The Apgar assessment and score tells the team how the newborn is transitioning to the extrauterine
                world after birth.
           d. The Apgar assessment and score tells the team how the newborn handled the birth overall.

    2. When thinking about scoring an Apgar assessment, the nurse knows that grimace is an assessment of what in
        a newborn?
           a. Grimace is an assessment of a newborn's response to taking their first breath.
           b. Grimace is an assessment of the flexion of hips and legs in the newborn.
           c. Grimace is an assessment of the response to seeing their birthing person's face.
           d. Grimace is an assessment of the response to stimulation from the nurse.

    3. What kind of muscle tone does a preterm newborn have compared to a full-term newborn?
           a. firm
           b. abnormal
           c. normal
           d. flaccid

    4. A nurse has just been asked to be the baby nurse for a coworker who is working with a birthing woman at 35
        weeks, 3 days. The patient has preeclampsia, has had a very hard labor with multiple decelerations on her
        fetal heart monitor, and her amniotic fluid had meconium when her water was broken earlier in the day. In
        anticipation of this birth, what resources will the nurse need to gather? Select all that apply.

           a. another baby nurse to help
           b. Neonatal Intensive Care team

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      22 · Assessments 989

         c. radiant warmer for the newborn
         d. intubation kit
         e. tracheotomy kit

 5. A full-term newborn has been delivered by a physician after a lengthy labor and delivery. The newborn has
      poor tone, minimal respiratory effort, and central cyanosis. The cord is cut, and the patient is placed in an
      infant warmer. What data does the nurse need to notice that are clinically significant? Select all that apply.

         a. Assess ABCs in newborn.
         b. Apgar score is determined.
         c. Temperature is measured.
         d. Vaccination is ready for administration.
         e. Length is measured.
          f. Head circumference is measured.
         g. Single IM injection of vitamin K is ready for administration.

 6. Transient tachypnea of the neonate develops due to what pathophysiologic phenomenon?
         a. failure to clear lung fluid by the usual mechanism
         b. failure of the patent ductus arteriosus to close
         c. insufficient surfactant production
         d. aspiration of meconium during vaginal or cesarean birth that interferes with surfactant activity

 7. The most effective time to initiate breast-feeding is in which stage of reactivity for the neonate?
         a. period of decreased reactivity
         b. first period of reactivity
         c. second period of reactivity
         d. after the end of the second period of reactivity

 8. Of the three fetal shunts, which one moves fetal blood from the lungs through the right atrium to the left
      atrium?
         a. ductus venosus
         b. foramen ovale
         c. ductus arteriosus
         d. foramen venosus

 9. Blood flow connection between the systemic, aorta, pulmonary blood flow, and pulmonary artery is which
      fetal shunt?
         a. ductus venosus
         b. foramen ovale
         c. ductus arteriosus
         d. foramen venosus

10. What assessment findings indicate abnormal transition in a neonate? Select all that apply.

         a. prolonged apneic episodes
         b. marked pallor
         c. excessive oral secretions
         d. crackles upon auscultation
         e. blue hands and feet
          f. poor capillary refill (longer than 3 seconds)

11. A newborn at 20 minutes of age has an axillary temperature of 36° C (96.8° F). What intervention should the
      nurse perform?
         a. ensure skin-to-skin contact until temperature is 37° C (98.6° F)
990 22 · Assessments

           b. give the baby a warm bath and then return to the birthing parent for skin-to-skin contact.
           c. place the baby under the radiant warmer until skin temperature is 37.5° C (99.5° F)
           d. check the baby's rectal temperature

  12. The nurse recommends skin-to-skin contact immediately following the birth of a newborn because it reduces
        what type of heat loss?
           a. radiation
           b. convection
           c. conduction
           d. evaporation

  13. After birth, the nurse immediately dries a neonate's face and hair with a clean, prewarmed towel. After drying,
        the nurse covers the neonate's hair with a cap. What type of heat loss is the nurse preventing?
           a. convection
           b. conduction
           c. evaporation
           d. radiation

  14. The nurse is caring for a neonate born at 36 weeks, 2 days by primary cesarean birth and weighing 6 pounds,
        4 ounces. The infant cried at delivery, had flexion in all extremities, had a heart rate of 135, had acrocyanosis
        in hands and feet, and was pale. The infant was placed skin-to-skin with the birthing person and has been
        latching and cuddling for the past 15 minutes. At 45 minutes, the neonate is found grunting and cool to the
        touch. What are the nurse's next steps?
           a. Stimulate the neonate to take some deep breaths.
           b. Ask the birthing person to wrap the baby in their blankets and cuddle them closer.
           c. Take the neonate to the radiant warmer and check their temperature.
           d. Call the NICU staff and activate the staff assist light in the birthing room.

  15. What steps are included in the QSEN steps for rewarming a neonate at risk for cold stress? Select all that
        apply.

           a. placing the neonate under the radiant warmer
           b. putting a pulse oximeter on the neonate
           c. assessing a blood glucose level
           d. calling the NICU team for assessment
           e. making certain the neonate is dressed appropriately to ensure warmth in the birthing room
            f. assessing respiratory status often

  16. What characteristics are directly related to the newborn's decreased ability to maintain thermal stability?
           a. A neonate has decreased subcutaneous fat and a large body surface-to-weight ratio.
           b. The blood vessels in the neonate are farther from the skin than those of an adult.
           c. Newborns are unable to rely on brown adipose tissue for heat production.
           d. The newborn prefers to be in constant motion, increasing the surface area exposed to the environment.

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. An infant at a gestation of 36 weeks and 1 day is born on the labor and delivery unit in the OR, and you are
        working as the baby nurse. You receive the baby from a 27-year-old G1P0 who gave birth today because she
        has a placenta previa and is actively bleeding. When the baby is given to you, she is limp, not making any
        noises, and pale. You bring her to the radiant warmer quickly. Please list what you will do when you receive
        the neonate.

    2. A birthing person just vaginally delivered at 38 weeks and 2 days' gestation. The infant has blue hands and
        feet, a heart rate of 110, slow breaths, and some flexion in the extremities. The infant pulls his foot away
        when the nurse rubs it and has flexed arms and legs. What is his Apgar score?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         22 · Assessments 991

    3. Explain the relevance of the Apgar score and why nurses use it as an assessment tool in the birthing room.

    4. List five assessment findings that would indicate a neonate in respiratory distress in the immediate postbirth
        period.

    5. Describe three ways that fetal circulation varies from neonatal/newborn circulation.

    6. Define the importance of understanding the phases of reactivity for the neonate.

    7. Explain the role of the baby nurse in the birthing room.

    8. Name some of the metabolic requirements that increase or decrease with cold stress in the newborn.

    9. Discuss the steps a nurse should follow to assess and manage cold stress in the newborn.

  10. Verbalize the importance of the ten-step warm chain and list all ten steps in the chain.

Reflection Questions

    1. What can a nurse do to improve the safety of babies in the birthing room?

    2. Prior to a birth, what type of equipment should the nurse confirm is adjacent to the radiant warmer in order to
        ensure the safe care of the neonate?

    3. What information would the baby nurse want to know about the birthing person, the labor, and medications
        the birthing person received before the neonate is born?

    4. In what ways would the nurse prepare the birthing room to prevent cold stress in the neonate?

    5. In what ways would the nurse prepare the postpartum room to prevent cold stress in the neonate?

    6. What are some educational topics the nurse would discuss with the new parents to prevent cold stress in the
        newborn when they take their baby home?

Critical-Thinking Questions about Case Studies

MISSING EXERCISE: tag:22-01-MNB-CT04MISSING EXERCISE: tag:22-02-MNB-CT05

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. Why is the Apgar scoring assessment performed, and how does it contribute to the immediate care and
        decision making for a neonate? Provide examples of situations where a low Apgar score might prompt
        specific interventions.

    2. As a neonatal nurse, what specific questions would you ask the obstetric team or gather information about
        before a neonate is born in the birthing room? How does this information contribute to preparing for the
        immediate care of the newborn?

    3. A newborn has just been delivered and is undergoing the transition to extrauterine life. As a nurse caring for a
        newborn in the first moments after birth, why is it crucial to understand and anticipate the physiologic
        adaptations occurring? Provide examples of nursing interventions that support these adaptations.

    4. In a scenario where a newborn is experiencing respiratory distress, how do you differentiate between normal
        adaptation changes and signs of potential complications? Provide examples of nursing actions that address
        both respiratory and cardiac aspects of stabilization.

    5. A neonate is at risk of heat loss. Outline the four ways a newborn can lose heat and explain how these
        mechanisms differ. Provide examples of nursing interventions for each type of heat loss, emphasizing the
        importance of a comprehensive approach to maintaining a neutral thermal environment.

    6. A newborn is exhibiting signs of cold stress. How does cold stress impact physiologic functions, and what
        nursing interventions are essential to caring for a newborn experiencing cold stress? Provide examples of how
        a nurse can effectively warm a cold-stressed neonate.
992 22 · References

References

Al-Taweel, Y. A. (2006). A simulation model of infant-incubator-feedback system with humidification and
   temperature control [Master's thesis]. Auckland University of Technology. https://hdl.handle.net/10292/975

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2015). The Apgar score. Committee Opinion No. 644.
   American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 126(4), 52-55.

Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses (AWHONN), Janke, J., & Baker, B. J. (2023). Core
   curriculum for maternal-newborn nursing. Elsevier.

AWHONN. (2018). Neonatal skin care evidence-based clinical practice guideline (4th ed.). Washington, DC.
    https://my.awhonn.org/productdetails?id=a1B2E000008LOXiUAO

Barker, P. M., & Olver, R. E. (2002) Invited review: Clearance of lung liquid during the perinatal period. Journal of
   Applied Physiology, 93(4), 1542-1548.

Castrodale, V., Rinehart, S., & Ikuta, L. (2014, February). The golden hour. Advances in Neonatal Care, 14(1), 9-14.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/ANC.0b013e31828d0289

Cavaliere, T. A. (2016). From fetus to neonate: A sensational journey. Newborn and Infant Nursing Reviews, 16(2),
    43-47.

Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. (2022). Assessments for newborn babies. https://www.chop.edu/conditions-
    diseases/assessments-newborn-babies

Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. (2022.) Heart murmur in children. https://www.chop.edu/conditions-diseases/
    heart-murmur

Desmond, M. M., Rudolph, A. J., & Phitaksphraiwan, P. (1966). The transitional care nursery. A mechanism for
   preventative medicine in the newborn. Pediatric Clinics of North America, 13(3), 651-658.

Elshazzly, M., Anekar, A. A., Shumway, K. R., & Caban, O. (2022). Physiology, newborn. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK499951/

Eslami, Z., Ghilian, R., & Abbasi, F. (2012, September). Evaluation of hemoglobin concentration of cord, capillary and
   venous sampling in neonates. Iran Journal of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, 2(4), 156-163.

Fellows, P. (2010). Management of thermal instability. In G. Boxwell (Ed.), Neonatal intensive care nursing (pp.
    89-120). Taylor & Francis.

Fraser, D. (2002). Complications in the transition from fetal to neonatal life. Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic &
   Neonatal Nursing, 31(3), 318-327. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1552-6909.2002.tb00054.x

Fraser, D. (2014). Newborn adaptation to extrauterine life. In K. R. Simpson & P. A. Creehan (Eds.), Perinatal nursing
    (4th ed., pp. 581-596). Wolters Kluwer.

Gardner, S. (2020, June). Assisted thermoregulation. The Royal Children's Hospital of Melbourne.
    https://www.rch.org.au/rchcpg/hospital_clinical_guideline_index/Assisted_thermoregulation/

Gevers, E. F., Fisher, D. A., & Dattani, M. T. (2016). Chapter 145 Fetal and neonatal endocrinology. Chapter 145 in J.
   L. Jameson, L. J. DeGroot, and G. C. Weir (Eds.), Endocrinology: Adult and pediatric (7th ed.). Elsevier.

Gillam-Krakauer, M., & Mahajan, K. (2022). Patent ductus arteriosus. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK430758/

Hammer, N. C., Koch, J. J., & Hopkins, H. C. (2021). Neonatal resuscitation: Updated guidelines from the American
   Heart Association. American Family Physician, 104(4), 425-428.

Hampton, T., Alsaleem, M., & Murphy-Lavoie, H. M. (2022). Patent foramen ovale. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29630203/

Hand, I., & Noble, L. (2022). Vitamin K and the newborn infant. Pediatrics, 149(3), e2021056036.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            22 · References 993

Hermansen, C. L., & Mahajan, A. (2015, December 1). Newborn respiratory distress. American Family Physician,
   92(11), 992-1002.

Hernandez, J. A., & Thilo, E. (2005). Routine care of the full-term newborn. Mosby.

Interprofessional Education and Research Committee of the Champlain Maternal Newborn Regional Program. (June
   2013). Newborn thermoregulation: Self-learning module. http://www.cmnrp.ca/uploads/documents/
    Newborn_Thermoregulation_SLM_2013_06.pdf

Lara-Canton, I., Badurdeen, S., Dekker, J., Davis, P., Roberts, C., Te Pas, A., & Vento, M. (2022). Oxygen saturation
   and heart rate in healthy term and late preterm infants I delayed cord clamping. Pediatric Research, 1-6.
    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41390-021-01805-y

Lubkowska, A., Szymaski, S., & Chudecka, M. (2019). Surface body temperature of full-term healthy newborns
   immediately after birth-pilot study. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 16(8),
    1312. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16081312

Ma, R. H., Zhang, Q., Ni, Z. H., and Lv, H. T. (2021). Transitional care experiences of caregivers of preterm infants
   hospitalized in a neonatal intensive care unit: A qualitative descriptive study. Nurse Open, 8(6), 3484-3494.

Marty, M., Kerndt, C. C., & Lui, F. (2022). Embryology, fetal circulation. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK537149/

New, K. (2019). Evidence-based guidelines for infant bathing. A Research Review Educational Series.
    https://www.researchreview.co.nz/getmedia/0a9e5190-b8ac-419f-8f44-43b8e5ba8c4b/Educational-Series-
    Evidence-based-guidelines-for-infant-bathing.pdf.aspx?ext=.pdf

Potchileev, I., Doroshenko, M., & Mohammed, A. N. (2022). Positive pressure ventilation. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK560916/

Pradbit, S., & Forshing, L. (2022). Embryology, ductus venosus. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    books/NBK547759/

Rehman, S., & Bacha, D. (2022). Embryology, pulmonary. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK544372/

Reuter, S., Moser, C., & Baack, M. (2014). Respiratory distress in the newborn. Pediatrics in Review, 35(10),
    417-429. https://doi.org/10.1542/pir.35-10-417

Simon L. V., Hashmi, M. F., & Bragg, B. N. (2023, May 22). APGAR Score. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK470569/

Trevisanuto, D., & Sedin, G. (2016). Physical environment for newborns: The thermal environment. In G. Buonocore,
   R. Bracci, M. Weindling (Eds.), Neonatology (pp. 1-24). Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    978-3-319-18159-2_172-1

Tuelo, P. M., & Mulaudzi, F. M. (2021). Indigenous neonatal feeding and bathing practices of caregivers in Vhembe
   District, Limpopo province. Health South Africa, 26, 1632. https://hsag.co.za/index.php/hsag/article/view/1632/
    html

World Health Organization. (1997). Thermal protection of the newborn: A practical guide. Maternal and Newborn
    Health/Safe Motherhood Unit. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO_RHT_MSM_97.2
994 22 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 23

Newborn Assessment

FIGURE 23.1 Assessment of the Newborn The nurse's assessment is critical for the care and management of a newborn. (credit: "A
Doctor Assessing a Newborn Child" by Lemniscate L/Pexels, CC0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
23.1 Physical Assessment of the Newborn
23.2 Estimation of Gestational Age of the Newborn and Newborn Behavioral Assessment
INTRODUCTION The nurse is typically the first person to assess the newborn. This is the first time the newborn has
been touched outside the womb. Though ultrasound scans and imaging can be done to make educated estimates of
gestational age and development, the true assessment can now occur with the newborn. It is important to estimate
the gestational age and complete a physical assessment of the newborn within the first few minutes to hours of
birth. A behavioral assessment is completed by the nurse to help determine the temperament of the newborn and to
best support attachment between the parent and newborn. These early assessments help the health-care provider
determine the newborn's need for future care and evaluations for any findings of concern. In most cases, the
newborn assessment is conducted in the presence of the parents, so this is an excellent opportunity for the nurse to
explain in lay terms how newborn physiology differs from that of adults and older children.
996  23 · Newborn Assessment

     23.1 Physical Assessment of the Newborn

     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Summarize newborn vital signs and implement techniques learned in the clinical setting with minimal
             disruption to the newborn

         · Identify and demonstrate the components of a head-to-toe newborn physical examination
         · Distinguish between different newborn skin variations, both normal and abnormal
         · Identify newborn neurologic reactions to maternal substance misuse and recognize the appropriate next

             steps for safe newborn care

     The nurse's assessment of the newborn focuses on knowing and understanding the language of the newborn, their
     behavioral cues, and normal newborn anatomy and physiology. With that knowledge, the nurse can identify the
     slightest changes in the condition of the newborn in their care. Neonatal nurses' expertise in newborn behavior and
     communication and their ability to assess newborn behavior through vital signs, head-to-toe assessment, and
     neurologic behavior are imperative to caring for neonates.

     Newborn Vital Signs

     Obtaining newborn vital signs is a skill that takes practice. Auscultation may be challenging because of newborns
     moving and crying during the assessment. Focus on starting with the least invasive assessment item and saving the
     most invasive for last to decrease the chance of crying. Auscultation is a skill that new nurses will need to practice
     often, but it is vital to the care and management of a newborn. Newborn vital signs are best obtained in a warm,
     well-lit place where the newborn is quiet and comfortable. Start with the heart rate and respirations. If the nurse
     can complete those while the newborn is sleeping or in a calm, relaxed state, that is the best time to obtain them.
     Heart rate is always counted at the apex, which can best be found at the fourth intercostal space. This will be the
     same from birth to about 3 years of age.

     Listen with a stethoscope for 1 full minute, followed by counting respirations with a stethoscope for 1 full minute.
     Normal newborn heart rates are 120 to 160 beats per minute (Stanford Medicine, Childrens Health, 2022). If no
     stethoscope is available in the first few minutes after birth, the base of the umbilicus can be used to assess the
     heart rate, although the most accurate method is with the use of a stethoscope (Johnson & Schmölzer, 2020). For
     new nurses, it is sometimes easier to listen for a minute with the stethoscope and put their other hand on the
     newborn's abdomen while watching for breaths to correlate with what they are hearing. Normal respirations are 30
     to 60 respirations per minute (Stanford Medicine, Childrens Health, 2022) and may increase with crying.
     Temperatures are obtained by the axillary method, with the thermometer being placed vertically under the arm with
     the tip in the axilla (Figure 23.2). Expected temperatures are 36.5° C to 37.5° C (97.7° F to 99.4° F) (Stanford
     Medicine, Childrens Health, 2022). Pain should be assessed as a vital sign, evaluated with a neonatal pain
     evaluation tool. Blood pressures are not usually assessed on newborns unless they are in the neonatal intensive
     care unit. Table 23.1 lists expected normal newborn vital signs (Stanford Medicine, Childrens Health, 2022).

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      23.1 · Physical Assessment of the Newborn                                   997

FIGURE 23.2 Axillary Temperature Temperatures of newborns are obtained by the axillary method, with the thermometer being placed
under the arm with the tip in the axilla. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Temperature               Respirations                Heart Rate

36.5° C-37.5° C (97.7°    · 30-60 respirations/       · 120-160 beats per minute (bpm) (Stanford
F-99.4° F)                   minute                      Medicine, Childrens Health, 2022)

    · Axillary: 36.5°     · Primarily diaphragmatic   · During deep sleep, may decrease to 70-90
        C-37.5° C (97.7°     with abdominal              bpm, can increase to 180 bpm during crying
        F-99° F)             movements
                                                      · Apical pulse counted for 1 full minute with a
    · Skin: 36° C-36.5°   · Obligate nose breathers      stethoscope
        C (96.8° F-97.7°  · Respirations counted for
        F)
                             60 seconds
    · Rectal: 36.6°
        C-37.2° C (97.8°
        F-99° F)

TABLE 23.1 Newborn Vital Signs

Pain in the newborn cannot be expressed in the way an adult can verbally describe and locate their pain. Pain scales
developed specifically for the neonatal or nonverbal population have been created and evaluated to assess this vital
sign in the newborn population. The Neonatal/Infant Pain Scale (NIPS) (Sarkaria & Gruszfeld, 2022) and the Face,
Legs, Activity, Cry, and Consolability (FLACC) scale are examples of pain scales specifically used in nonverbal patient
populations.

        LINK TO LEARNING

The Neonatal/Infant Pain Scales (https://openstax.org/r/77KidPainScale) is a pain assessment tool used in children
less than 1 year of age. Caregivers and health-care providers can use the child's body language to determine their
degree of pain.

Assessment of General Appearance

The nursing assessment is the part of the nursing process whereby a nurse gathers patient health information using
evidence-informed tools to learn more about a patient's overall health, symptoms, and concerns (Toney-Butler &
Unison-Pace, 2022). Newborn assessment begins with an evaluation of the general appearance of the newborn. A
typical newborn will have a head that is disproportionately large for their body, with a neck that appears short
998  23 · Newborn Assessment

     because their chin rests on their chest. Their abdomen will be round and protruding, the chest will appear small and
     thin, and their arms and legs will be flexed. They will have an umbilical cord in the center of their abdomen that has
     a cord clamp on it. Newborns will have their hands tightly clenched, and their hands and feet may remain blue for
     the first 24 to 48 hours, a common finding called acrocyanosis. Their bodies should be a color that is appropriate for
     their ethnicity, but in general, melanin takes a while to appear after birth.

     Weight and Measurements
     Full term weights of newborns vary greatly depending on the race of the parents. Newborn infants of Black, Asian,
     and Hispanic heritage generally are somewhat smaller when born at term than White newborns (Ro et al., 2019).
     The average weight of a newborn in the United States in the past decade is between 5 pounds, 8 ounces (2,500
     grams), and 8 pounds, 13 ounces (3,850 grams) (Desiraju, 2018). Maternal factors that can influence the weight of a
     newborn are health; nutrition during the pregnancy; intervals between pregnancies; use of substances including
     tobacco, nicotine, narcotics, and alcohol; gestational diabetes; and the size of both parents. The newborn will
     initially lose weight--up to 10 percent of their birth weight--in the first 3 days after birth (Figure 23.3). They are
     expected to regain their birth weight by 2 weeks of life (DiTomasso, 2019).

             LINK TO LEARNING

     The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that health-care providers follow World
     Health Organization (WHO) growth standards for children zero to 2 years of age. The World Health Organization has
     established breast-fed newborns as the norm for growth and therefore have recommended this as the standard for
     infant feeding. The chart reflects growth patterns (https://openstax.org/r/77growthpattern) for children who were
     predominantly breast-fed for at least 4 months and still breast-feeding at 12 months. Clinicians and nurses still use
     this CDC growth chart as a standard on how children should grow, and this begins in the hospital at the time of birth.
     Nurses will document the newborn's weight and length in the chart, and this will be the first measurements plotted
     on the newborn's growth chart.

     FIGURE 23.3 Weighing the Newborn The nurse will weigh the newborn at birth and again before discharge to ensure weight loss has not
     been excessive. (credit: "Newborn Weight" by Robyn Alvarez/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

     During the initial newborn period of the first week, the newborn will have a physiologic weight loss of approximately
     5 to 10 percent due to fluid shifts. This occurs because about 75 percent of the newborn's body is made of water.
     Keep in mind that larger babies will have larger weight losses because they have more fluid in proportion to their
     birth weight. However, a weight loss of more than 10 to 12 percent requires further evaluation (Children's Hospital
     of Philadephia, 2022). After regaining their birth weight, the infant will double their weight in the first 5 or 6 months.
     The newborn will increase their weight by approximately 5 to 7 ounces (140 to 200 grams) per week (Children's

     Access for free at openstax.org
23.1 · Physical Assessment of the Newborn                                                                                                999

Hospital of Philadephia, 2022). If the newborn is breast-feeding, the nurse will need to assess feeding effort and
coordination, along with collaborating with the care team that includes a lactation consultant and the pediatrician.
Typically, birth weight is regained in 14 days (Levinson, 2020).

        CULTURAL CONTEXT

Health-Care Disparities of the Newborn

Cultural, racial, and ethnic related disparities in newborn medical care is a chronic issue within health care.
Newborn infants, particularly preterm infants, who are from Black, Hispanic, Native American, and Puerto Rican
populations have been shown to be more likely to experience serious complications or disparities in health
outcomes. The long-term possible consequences of disparities in health care include increased risks of morbidity,
poor neurodevelopmental outcomes and behavioral deficits that influence health and quality of life over the lifetime
(Ravi et al., 2021).

To measure the length of the newborn, the nurse will place the newborn in a supine position with their legs
extended as much as possible, remembering that newborns prefer to keep their legs flexed and tense (Figure 23.4).
The average length is 50 cm (20 inches), with a range of 46 to 56 cm (18 to 22 inches) determined by a combination
of genetics and environmental factors. The newborn will grow approximately one-half inch to one inch (1.5 to 2.5
cm) per month (Stanford Medicine, Children's Health, 2022). During their lifetime, this is the period of most rapid
growth.

FIGURE 23.4 Newborn Measurements The nurse will measure the length of the newborn at birth, their head circumference, and their
chest circumference. To measure the full length of the newborn, place the tape measure at the top of the newborn's head, stretching the
newborn's legs out to ensure accurate length. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Head circumference is measured at birth and regularly during the first 2 years of life. Growth averages 0.5 cm a
week during the first 2 months of life and then slows to half that rate. Place the measuring tape at the widest point
of the head, from the most prominent point of the forehead around to the back of the head.

Chest circumference is measured at birth or shortly after by using a measuring tape aligned to the nipples (Azevedo
et al., 2019). This measurement can help determine if an infant is small for gestational age from intrauterine growth
retardation with a small chest-to-head circumference ratio. The infant of a person with gestational diabetes would
have a relatively large chest-to-head ratio (Nichols, 1996).

Monitoring Temperature in the Newborn
Newborns are unable to regulate their temperatures. For the first 24 hours of their lives, it is important that the
nurse monitor the temperature and assist the parents in maintaining the newborn's temperature. Keeping newborns
in a thermal-neutral environment, between 36.5° C and 37.5° C (97.7° F-99.4° F), is a high priority for nurses. This
is a vital function and one that is reflective of physiologic maturity. The earlier the gestational age of the infant, the
1000  23 · Newborn Assessment

      more difficult it is for them to maintain their temperature (Gardner, 2020).

      The nurse's responsibility in thermoregulation is to monitor the newborn's temperature and provide an environment
      that reduces heat loss and avoids cold stress (Gardner, 2020). Thermoregulation by the nurse and caregivers is
      necessary due to the unique physiologic mechanisms competing within the newborn.

      Ideally, placing the newborn skin to skin with one of the parents can aid in thermoregulation. However, if a
      newborn's temperature drops too low, the nurse will need to move the infant to a warmer or incubator (Isolette)
      because skin-to-skin care cannot reverse hypothermia quickly enough.

      Excessive heat loss triggers compensatory mechanisms in the newborn, including increased respirations and
      nonshivering thermogenesis, which are indications of cold stress. These behaviors are the infant's effort to produce
      heat and maintain core body temperature. If the newborn is not kept warm, cold stress can lead to hypoglycemia,
      poor feeding, and even respiratory distress. While inside the uterus, the fetus's temperature was the same as or
      slightly higher than that of the pregnant person. When a newborn enters the world, their temperature drops
      significantly, and the newborn is unable to thermoregulate for themselves. Newborns have very thin skin, their blood
      vessels are very close to the surface, they have very little brown or subcutaneous fat, and their ratio of body surface
      to body mass is three times that of adults. Therefore, it is important that the nurse manage the newborn's
      environment to help maintain their body temperature.

        CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

        Take Action: Maintaining Normothermic Temperature in a Newborn

        The nurse is preparing to settle a newborn in a bassinet next to their parent in the shared delivery and
        postpartum room. The nurse knows that the newborn is unable to thermoregulate themselves well and that the
        environment may decrease their body temperature by evaporation, convection, conduction, and radiation. By
        both placing a hat on the newborn's head and swaddling them in a thin blanket, the nurse is modeling behavior
        for home caregiver behavior and managing the newborn's environment to maintain their body temperature.

      Newborns lose heat in their environments in four ways: evaporation, convection, conduction, and radiation (see
      Figure 22.11). When heat is lost from liquid on the newborn's skin, converting to a vapor in the air, it is called
      evaporation (Gardner, 2020). For example, after the newborn bath when they are wet, they are losing heat in the
      room by the water evaporating off their skin. That is the reason postpartum nurses will provide sponge baths for
      newborns around 24 hours of age while keeping most of their bodies covered. When heat is transferred from the
      body surface to the surrounding air by a current, like a fan in a room, it is called convection. When heat from a
      newborn is transferred because the newborn is lying naked on something very cold, like a newborn scale that is
      metal, it is called conduction. And finally, radiation is the transfer of heat to cool, solid objects not in direct contact
      with the newborn. An example of radiation would be placing a newborn crib too close to a cold hospital wall. It is
      imperative that a newborn's temperature be checked often and that nurses manage those temperatures. The nurse
      can do this by drying the newborn as soon as possible after birth or a bath to prevent evaporation, warming any
      items that will touch the newborn, keeping the newborn out of drafts and keeping preterm newborns in incubators,
      and keeping all newborns away from walls and windows.

              LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

      What Are the Ethical Obligations of the Maternal-Newborn Nurse?

      More than four million births occur annually in the United States, making childbirth the most common reason people
      are hospitalized. The nurse in a maternal-newborn care role will be faced with ethical challenges nearly daily, often
      in an emotionally charged environment. In these instances, it is important to understand the nurse's ethical
      obligations for their patients' safety and privacy, which are described in the American Nurses Association Code of
      Ethics (https://openstax.org/r/77NurseCdEthics) for Nurses.

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            23.1 · Physical Assessment of the Newborn                   1001

Auscultation

Auscultation is the act of listening, with a stethoscope, to the chest for both heart and lung sounds, and to the
abdomen for abdominal activity. When the nurse assesses the heart, auscultating on the left side of the chest while
listening is focused on heart rate, rhythm, regularity, and heart sounds. The stethoscope is moved to the front and
back of the chest along with moving it left and right laterally to assess breath sounds, listening for equal clear air
entry on both sides. The nurse listens for a full minute to count the respirations over a full minute. Abdominal
assessment also includes auscultation of the four quadrants, starting with the right lower quadrant. The nurse
listens for bowel sounds from each quadrant up to 5 minutes each.

Before conducting a respiratory or cardiovascular assessment of the newborn, the nurse must ensure that the bell of
the stethoscope is warmed. A cold stethoscope can startle the newborn, artificially increasing heart and respiratory
rates. In addition, the newborn can lose heat due to the cold instrument.

Respiratory Assessment
Normal respirations will be easy, nonlabored, and without the use of accessory muscles, with no evidence of
grunting, retractions, or nasal flaring. There should be no adventitious lung sounds auscultated, though fluid may be
noted in the lungs of an infant delivered via cesarean section. The normal newborn respiratory rate is 30 to 60
breaths per minute, and newborns are obligate nose breathers. Periodic breathing in newborns is expected
(Kondamudi et al., 2023), along with diaphragmatic breathing. This is a good time for the nurse to give anticipatory
guidance to new parents about newborn periodic breathing to avoid panic when they notice irregular breathing at
home. Newborns have periodic breathing where the rate of breaths changes over time, sometimes faster and
sometimes pausing. When breathing has stopped for 20 seconds or longer, it is considered apnea.

Upper airway noises and bowel sounds in a newborn can be heard over the chest wall, making auscultation of
newborn breath sounds more difficult. Listening for a full minute with a stethoscope and watching the abdomen rise
and fall with the breaths can help the nurse identify what they are hearing. For new nurses performing a newborn
respiratory assessment, it is sometimes easier to listen for a minute with the stethoscope while placing the other
hand on the newborn's abdomen to watch for breaths. This will help correlate what they are hearing and seeing.

UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

Newborn Care: Part 2

See Newborn Care: Part 1 for a review of the patient data.

Flow Chart  Newborn assessment data at 30 minutes of age
            Temp: 97.8° F/36.5° C (ax)
            Heart rate: 160 bpm
            Respiration rate: 66 breaths/min
            Pulse oximetry: 92%
            Color: acrocyanosis present
            Respirations: shallow, irregular
            Nasal flaring
            Marcus has not been interested in nursing.
            Capillary glucose: 42

1. Fill in the blanks using one choice for options 1 and 2 from each of the lists. Based on the prenatal
    problems and newborn assessment data, the nurse identifies the priority problem for Marcus is OPTION
    1.
       a. hypoglycemia
       b. respiratory distress
       c. periodic breathing

    The priority diagnosis is supported by OPTION 2.
1002  23 · Newborn Assessment

                    a. newborn's color and mild shoulder dystocia
                    b. nasal flaring and gestational diabetes
                    c. capillary glucose and gestational diabetes

            2. Based on the assessment data at 30 minutes of age, the nurse notifies the HCP.

                 What recommendations would the nurse include when providing the SBAR to the HCP at this time? Select
                 5 that apply.

                    a. encourage skin-to-skin contact with parent
                    b. continuous oxygen
                    c. transfer infant to transitional (intermediate care) nursery
                    d. transfer to admission nursery
                    e. place infant under radiant warmer
                     f. NPO
                    g. continuous pulse oximetry
                    h. breast-feeding on demand

      Cardiovascular Assessment
      Heart rate in a newborn can be as rapid as 180 beats per minute if the newborn is crying or moving. The normal
      newborn heart rate is 120 to 160 beats per minute (Tveiten et al., 2021). Auscultating a newborn heart rate is done
      with the stethoscope at the apex of the heart for 1 full minute. The nurse will listen for rate, rhythm, and intensity
      and will count the beats, preferably when the newborn is quietly awake or sleeping. The heart is relatively large at
      birth and is located mid to left chest and high in the chest, with the apex somewhere between the fourth and fifth
      intercostal spaces.

      Assessing a Newborn's Cry
      Newborns' primary way of communication is crying. Cries should be of normal pitch, steady, and consolable by a
      nurse or the parents. High-pitched cries that are piercing and not consolable can be, and often are, a sign of narcotic
      withdrawal, birth injury, genetic anomaly, and/or other neurobehavioral insults. A weak cry would indicate the
      newborn may need resuscitation measures.

      Heart Murmurs
      Normally, the heart has a "lub dub" sound, but because of the physiologic fetal shunts that close functionally during
      the newborn's transition from intrauterine life to extrauterine life, a murmur often remains. All the fetal shunts close
      functionally at birth but will not close structurally for another 3 to 7 days after delivery. Physiologic murmurs in
      newborns are an expected finding. When auscultated, they will sound like whooshing in addition to the "lub dub" on
      S1 and S2. It can be difficult to differentiate heart sounds from lung sounds in a newborn. The nurse must monitor
      the respiratory pattern to isolate the heart sounds. Ninety percent of murmurs are temporary, lasting only 90 days or
      so. Many are secondary to closing of the patent ductus arteriosus or the patent foramen ovale. Normally, those will
      close 1 to 2 days after birth. Rarely, aortic or pulmonary stenosis occurs, or a congenital defect is found. All
      murmurs must be evaluated by a health-care provider.

      Head-to-Toe Physical Assessment

      Once auscultation is complete, the head-to-toe physical assessment can begin. This is the first time this person will
      have ever been examined. A systematic, thoughtful, and thorough approach is the best way to comprehensively
      examine the entire infant.

      Head
      For the newborn that moved through the vagina, the head may have some molding and bruising. The evolution of
      bruising and the return to typical head shape will occur over the first 24 to 48 hours. A newborn delivered via
      cesarean section may or may not have molding, depending on whether there was a second stage of labor or if the
      fetus spent time low in the pelvic cavity. The size of the newborn's head is one-fourth the size of an adult's head,
      and the circumference is approximately 32 to 37 cm (12.6 to 14.6 inches). The nurse will measure the newborn's
      head by placing the tape over the most prominent part of the occiput, just above the ears, and bring it just above the

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                              23.1 · Physical Assessment of the Newborn  1003

eyebrows. The circumference of the newborn's head should be greater than that of the newborn's chest at birth and
will remain that way for the next few months. If the newborn experienced significant trauma during birth, the nurse
should reassess the shape of the head and remeasure the head circumference the next day (see Figure 23.4).

Fontanelles
A fontanelle is one of the soft spots located on the newborn's head where the cranial bones meet and leave
openings to allow for molding of the head during birth. Over the first 24 months of life, the anterior and posterior
fontanelle will close. Fontanelles should be palpated during this part of the assessment. The anterior fontanelle is
the larger of the two that the nurse will assess and can be felt as a diamond shape ranging in size from 0.6 cm to 3.6
cm between the two frontal bones. The posterior fontanelle is a triangle shape approximately 0.5 cm in size and
located at the junction of the parietal bones and the occipital bone on the newborn. The average time of closure for
the anterior fontanelle ranges from 13 to 24 months. In contrast, the posterior fontanelle will close within
approximately 6 to 8 weeks after birth (Lipsett et al, 2022). Both fontanelles should feel soft and flat upon
palpation. Bulging or tense fontanelles indicate issues such as hydrocephalus, increased intracranial pressure,
meningitis, trauma, or hemorrhage. A sunken or depressed fontanelle indicates dehydration. Pulsatility may be
noted later in infancy as an expected variability.

Abnormal Variations Commonly Occurring in Newborns
Abnormal variations that are commonly seen in newborn heads include caput succedaneum and cephalohematoma.
The condition in which edema is observed on a newborn's scalp at birth and is related to the labor and birth process
is caput succedaneum. This is a benign condition in which the edema crosses cranial suture lines and feels soft and
boggy (spongy). It is often related to extended pushing during vaginal births because the fetal head is subjected to
pressure from the uterine contractions and the vaginal walls as it passes through the cervix. This condition has also
been associated with forceps-assisted and vacuum-assisted births. Caput succedaneum usually resolves within the
first few days following birth with no complications (Lipsett et al, 2022) (Figure 23.5). (For more on the topic of
forceps-assisted birth and risk for trauma, see Chapter 25 Care of the Newborn at Risk.)

FIGURE 23.5 Caput Succedaneum Caput succedaneum can occur after extended pushing during vaginal births or with forceps- or
vacuum-assisted births. (credit: "Caput succedaneum" by "Muago"/Wikimedia Commons, CC0 1.0)

The condition in which serosanguineous or bloody fluid accumulates below the periosteum of the skull is called
cephalohematoma (Figure 23.6). This can result from instrument-assisted births, when the fetus's head is occiput-
posterior or occiput-anterior, or when a scalp electrode has been placed during labor. However, it can also occur
spontaneously (Remien & Majmundar, 2022). This is a much deeper injury than caput succedaneum, it does not
cross the suture lines, and it requires assessment after birth by the nurse for signs and symptoms of increased or
1004  23 · Newborn Assessment

      prolonged bleeding, jaundice, and infection. Cephalohematoma should resolve in 2 to 6 weeks after birth (Lipsett et
      al, 2022; Remien & Majmundar, 2022).

      FIGURE 23.6 Cephalohematoma Related to Birth Trauma This 5-week-old newborn suffered trauma during birth, resulting in a
      cephalohematoma that became infected, as shown in magnetic resonance imaging.(credit: "Clinical presentation and magnetic resonance
      imaging findings of the 5-week-old girl with infected cephalhaematoma" by Petra Zimmermann and Andrea Duppenthaler/BMC Infectious
      Diseases, CC BY 4.0)

      Hair
      The nurse assesses the amount of hair, color, hairlines, and any cowlicks in the pattern. There will be very dramatic
      differences in newborn hair. Some newborns have a lot of hair at birth, and some have almost none. Lanugo is a soft,
      fine body hair covering a fetus while inside the uterus that may still be present right after birth. It helps to protect
      the fetus and keeps them warm while they grow. It is more commonly found in newborns born prematurely. The
      nurse should document what is observed, including hairline, quantity of hair, quality of hair, whether curly or
      straight, and color.

      Face
      Newborns' faces are designed to help them breast-feed, so their chins are recessed, their lips are sensitive to touch,
      and they demonstrate the rooting reflex when the nurse touches the cheek. Eyes and ears should be symmetrical,
      as should facial movements. Any facial asymmetry or facial paralysis is not an expected variation. This abnormal
      finding may appear when the newborn cries and would require follow-up with a pediatrician or other health-care
      provider.

      Eyes
      Eye examination should be done when the newborn is in a quiet, awake, alert state. Tipping a newborn backward
      slightly can result in slight eye opening. Eyes should be equal in size bilaterally and align with the ears. Term
      newborns can fix and focus on an object that is 8 to 10 inches from their face and can sometimes follow it vertically
      and horizontally. The nurse will assess the eyes for the ability to fully open, pupil size and shape, and placement on
      the face. Facial swelling or edema may prevent the newborn from opening their eyes fully in the first few hours after
      birth. The sclera, the area of the eye around the iris and pupil, should be whitish or white, or have a blue tint; and the
      iris is often blue, gray, or brown. Pupils should be equal, round, and reactive to light. Permanent eye color may
      appear in 9 months but can take up to 3 years to be fully permanent (Boyd, 2022).

      Nose
      Assessment of size, shape, and patency of each nostril is important during the assessment of the newborn's nose.
      The nose should be symmetrical and midline on the face. The nurse will use a finger to close one of the newborn's
      nostrils and assess patency of the other, then repeat on the opposite side. It is important that the nurse assess this
      soon after delivery because infants are obligate nose breathers (i.e., they can breathe only through their nose) with
      an acute sense of smell that assists them in learning to breast-feed. Naris patency is supported by observing
      continued respiratory effort or by feeling the presence of air movement during breaths. Newborns also use sneezing
      to clear mucus or to indicate they are overstimulated.

      Mouth
      All newborns will have their mouth assessed for mobility and anatomy. The mouth should be moist, without drool,

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                              23.1 · Physical Assessment of the Newborn  1005

pink, and mobile. The nurse places a gloved finger into the newborn's mouth, assesses the hard and soft palate
continuity, and assesses whether the mucous membranes are pink and moist, indicating adequate hydration and
oxygenation. The nurse assesses the gums for Epstein pearls, which are small, harmless, firm white cysts that
contain keratin and which will resolve spontaneously within 1 to 2 weeks. However, if the Epstein pearls are loose,
they should be reported to a provider so that they can be removed to prevent choking.

The frenulum of the tongue is a tiny fold of mucous membrane that runs from the floor of the mouth to the midline
of the tongue's underside. Its purpose is to regulate tongue movements. An abnormally short frenulum or a
frenulum that is attached near the bottom of the tongue is a condition known as tongue-tie, or ankyloglossia. This
can be a cause for feeding issues (Figure 23.7). The nurse checks the newborn's frenulum to assess for tongue-tie to
avoid issues with breast-feeding. The clinician should be notified early if the nurse notices this during assessment so
that an intervention can occur. With intervention, the breast-feeding person can improve the breast-feeding latch
and improve the feeding relationship with the newborn. However, intervention is not always necessary at this age.

        REAL RN STORIES

Nurse: Jan, MSN, NP
Years in practice: 33
Clinical setting: Cardiology unit
Geographic location: Inner city of a medium-sized city in Ohio

We serve a diverse patient population, but many of our patients are middle class, college-educated, and engaged
parents who want to advocate for their newborn. In meeting a new birthing parent with a 5-day-old baby boy, we
learn that the birthing parent wants to breast-feed but is having difficulties. The new parent has done multiple
Google searches and is worried that they do not have enough breast milk supply and that they are doing "something
wrong" when attempting to help their newborn latch. A lactation consultation was placed and the trained lactation
consultant evaluated both the hold and latch of the newborn during an attempted breast-feeding. Finding a
significant tongue-tie led to an ENT consultation and a concrete answer for the parent as to why they were having
difficulties with breast-feeding. Ultimately, after working with both ENT and the lactation consultant, the newborn
was able to breast-feed successfully.

FIGURE 23.7 Tongue-tie Condition This child has a mild tongue-tie due to a frenulum that is attached near the bottom of the tongue.
(credit: "Frenulum linguae" by Klaus D. Peter/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0)

Ears
Newborn ears should feel firm, flexible, and pliable, and recoil briskly when assessed. The nurse will assess
placement of the ear by imagining a line that is parallel to the outer and inner canthus of the eye. If the pinna of the
ear is touching the top of the imaginary line, it is correctly placed. If not, the top of the pinna will be below the line,
and the ears are deemed low set (Figure 23.8) Ears should be symmetrical, similar in size, and in the same position.
Ears can be an indicator of many congenital and chromosomal disorders, like renal agenesis, because kidneys and
ears develop at the same time in the womb. Newborns will all have a hearing screen completed before discharge
1006  23 · Newborn Assessment

      from the hospital, and if they do not pass, they will be rescreened at their pediatrician's office or referred to a
      pediatric audiologist after discharge. Nurses are responsible for ensuring that the hearing screen is complete.
      Knowing that language development begins at birth, it is vital that the nurses assess newborns for hearing loss.

      FIGURE 23.8 Ear Placement The newborn's eyes are appropriately placed in relation to the top of the ears. (credit: "Newborn Sleeping" by
      Vera Kratochvil/PublicDomainPictures, Public Domain)

      Neck
      All newborns have a short neck that should be freely movable in all directions with no webbing present. Asymmetry
      of the neck is usually due to positioning in utero. The nurse performs range of motion of the neck. The thyroid cannot
      be palpated.

      Chest
      The newborn chest should be cylindrical, symmetrical, and have an anterior-posterior diameter of 1:1. Chest
      circumference should be measured by placing the measuring tape flat on the warmer and laying the newborn supine
      on top of it with the tape at the scapulae. The tape will then be brought around anteriorly, directly over the nipple
      line (see Figure 23.4). Average chest circumference in a newborn is 33 cm (13 inches), or 2 cm (1 inch) less than the
      head circumference. Due to maternal hormones still circulating in the newborn's body, breast buds will appear
      enlarged and swollen, and female newborns may experience breast discharge. The nurse should assess the clavicles
      for crepitus, lumps, or masses, which could indicate an injury during birth.

      Assessment of Abdomen
      Upon inspection, the newborn's abdomen is symmetrical, round, cylindrical and protruding. The newborn's
      abdomen should move with respiration. Abnormal findings include distention, hernias (Figure 23.9), and visibly
      engorged vessels. Upon auscultation, the nurse hears bowel sounds present in all four quadrants by 1 to 2 hours of
      life. On palpation, the abdomen is soft, and the liver can be palpated 1 to 2 cm below the right costal margin.

      FIGURE 23.9 Umbilical Hernia This is a newborn with an umbilical hernia. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY
      4.0 license)

      The umbilical stump contains three vessels: two arteries and one vein (AVA). The cord will begin drying soon after
      birth. It should remain free of redness and drainage. The nurse will provide education to the family to keep the
      umbilical stump open to air to facilitate drying. The cord will fall off independently in 7 to 10 days. Along with
      educating the parents about care of the umbilical stump, the nurse also instructs the parents to call their health-
      care provider if they notice any redness, persistent bleeding, or bad smell coming from the umbilical stump (Figure
      23.10).

      Access for free at openstax.org
23.1 · Physical Assessment of the Newborn                                                                                               1007

FIGURE 23.10 Umbilical Clamp Newborn with a clamped umbilical cord. (credit: modification of "Untitled - panoramio - Pedro Martha (7)"
by Pedro Marth/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0)

Genitourinary Assessment
It is important that the nurse perform a complete and thorough assessment of the genitalia of the newborn. This
assessment should be completed at the end of the physical examination, since this is often the most invasive part. If
this is the parents' first child, it is also an appropriate time to teach them how to change a diaper.

Female
The nurse should assess the labia majora, which are slightly swollen from maternal hormones and cover the labia
minora and clitoris. Milky discharge and even a reddish discharge, called pseudomenstruation, from the vagina are
expected findings for the first 3 to 4 days after birth due to maternal hormones. There may be a vaginal tag, which
can be normal and representative of a visible hymenal ring. This will disappear in a few weeks. It is important for the
nurse to educate parents about these normal findings in female newborns because they can cause concern if red
discharge is found in diapers and parents have not heard this is expected.

Male
Assessment of genitalia in male newborns includes the placement of the urethra, to ensure that it is at the tip of the
penis, midline, and patent. Abnormal variations in male genitalia include hypospadias, which occurs when the
urethral meatus is located on the ventral side of the penis; alternatively, epispadias is an abnormal condition in
which the urethral meatus is located on the dorsal side of the penis. Male newborns with epispadias and
hypospadias are not candidates for circumcision until they have a pediatric urology consultation to ensure that there
are no additional anatomic abnormalities. Once the newborn is seen by pediatric urology providers after discharge
from the hospital, the pediatric urologist will schedule a surgery to correct the meatus and, if the parents choose,
may perform a circumcision at the same time. Another abnormal variation in male genitalia the nurse should assess
for is phimosis, a condition in which the opening of the foreskin is small and cannot be pulled back over the tip of
the penis at all. This can interfere with urination and needs immediate intervention.

Assessment of the scrotum includes noting whether both testes have descended and can be palpated. The
abnormal assessment finding in which the testes have not descended is called cryptorchidism. In a newborn, this
can be a normal variation that should be followed by the health-care provider to ensure that they do descend in the
future. There should be no evidence of hydrocele, which is an abnormal collection of fluid in the scrotal sac.

For newborn boys having a circumcision, that surgical procedure is often performed prior to discharge. The nurse
will provide the parents with education regarding care of the surgical site. The nurse will explain to the parents that
it is vital not to allow any gauze to adhere to the surgical site and disrupt the clotting that occurs on the tip of the
penis. Some circumcision sites may have a device that is left in place until it falls off in 7 to 10 days. Parents will be
instructed to use unscented, clear ointment on the tip of the newly circumcised penis and then place a 2-inch ×
2-inch gauze pad gently over the surgical site. When it is time to change the dressing, they should remove the gauze
and very gently wipe off any meconium or stool waste, using caution not to disrupt the clot. It is not necessary to
remove all the ointment. Then, the parents will be told to apply fresh ointment and gauze with every diaper change
for the next 7 to 10 days. Newborns would likely have had vitamin K prior to the procedure. If bleeding occurs that
will not stop, the parents will be told by the nurse to take the newborn to the emergency department (ED) or for
evaluation immediately. (See Chapter 22 Immediate Care of the Newborn.)
1008  23 · Newborn Assessment

      Atypical Genitalia
      Some newborns are born with enlarged clitoris, labial fusion, and/or urethral openings not ventral to vaginal
      openings, making it difficult for the nurse to assign their sex. These newborns are among the one in 4,500 births that
      have atypical genitalia (Cleveland Clinic, 2022). The most common cause of atypical genitalia (sometimes called
      intersex genitals) in XX chromosome newborns is congenital adrenal hyperplasia (in the United States the overall
      incidence is 1:13,000 to 1:16,000 live births) (Krone & Arlt, 2009). Genital ambiguity in XY chromosome newborns
      is rare (de Omena Filho et al., 2022.)

              LINK TO LEARNING

      Atypical genitalia in newborns are an uncommon occurrence and are often related to abnormalities in chromosomal
      formation. Read this article about assessing atypical genitalia (https://openstax.org/r/77atypgenitalia) for additional
      information.

      Anus
      The nurse will inspect the anal area to verify that it is patent and has no fissure. A missing or blocked opening to the
      anus is abnormal and is termed an imperforate anus. This is ruled out by visual assessment; no digital exam is
      necessary by the nurse. The passage of meconium can also be noted. When there is no passage of meconium in the
      first 24 to 48 hours after birth, the newborn is diagnosed with meconium ileus with obstruction, an abnormal
      finding in the newborn (Cleveland Clinic, 2022).

              LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

      Nurse's Response to Parents' Refusal of Vitamin K Injection for Newborn

      Imagine you are the nurse caring for a newborn who is 12 hours old. The parents of that newborn have declined
      administration of a vitamin K injection, despite education from the labor and delivery nurse and the midwife about
      the important medical benefits of the injection. As a nurse, you know that vitamin K is given to newborns to remedy
      their lack of clotting factors and thus prevent potentially fatal bleeding events.

      The new parents are asking you when their baby boy can be circumcised. They are adamant that this must be done
      in the hospital before discharge and that they will not accept the vitamin K injection for their child. You again
      educate them about the potential for a catastrophic bleed during the procedure. If their newborn does not receive
      the vitamin K injection beforehand, the newborn is not eligible for this procedure. You explain to them that the
      American Academy of Pediatrics has recommended this as a routine preventive measure for nearly 60 years.
      Studies show that newborns are at risk for serious bleeding up to 2 weeks post birth (American Academy of
      Pediatrics, 2020). Nonetheless, the parents continue to refuse the injection, they ask to move forward with the
      circumcision, and they demand that the physician performing the procedure come in.

      If a health-care provider agrees to perform the circumcisions despite the parents' refusal of the vitamin K injection,
      your role as the nurse would require you to witness the parents' consent for this procedure. However, you have
      serious concerns about the safety of this newborn under these circumstances.

      It is not the nurse's job to judge. It is the nurse's job to advocate, provide evidence-based resources, and maintain
      confidentiality. Nurses respect the autonomy of childbearing people, pregnant people, and those who have given
      birth to make decisions that they feel are right for themselves and their children. Ethical nursing practice should
      include beneficence, the obligation to do good and nonmaleficence, the obligation to do no harm. Additionally, the
      nurse will need confidentiality, justice (treating everyone fairly and equitably), and veracity, demonstrating integrity
      and truth at all times. Maintaining these ethical principles is especially important when the nurse is in an
      emotionally charged environment.

      Ultimately, in a situation like this, all the nurse can do is document the extensive teaching that was provided to the
      parents on multiple occasions. It is, by law, the parents' decision to make, whether the nurse agrees or not. Ethical
      issues in maternal-health nursing occur frequently; the nurses' job is to provide evidence-based education,

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                              23.1 · Physical Assessment of the Newborn  1009

advocate for their patients, and support the families they serve (Callister & Sudia-Robinson, 2011).

Musculoskeletal
In the musculoskeletal assessment, the nurse inspects the newborn's extremities for gross deformities. The nurse
assesses for extra digits, webbing, clubfoot, range of motion, short extremities, flexibility, and symmetrical
movement. During the first few weeks of life and specifically in the first 24 hours, the newborn's preferred position
will be one that resembles their position in the uterus. They will remain in the fetal position with arms and legs
flexed closely to the front of their body, hands clenched, with elbows and knees bent. This posture will change as
the newborn develops more control over their body movements and becomes more comfortable with the outside
world. Hypotonia, laxity, or a relaxed overall position may be related to maternal medication or an underlying
genetic condition.

Arms and Hands
In a full-term newborn, fingernails will extend beyond the end of the fingertip and are often slightly adhered to the
skin. The nurse counts all the digits in each hand. The abnormal condition of extra digits in the hand is known as
polydactyly. Another abnormal finding of the hand, syndactyly, is the presence of webbing, or fusion, of fingers and
toes that can be associated with trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) or be the result of heredity (Figure 23.11). Hands are
assessed for palmar creases. A single palmer crease is associated with newborns with trisomy 21.

FIGURE 23.11 Abnormal Conditions of the Hand. (a) This newborn's clenched fist is a normal hand. (b) This infant exhibits the condition
of polydactyly. (c) This infant exhibits the condition of syndactyly. (credit: (a) "Hand of crop black infant on leg of anonymous African
American mother" by William Fortunate/Pexels, CC0; (b) "Bilateral polydactyly with short fingers in Ellis-van Creveld syndrome patient" by
G. Baujat and M. LeMerer/Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases, CC BY 2.0; (c) "New born baby hand showing complete complex syndactyly of
two fingers (III & IV)" by Dumplestilskin/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

A partial or complete paralysis of portions of the arm that results from trauma to the brachial plexus nerve is called
brachial palsy. This can be caused by too much downward pressure being applied during the delivery of the head to
deliver the shoulders. From this same motion, it is possible to fracture the clavicle. A fractured clavicle does not
always indicate brachial plexus injury. It is important that the nurse assess for full range of motion in both limbs.
Brachial palsy occurs most often when there is strong traction applied to the newborn's head to dislodge the
shoulder behind the symphysis pubis in the presence of shoulder dystocia. The portion of the arm affected is
determined by the nerves damaged.

Erb-Duchenne paralysis, also known as Erb palsy, involves damage to the upper arm and is the most common nerve
injury for newborns. With this injury, the newborn's arm may lie limply at the side of the body, or the newborn may
avoid moving their arm when encouraged to do so. The nurse can see this by initiating the startle reflex. The nurse
will place their fingers on the newborn's clavicle, starting in the center of body and then palpating to the outer body
and feeling for crepitus, lumps, or masses on the clavicle, paying attention to grimaces or crying from the newborn.
(For a full discussion of Erb-Duchenne paralysis and brachial plexus injury, see Chapter 25 Care of the Newborn at
Risk.)

Assessment of Legs and Feet
Newborn legs should be of equal length and with symmetrical folds. The newborn's legs will likely still be in a flexed
position, but the nurse should be able to extend the legs with ease. Range of motion should be symmetrical. The
nurse performs the Barlow maneuver to assess the newborn for congenital hip dysplasia by placing the newborn in
a supine position in a warm, well-lit place. The nurse will then bring the newborn's thighs to their chest, adducting
1010  23 · Newborn Assessment

      the hip while applying pressure on the knee to direct the force posteriorly. If the hip can be dislocated, it will pop out
      of the socket, and the nurse will hear and feel a click or pop. This is considered a positive test that needs to be
      reported and documented. The Ortolani maneuver is the second assessment for congenital hip dysplasia, in which
      the nurse keeps the newborn's thighs at the midline in the Barlow position, places anterior pressure on the greater
      trochanters, then uses their thumbs to abduct the newborn's legs gently and smoothly. If the hips can be dislocated,
      the nurse will hear or feel a pop. That is considered a positive test that needs to be documented and, though it is not
      highly sensitive, reported to the health-care provider. A negative exam is free of clicking.

              LINK TO LEARNING

      Examination of the newborn includes the Ortolani and Barlow maneuvers (https://openstax.org/r/77hipmaneuvers)
      for assessing for hip dysplasia.

      FIGURE 23.12 Barlow and Ortolani Maneuvers (a) In the Barlow maneuver, the provider adducts the newborn's hip. (b) In the Ortolani
      maneuver, the provider abducts the newborn's hip. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

      The nurse assesses the newborn feet for symmetry and mobility. An abnormal finding of asymmetry or lack of
      movement may indicate a talipes deformity, also known as clubfoot. If this condition is noted (see Figure 25.11), the
      nurse should document it and notify a clinician for follow-up. See Chapter 25 Care of the Newborn at Risk for more
      information on this topic.

      Back and Spine
      To assess the back and spine, the nurse rotates the newborn to a prone position. The nurse places one finger on
      either side of the newborn's spine, gently pressing as they run their fingers down the length of the spine. In doing so,
      the nurse assesses that the spine is straight and flat, with no deviations to the right or left. At the base of the spine,
      there should be no hair tufts, dimples, or breaks in the skin. During fetal development the spinal column comes
      together caudal to pedal (head to toe). If this process is stopped prior to full alignment, a dimple, cyst, or opening
      may be found at the base of the spine, potentially indicating misplacement of the nerves found at the base of the
      spinal column, or spina bifida. Spina bifida is a condition that may not be diagnosed until late childhood, but it will
      be monitored by pediatric health-care providers. Any deviations should be reported to the health-care provider.

              PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

      The Hepatitis B Vaccine

      A large part of the nurse's responsibility during their time with the new family on the postpartum unit is providing
      education about the newborn's first vaccination, hepatitis B. The hepatitis B vaccine is given to the newborn within
      the first 24 hours after birth and is the first in a three-dose series the newborn will receive over an 18-month period.
      The nurse should allow plenty of time to answer any questions from the new parents before administering the

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                              23.1 · Physical Assessment of the Newborn  1011

injection to the newborn.

    · Generic Name: Hepatitis B immune globulin
    · Trade Name: Engerix-B, Recombivax HB, Heplisav-B
    · Class/Action: vaccines, inactivated, viral
    · Route/Dosage: 5 mcg/0.5 mL (Recombivax HB), 10 mcg/0.5mL (Engerix-B).
    · The hepatitis B vaccine is given to the infant as a 0.5 mL intramuscular injection in the anterior thigh. It is a

        three-dose immunization: The first dose is administered to the newborn within 24 hours of birth, the second
        between 1 and 2 months of age, and the third and final dose between 6 and 18 months of age.
    · High Alert/Black Box Warning:
    · Indications: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends administration of the
        hepatitis B vaccine to all newborns within 24 hours of birth or at hospital discharge, whichever comes first.
    · Mechanism of Action: Immunization with hepatitis B vaccine stimulates the immune system to produce
        specific humoral antibodies (HBsAG) against the hepatitis B virus.
    · Contraindications: hypersensitivity to yeast
    · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: soreness at the site of the injection, severe itching, redness at the injection
        site, weakness, feeling unwell, nausea, vomiting
    · Nursing Implications: Witness consent. Review patient education with the family. Administer the IM injection
        in the middle vastus lateralis muscle. Document in the patient's chart.
    · Parent/Family Education: The nurse will provide education to the parents via the CDC vaccine information
        statement (VIS). It is mandatory that, while providing this information to the parents, the nurse provide a copy
        of the VIS statement to them so that they can follow along and make an informed decision. The nurse should
        educate the parents that the risk of reaction for this injection is soreness at the site of the injection. The nurse
        will also advise the parents that they will need to follow up with their pediatrician and schedule the next
        appointment for immunization between 1 and 2 months of age and then again for the newborn's final dose
        between 6 and 18 months.

Skin Assessment

Newborn skin should look well perfused and an appropriate color for the race of the newborn. Capillary refill for
newborns should be less than 3 seconds (Singh, 2015), and well-hydrated newborns have flat fontanelles and moist
mucosal membranes. It is a normal variation to see dry, cracked skin on hands, legs, and feet. Some variations in
newborn skin are identified and defined in Table 23.2.
1012  23 · Newborn Assessment

      Skin Presentation                Assessment Findings                        Comments
      Acrocyanosis
                                       Bluish discoloration of hands and feet     Peripheral cyanosis is normal in the first
                                       after birth                                24-48 hours after birth and resolves on
                                                                                  its own. This is due to an immature
                                                                                  cardiac system. If this is seen after that
                                                                                  period, it is due to cold stress or sepsis
                                                                                  and requires further evaluation.

      (credit: modification of
      "Cyanotic neonate" by
      Jules Atkins/Wikipedia
      Commons, Public Domain)

      Erythema toxicum                 Normal newborn rash abruptly occurring     This condition is of unknown cause but
                                       as yellow or white papules over an         thought to be an awakening of the
                                       erythematous base on the newborn's         immature immune system.
                                       body except the palms; occurs in
                                       30%-70% of newborns

      (credit: "Erythema toxicum
      neonatorum" by F. T. T. S.
      Haveri and A. C. Inamadar/
      ISRN Dermatology, CC BY
      1.0)

      Milia                            Exposed sebaceous glands that look like    Milia disappear within the first month of
                                       "baby acne" on the newborn's face, nose,   life; no additional treatment is needed.
                                       or chin, or all three

      (credit: "Newborn Milia
      (Milk Spots)" by
      "Serephine"/Wikimedia
      Commons, CC0)

      Telangiectatic nevus             Pale pink or reddish discoloration at the  Stork bites are often more noticeable
      (stork bite)                     base of the neck, lower axilla, nasal      when the newborn is crying or upset;
                                       bridge, or eyelids                         they usually disappears by the second
                                                                                  birthday but sometimes do not; they
                                                                                  require no intervention.

        (credit: "Here's Maddie's
        `stork bite' birth mark." By
        Abigail Batchelder/Flickr,
        CC BY 2.0)

      TABLE 23.2 Newborn Skin Variations

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          23.1 · Physical Assessment of the Newborn       1013

Skin Presentation           Assessment Findings                           Comments
Dermal
melanocytosis               Formerly referred to as Mongolian spots,      Commonly seen in newborns with darker
                            bluish-gray spots that can occur across       skin, these spots will resolve on their own
(credit: "6 month old       the shoulders, on the hips, on the lower      in the first few years of life; they
Taiwanese baby girl" by     back near the buttocks, and on the legs       resemble bruising and so can be
Abby Lu/flickr, CC BY 2.0)                                                confused with nonaccidental trauma, so
                                                                          the nurse should document location and
                                                                          size during neonatal assessment.

Strawberry                  Raised capillary nevi, occurring anywhere     No referral is needed unless these are
hemangioma                  on the body, that often increase in size for  interfering with vision or are very close to
                            the first few months of life, slowly          the eyes.
                            decreasing in size over time, and
                            disappearing by 10 years of age

(credit: "Capillary
haemangioma" by
"User:Zeimusu"/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain)

Lanugo                      Fine, soft hair that covers the newborn's     No referral is needed.
                            back, shoulders, cheeks, forehead, and
(credit: "Lanugo" by        scalp; more common in newborns that
"Raumka"/Wikimedia          are born early and often disappears
Commons, CC BY 1.0)         within the 4 weeks after birth

Vernix caseosa              Cheesy, white substance covering and          Vernix caseosa diminishes the closer to
                            protecting the skin during intrauterine       term the fetus gets.
                            life; coverage at birth related to
                            gestational age

  (credit: "Vernix feet" by
  "Np0x"/Wikimedia
  Commons, Public Domain)

TABLE 23.2 Newborn Skin Variations

        CULTURAL CONTEXT

Skin Color in Black and Biracial Newborns

Newborns of Black or biracial descent are born with variations in skin color. These newborns often have very
sensitive skin that is prone to dryness and hyperpigmentation. Their skin is likely to be a shade or two lighter than
their eventual skin color will be. This is so because it takes melanin 2 to 3 weeks to appear at the surface of the skin
1014  23 · Newborn Assessment

      after being produced by cells called melanocytes (Lucock, 2023). If parents are concerned about the newborn's
      light skin color, the nurse can use this as a teaching opportunity.

      Assessing Jaundice in a Newborn
      The condition of neonatal jaundice arises from an excess of bilirubin in the blood due to an increase in breakdown
      of red blood cells and manifests in a newborn as a yellowish discoloration of the skin, sclera, and mucous
      membranes. Approximately 75 percent of jaundice cases in newborns is caused by physiologic jaundice, which
      results from an increased bilirubin load, decreased ability to clear the bilirubin, and impaired activity from the
      enzyme needed for bilirubin conjugation in immature newborn livers. Physiologic jaundice typically appears after 24
      hours of age, peaks at around 48 to 96 hours, and resolves by 2 to 3 weeks in full-term newborns.

      To assess for newborn jaundice, the nurse will press on the newborn's forehead and nose for 1 second with a gloved
      finger and observe for any underlying yellow tinge to the skin. If there is a yellow tinge, the nurse will also assess the
      sternum, palms, and soles by blanching the skin. In darker skinned newborns, jaundice may be more difficult to
      assess. Under the tongue and the sclera of the newborn's eyes are other areas that should be assessed for jaundice
      or yellowing, as those areas work equally well for all skin colors. Jaundice progresses from head to toe. Jaundice is
      observable in the face and neck when bilirubin levels reach 4 to 8 mg/dL and can be seen on hands and feet when
      levels are greater than 15 mg/dL. The first notable finding is often seen in the sclera, and it is also the last area to
      clear. If the newborn appears jaundiced, a total serum bilirubin or transcutaneous bilirubin (TcB) level needs to be
      checked with the transcutaneous bilirubin meter (Figure 23.13). A diagnosis of pathologic jaundice, or
      nonphysiologic jaundice, occurs if the jaundice is present on the first day of life, and the newborn's total serum
      bilirubin (TSB) rises by more than 5 mg/dL, more than 0.2 mg/dL/hour, or is higher than 17 mg/dL, or when the
      newborn has signs and symptoms suggestive of serious illness, like lethargy, respiratory distress, and decreased
      feeding. (For further discussion, refer 24.2 Care of Common Problems in the Newborn.)

      FIGURE 23.13 Transcutaneous Bilirubinometer A transcutaneous bilirubinometer is used to measure bilirubin levels in the subcutaneous
      tissue in a newborn. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

      Assessment of Neurologic Status

      The assessment of neurologic status should be ongoing throughout the entire assessment of the newborn and
      throughout the nurse's shift. Neurologic assessment of a newborn is different from a neurologic assessment in an
      adult. In the newborn, the nurse assesses physical characteristics including resting posture, muscle tone, motor
      activity, state of alertness, cry, and, most importantly, the ability to be consoled. Newborns like to be in a flexed
      position and should be using their extremities bilaterally. Typical newborns move their upper extremities erratically
      with uncoordinated movements. Any decreased, absent, or unilateral movements need further evaluation, as they
      may be indicative of a neurologic issue.
      Any observation of consistently long-lasting, ongoing tremors or jitteriness in a full-term newborn must be evaluated

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         23.1 · Physical Assessment of the Newborn                                  1015

for a cause. Tremors can be related to hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, substance withdrawal, or convulsions. Neonatal
seizures can look like many things but can also simply be chewing or swallowing movements, deviations of the eyes,
rigidity, or flaccidity due to immaturity of the central nervous system.

To assess the sucking reflex, the nurse will insert a gloved finger into the newborn's mouth to elicit a response. Once
the newborn is sucking, the nurse will assess hearing and vision responses by noting sucking changes in the
presence of noise by a rattle or voice, and a change in sucking when a penlight is shined near the newborn's eyes.
The newborn responds with a brief stop in sucking followed by restarting sucking.

A normal neurologic examination indicates a functional neurologic system in the newborn. Nurses will be on alert for
neurologic changes to be recognized as possible alterations and injuries that have occurred. Table 23.3 lists
possible injuries that could occur during birth or after and the signs that a nurse may observe during a physical
examination.

Immaturity of the central nervous system in the newborn is demonstrated by reflex responses. The newborn's
movements are uncoordinated, and methods of communication are very limited, so reflexes in newborns serve
specific purposes. Some of them are protective, like blink, gag, and sneeze. Some newborn reflexes help with
feeding, such as rooting and sucking, and some are for stimulating human interaction, such as yawning. Additionally,
newborns can draw back from pain (protective), and they can even push up and try to crawl (prone crawl).

Potential Injury      Example

Eye injuries          Subconjunctival and retinal hemorrhages

Intracranial hemorrhage Subdural, subarachnoid

Bone fracture         Clavicle, facial bone, skull, humerus, femur

Nasal injuries        Dislocation, fractures

Scalp laceration abscess Fetal scalp electrode, scalpel injuries related to cesarean birth

Soft-tissue injuries  Cephalohematoma, brachial plexus

TABLE 23.3 Possible Injuries That Can Occur in Newborns

Moro Reflex
The Moro, or startle, reflex is present at birth and usually disappears around 2 months of age. This is a primitive
protective reflex that occurs when the newborn is startled by a loud sound or sudden movement. The newborn will
throw back their head, extend arms and legs, and sometimes begin to cry. A lack of Moro reflex warrants a call to the
primary health-care provider for further evaluation (Figure 23.14).

FIGURE 23.14 Moro Reflex This startled newborn extends their arms, demonstrating the Moro reflex. (credit: "Moro reflex" by "Patty
2"/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Palmar Grasp Reflex
The palmar grasp reflex, present at 16 weeks' gestation in utero, is a primitive reflex that can be elicited in preterm
newborns as early as 25 weeks (Anekar & Brodoni, 2022). This reflex integrates with other newborn behaviors at 4
to 6 months to allow grasping of objects. It is possible that this reflex began as a way create interaction and bonding
1016  23 · Newborn Assessment

      between the newborn and the parent (Anekar & Brodoni, 2022). The nurse can assess for the grasp reflex by placing
      their finger into the newborn's palm. The newborn will grasp hard enough bilaterally that the nurse will be able to
      raise the newborn's trunk for a few seconds (Figure 23.15).

      FIGURE 23.15 Palmar Grasp Reflex New parents are often surprised by the strength of their newborn's palmar grasp reflex. (credit: "A
      Person Touching an Infant's Hand" by Steven Morissette/Pexels, CC0)

      Rooting Reflex
      The rooting reflex that assists the infant in eating is present at birth and disappears around 3 to 4 months of age.
      The nurse can elicit this response by stroking the newborn's cheek or the corner of the newborn's mouth. The
      newborn will turn toward the nurse and open their mouth, anticipating the nipple or a bottle (Figure 23.16). Lack of
      response can indicate facial paralysis or neurologic depression, and the nurse should contact the primary care
      practitioner for follow-up.

      FIGURE 23.16 Rooting Reflex The rooting reflex aims the infant's mouth toward a possible source of food. (attribution: Copyright Rice
      University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

      Sucking Reflex
      The sucking reflex begins in utero around 23 weeks' gestation but does not fully develop until 36 weeks' gestation.
      Premature newborns may have a weak, uncoordinated sucking ability, and it may be difficult for them to feed
      (Stanford Medicine, Childrens Health, 2022). The nurse can elicit this response by placing a gloved finger in the
      newborn's mouth and assessing the strength of the suck (Figure 23.17). During this assessment, the nurse can also
      assess for any soft and hard palate abnormalities. Absence of a suck reflex may indicate neurologic depression from
      CNS conditions, neonatal abstinence syndrome, or developmental immaturity, and the nurse will report this to the
      primary care practitioner for further follow-up.

      Access for free at openstax.org
23.1 · Physical Assessment of the Newborn                                                                                              1017

FIGURE 23.17 Suck Reflex The newborn's suck reflex responds to anything placed in the mouth. (credit: "Newborn Baby Breastfeeding" by
Jonathan Borba/Pexels, CC0)

Tonic Neck Reflex
The tonic neck reflex is present at birth and integrates at 4 to 6 months with other newborn behaviors like rolling
over, sitting up, and developing hand-eye coordination to reach for items (Frothingham, 2020). Some hypotheses
suggest that this reflex occurs to help the fetus move down the birth canal (Frothingham, 2020). The nurse can
assess for tonic neck reflex by placing the newborn supine, gently rotating the head to one side, and holding it in
position for 15 seconds. A positive response is when the arm and leg extend on the facial side and flex on the other
(Figure 23.18). No response to the assessment indicates the need to report that finding to the newborn's primary
clinician.

FIGURE 23.18 Tonic Neck Reflex This newborn demonstrates a positive response to assessment of the tonic neck reflex. (credit:
"Asymmetrical tonic neck reflex (ATNR) at Two Months" by "Mjlissner"/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)

Stepping Reflex
The final reflex assessed is the stepping reflex, present from birth and designed to assist the newborn in moving to
the birthing person's breast to begin feeding. The nurse can assess this reflex in two ways. They can leave the
newborn prone on the birthing person's abdomen and observe the newborn crawl to the birthing person's breast
using the toes and knees, as though they are taking steps (Stanford Medicine, Childrens Health, 2022). Alternatively,
1018  23 · Newborn Assessment

      the nurse can hold the newborn, place their feet on the bed, and observe the newborn try to stand on their feet and
      take steps (Figure 23.19). This reflex will disappear at around 8 weeks of age.

      FIGURE 23.19 Stepping Reflex Parents often enjoy having their newborn demonstrate the stepping reflex for family and friends. (credit:
      (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

              CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

      QSEN Competency: Patient-Centered Care: Use of a Pacifier

      Definition: Recognize the patient or designee as the source of control and full partner in providing compassionate
      and coordinated care based on respect for patients' preferences, values, and needs.
      Knowledge: The nurse integrates understanding of multiple dimensions of patient-centered care:

          · patient/family/community preferences, values
          · coordination and integration of care
          · information, communication, and education
          · physical comfort and emotional support
          · involvement of family and friends
          · transition and continuity
      Describe how diverse cultural, ethnic, and social backgrounds function as sources of patient family and community
      values
      Skill: Communicate patient values, preferences, and expressed needs to other members of health-care team. The
      nurse will do the following:
          · Listen to the patient and explore any concerns they may express.
          · Share the preference the birthing parent has for the newborn to utilize a pacifier to self-soothe when not

              feeding.
          · Provide the materials requested.
      Attitude: Respect and encourage individual expression of patient values, preferences, and expressed needs.

      Access for free at openstax.org
23.2 · Estimation of Gestational Age of the Newborn and Newborn Behavioral Assessment                                   1019

(QSEN Institute, n.d.)

23.2 Estimation of Gestational Age of the Newborn and Newborn Behavioral
Assessment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Identify ways to estimate the gestational age of a newborn according to physical and neurologic maturity
        by using the Ballard estimation of gestational age tool

    · Determine a newborn's social adequacy and capabilities by utilizing the Brazelton Neonatal Behavioral
        Assessment Scale

Estimating gestational age as well as assessing newborn behavior is another aspect of the complete exam of a
newborn. The Ballard Score (Ballard et al., 2014) and the Brazelton Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale are
included only in the newborn period and are specific tools of the nurse caring for newborns. When handling and
touching the newborn, it is important the nurse wear gloves until the newborn has received their first bath and all
the amniotic fluid, vaginal secretions, and blood on the skin are removed.

Estimating Newborn Gestational Age by Maturity Rating: The Ballard Score

The nurse uses the Ballard maturity rating to establish the accuracy of the age of the newborn in the first 4 hours
after birth. The two components of clinical gestational age assessment are external physical characteristics and
neuromuscular maturity. Assessing gestational age can be especially important when the birth parent has had
limited prenatal care and the gestational age is unknown or unclear. Neurologic examination is done to assess
physiologic maturation in addition to physical development. However, the newborn's nervous system is often
unstable during the first 24 hours of life, and therefore their reflexes may be unstable. If their neurologic findings
deviate from the gestational age derived by evaluation of external characteristics, it is recommended that a second
evaluation be completed in 24 hours. The neurologic assessment, especially reflexes, are especially important in
newborns at less than 34 weeks' gestation. That is because neurologic changes are significant between 26 and 34
weeks' gestation, while significant physical changes are less evident. It is also important that the nurse complete
the assessment during quiet, calm times for the newborn so that their neurologic status can be assessed accurately.

        LINK TO LEARNING

With this interactive online Ballard Assessment Calculator (https://openstax.org/r/77BallardCalc) Tool, the nurse
can go through the Ballard Assessment and click on each assessment finding as they work their way through. The
online tool will add up the score as you go. Nurses can download this link to their phone so that they can use this
tool in the clinical setting.

Ballard et al. (1991) developed the estimation of gestational age by maturity rating, or Ballard Score, in which each
physical and neuromuscular finding is assigned a point value. Those points are then totaled, and the total score is
matched to a gestational age scale to determine the approximate gestational age of the newborn. The maximum
score on the Ballard scale is 50, which correlates to a gestational age of 44 weeks. For example, on completing a
gestational assessment of a one-hour-old newborn, the nurse gives a score of 2 to all the physical characteristics,
for a total of 12, and gives a score of 3 to all the neuromuscular assessments for a score of 18. That would equal a
score of 30, indicating a gestational age of 36 weeks' gestation. Usually, the nurse will not score all 3s or all 2s
because most newborns vary in development of physical and neuromuscular characteristics, unlike this example.

Some maternal conditions or medications used during labor can affect gestational assessment components and
cause the need for further evaluations by the nurse. Maternal diabetes, while it can accelerate fetal physical growth,
decelerates fetal maturation. Maternal hypertension usually slows fetal physical growth and accelerates fetal
maturation. Use of magnesium sulfate in pregnant people with preeclampsia is correlated with poor muscle tone
and edema in newborns. Use of analgesia and anesthesia may cause the newborn to have respiratory depression,
and therefore the newborn may show flaccid limbs and demonstrate a frog-like posture. These characteristics affect
the neuromuscular portion of the Ballard scoring and should be taken into consideration when the overall scoring is
1020  23 · Newborn Assessment

      completed.
      Estimating by Physical Maturity
      The first part of the Ballard Assessment is to observe the newborn without disruption. The following physical
      characteristics are assessed in specific order from least invasive to more invasive.
      Posture
      To assess posture, the nurse will assess the newborn lying in the crib in their preferred position. The position of
      comfort is noted by the nurse on the Ballard Assessment (Figure 23.20). This is a neuromuscular assessment, but
      the nurse is assessing this during the physical assessment in order not to disrupt the newborn.

      FIGURE 23.20 Newborn Posture The nurse assesses the newborn's posture in a relaxed state during gestational assessment. (credit:
      "Back sleep 6" by National Institute of Child Health and Human Development/Flickr, Public Domain)

      Skin
      Assessment of the skin is a visual assessment. Mature newborn skin loses its protective coating, vernix caseosa.
      The nurse will see thicker, dryer skin with wrinkles that peels as the newborn matures. In a preterm newborn, the
      nurse will note that the skin is thin and transparent with veins that are prominent, especially over the abdomen.

      Lanugo
      Lanugo is fine hair that covers the body of the newborn. In a very premature newborn, the nurse will discover very
      little lanugo. Lanugo appears at approximately 24 to 25 weeks' gestation and is most abundant on the back between
      the scapulae. By the 28th week, it is abundant; and by 38 to 39 weeks, it is mostly gone, disappearing first from the
      face and then the trunk and extremities (see Table 23.2).

      Plantar Surface
      This assessment evaluates the plantar surface and the creases on a newborn's feet. Sole creases appear on the
      anterior ball of the feet. When the feet begin drying, superficial creases appear, and peeling may occur. Preterm
      newborns have almost no creases. The nurse measures the distance from the back of the heel to the tip of the great
      toe.

      Breast
      The nurses will assess each breast's diameter in millimeters after inspecting the areola. At term gestation, the
      tissue should measure between 0.5 and 1 cm (5 to 10 mm). As the gestation progresses, the breast bud and areola
      enlarge. In a large for gestational age (LGA) newborn, the nurse will note accelerated breast bud development as a
      reflection of subcutaneous tissue deposits. Small for gestational age (SGA) newborns will have utilized all their
      subcutaneous tissue to survive in utero and will lack breast tissue (Rosenberg, 2008).

      Eyes and Ears
      Cartilage in the ears develops with gestational age. Cartilage in the ears is what gives them their shape, so in very

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          23.2 · Estimation of Gestational Age of the Newborn and Newborn Behavioral Assessment  1021

premature newborns, the pinna of the ear will remain folded when bent and released. In newborns at less than 34
weeks' gestation, ears are very flat and have little shape. Additionally, premature newborns may have partially or
fully fused eyelids.

Male Genitals
The nurse will assess the male genitals for size of the scrotum, presence of rugae (wrinkles and ridges in the
scrotum), and descent of the testicles. During the 30th week of gestation, the testicles descend into the scrotal sac.
Before 36 weeks, the scrotum will have very few rugae, and the testes are palpable in the inguinal canal. By term,
the testes should have descended, there should be rugae present, and the scrotum should be pendulous.

Female Genitals
Assessment of female genitalia can be difficult due to edema caused by maternal hormones. The clitoris may vary in
size. Subcutaneous fat deposition varies as a result of fetal nutritional status, making it difficult sometimes to
determine the sex of the newborn. In adrenogenital syndrome (also known as congenital adrenal hyperplasia)
excessive amounts of androgen and other hormones are secreted by the adrenal gland and can present as edema of
the genitalia. In extremely premature female newborns, the labia are flat, and the clitoris is very prominent. As the
infant grows, the labia will grow larger and cover the clitoris.

Estimating by Neuromuscular Maturity
Neuromuscular assessment is best performed when the newborn has stabilized. One significant neuromuscular
change is that muscle tone progresses from extensor tone to flexor tone and from the lower to the upper extremities
as the neurologic system matures in a tail-to-head progression. In this part of the evaluation, the nurse is looking for
responses involving the newborn's tone.

Square Window Sign
The nurse can assess for the square window sign (measuring wrist flexibility) by flexing the newborn's hand
downward toward the ventral forearm until resistance is felt. The nurse will measure the angle formed at the wrist
and document it.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Review these visual instructions on the square window sign (https://openstax.org/r/77SqrWindowSign) for more
information on how to perform this part of the Ballard Assessment.

Arm Recoil
To assess for arm recoil (measuring passive flexor tone of biceps), the nurse will place the newborn in a supine
position with one of the nurse's hands beneath the newborn's elbows for support. The nurses will take the
newborn's hand and briefly set the elbow in flexion, then momentarily extend the arm before releasing the hand.
The angle of recoil with which the forearm springs back into flexion is noted.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Review these visual instructions on the arm recoil (https://openstax.org/r/77ArmRecoil) for more information on
how to perform this part of the Ballard Assessment.

Popliteal Angle
To assess the popliteal angle, which involves measuring the maturation of passive flexor tone about the knee joint,
the nurse must remove the newborn's diaper and place the newborn in a supine position. Then, the thigh is placed
gently on the abdomen, with the knee fully flexed. After the newborn is relaxed in this position, the nurse will gently
grasp the foot at the sides with one hand while supporting the thigh with the other. This will be done until a definite
angle of extension can be determined. The angle formed at the knee by the upper and lower leg is measured.
1022  23 · Newborn Assessment

              LINK TO LEARNING

      Review these visual instructions on assessing the popliteal angle (https://openstax.org/r/77poplitealangl) for more
      information on how to perform this part of the Ballard Assessment.

      Scarf Sign
      Assessment of the scarf sign is done to evaluate the passive tone of the flexors above the shoulder girdle. This
      assessment is completed while the newborn is lying supine, and the nurse adjusts the newborn's head to a midline
      position. The nurse gently guides the newborn's arm over the chest to the other side of the body until resistance is
      felt. A preterm newborn's elbow will cross the midline of the chest, whereas a full-term newborn's elbow will not
      cross midline.

              LINK TO LEARNING

      Review these visual instructions on the scarf sign (https://openstax.org/r/77scarfsign) for more information on how
      to perform this part of the Ballard Assessment.

      Heel to Ear
      In assessing heel to ear, the nurse places the newborn supine and flexes a lower extremity laterally alongside the
      body with the palm of their hand. The nurse pulls the newborn's foot toward the ear of the same side until resistance
      is felt. A very preterm newborn's leg will remain straight, and the foot will go to the ear or beyond. With increasing
      gestational age, the newborn will demonstrate resistance to this maneuver.

              LINK TO LEARNING

      Review these visual instructions on performing the heel-to-ear assessment (https://openstax.org/r/
      77heelearmsrmnt) for more information on how to perform this part of the Ballard Assessment.

      Determining the Newborn's Placement on the CDC Weight Scale
      Once the gestational assessment is complete, the nurse will plot the gestational age with the newborn's length,
      head circumference, and weight on the appropriate growth chart from the World Health Organization's growth charts
      to determine if these measurements fall within range, the 10th to the 90th percentile for the corresponding
      gestational age based on gender. The placement of the newborn's data on this growth chart is imperative to
      monitoring the infant's weight gain and growth over the first year. The ranges for measurements are grouped as
      follows:

          · small for gestational age (SGA): a newborn whose weight and/or length measures below the 10th percentile
              compared to all other newborns their age, according to the CDC growth chart

          · appropriate for gestational age (AGA): a newborn whose weight and/or length measures within the 10th and
              90th percentile compared to all other newborns their age, according to the CDC growth chart

          · large for gestational age (LGA): a newborn whose weight and/or length measures above the 90th percentile
              compared to all other newborns their age, according to the CDC growth chart. (For information on special care
              of the LGA newborn born to a parent with gestational diabetes, see 25.2 Congenital, Genetic, and Acquired
              Complications.)

              CULTURAL CONTEXT

      Cultural Norms Surrounding the Weighing of the Newborn

      Most cultures have traditions or beliefs surrounding childbirth and newborn care. One tradition that postpartum

      Access for free at openstax.org
23.2 · Estimation of Gestational Age of the Newborn and Newborn Behavioral Assessment                                       1023

nurses may encounter with Hindu parents concerns the weighing of newborns. Nearly two-fifths of Hindu mothers
have concerns about babies being weighed regularly or being weighed in front of people. In a survey about this
practice, 64 percent of the women said the newborn could not be weighed in front of anyone except the doctor, 27
percent said they did not want the newborn weighed frequently, and 9 percent said they did not want the infant
weighed at all in the hospital for fear that the infant would get ill (Upadhayay et al., 2012). It is always best practice
for the nurse to assess for any cultural beliefs and practices before doing procedures with the newborn.

Behavioral Assessment of the Newborn: The Brazelton Neonatal Behavioral Assessment

The first few days after birth are a period of behavioral disorganization for the newborn as they adjust to the outside
world and its new noises, smells, and sounds. In utero, the newborn only knew muffled sounds and no light or
smells; now the newborn is in a sensory-overload environment. As a result, the personality of their newborn may not
be readily apparent until day 2 or 3, when they have adjusted to their new environment.

The Brazelton Behavioral Assessment is a psychologic assessment completed on a newborn to assess their
capabilities for social relationships (Chin & Teti, 2013). The Brazelton Behavioral Assessment should be completed
by the nurse on the second or third day post birth to elicit the best response from the newborn. As newborns are
often discharged at 24 hours of life, this assessment may not be performed prior to discharge. This assessment
should be completed in a warm, quiet room with as much involvement from the parents as the nurse can
incorporate to facilitate parental attachment. The results are relevant up to 2 months of age. The concepts from this
behavioral assessment tool have been used by nurses to plan care regarding interactions between newborns and
their parents, especially those who are at risk for delayed attachment styles (Chin & Teti, 2013). This assessment's
scale identifies individual differences based on levels of stimulation, handling, and interactions between the
newborn and the parent. Four categories are assessed: interactive processes, motoric processes, organizational
processes, and physical response to stress. The response is identified as exceptionally good, average, or poor in
each of the categories.

The newborn must be in the quiet, alert state when the assessment is performed. The selected maneuvers in the
Brazelton scale include having the newborn fix, follow, and find the source of noise and visual stimuli, such as a face
or an inanimate object. Demonstrating that the newborn recognizes the parents' voices and will turn toward them
rather than a stranger's voice is exciting and reassuring for the parents or caregivers to see. During the assessment,
the nurse can provide strategies for handling the newborn, soothing and comforting, and pointing out when the
newborn is self-soothing. The Brazelton assessment includes four categories, Dimensions I through IV.

Dimension I: Interactive Process
Dimension I: Interactive Process includes assessment of alertness, orientation, and responsiveness to visual and
auditory cues. The newborn would receive an exceptionally good score if they could stay alert and focused for most
of a 30-minute exam. The newborn would need to focus on an object, turn their head and follow it, and turn their
head toward an auditory sound they recognize, like a parent's voice. A poor score would be given if the newborn did
not recognize and acknowledge the auditory cue by turning their head, could not stay awake, and/or was crying and
couldn't be consoled (Basdas et al., 2018).

Dimension II: Motoric Process
Dimension II: Motoric Process focuses on motor tone and the newborn's activity level. The newborn would score
exceptionally well if they had good tone when they were touched or handled by the examiner or parent, could relax
in between those interactions, and if they had good reflexes with moderate activity. The newborn would also show
head control, hand-to-mouth activity, and no hyper- or hypotonic movements. If the newborn had hyper- or hypo-
reflexes, hypo- or hypertonic movements, poor head control, low activity or inconsolability, jerking, tremors, or other
immature movements, this would be reflected in poor scores (Basdas et al., 2018).

Dimension III: Organizational Process
Dimension III: Organizational Process assesses the newborn's ability to achieve and maintain a state of alertness,
not be irritable, and not be disturbed by stimuli. To obtain exceptionally good scores, the newborn will need to stay
alert and, when drowsy, shut down body responses to stimuli (Basdas et al., 2018). The newborn will demonstrate
self-quieting techniques, return to alertness after crying, and have low irritability. Conversely, high irritability or
excessively depressed mood would result in low scoring. Flat, depressed newborns would appear drowsy when they
1024  23 · Newborn Assessment

      were encouraged to wake and be irritable to unpleasant stimuli. High irritability newborns would demonstrate mood
      swings, inconsolability, and an inability to self-soothe (Basdas et al., 2018).

      Dimension IV: Physical Response to Stress
      Dimension IV: Physical Response to Stress is focused on physical symptoms in the newborn related to being
      handled and dressed. If the newborn cries and has significant changes in skin color, a slow recovery of good color, or
      is startled frequently, this would indicate a poor score. A newborn who has no skin color changes or whose skin
      recovers quickly from color changes is experiencing good reactions to stress and therefore will receive good scores
      (Basdas et al., 2018).

      Implications and Mitigating Factors for Poor Behavioral Assessment Scores
      Some identifiable reasons exist for newborns to score poorly on the behavioral scale and be identified as high-risk.
      For example, those who are born preterm are more likely to sleep for longer periods. But much more research needs
      to be done in this area of maternal-child health (Malak et al, 2021). Low-scoring newborns may be hard to wake up
      to feed, may not bond with parents as easily as other newborns, may have poor breast-feeding initiation and
      6-month success rates, and may require early intervention and follow-up (Basdas et al., 2018). Some causal factors
      for poor scores on the behavioral scale can be phototherapy treatments, excessive maternal medications, low birth
      weight, young parents, inattentive parenting, inappropriate parental perceptions of infant behaviors, or newborns
      born to people with narcotic addiction (Basdas et al., 2018).

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            23 · Summary 1025

Summary

23.1 Physical Assessment of the Newborn

It is important for the nurse to know how to complete a comprehensive and accurate physical assessment on a
newborn. Performing the physical assessment with the new parents in the room is a good opportunity for the nurse
to educate the parents on safety issues in handling and caring for their newborn. New parents and even experienced
ones will look to the nurse for guidance before discharge about how to integrate the newborn into their family, how
to feed and soothe their newborn, and how to recognize when their newborn needs help. The nurse's assessment
should always work from the least invasive to the more invasive to avoid irritating the newborn and to maintain
thermoregulation. Assessment begins with passive observations, then moves into a hands-on physical examination.
The nurse should have a broad knowledge base of expected findings in a newborn, including weights and
measurements, vital signs, commonly elicited reflexes, and expected and unexpected variations to look out for.
Nurses are the experts in newborn care and should advocate for safe, timely discharge home for the newborn and
their family.

23.2 Estimation of Gestational Age of the Newborn and Newborn Behavioral Assessment

A complete newborn assessment must consider the gestational age of a newborn. While that can be obtained by the
date of a pregnant person's last menstrual period, there are times when that is not accurate or is unknown. At those
times, the nurse can utilize the Ballard scoring tool to determine the newborn's approximate gestational age,
allowing the clinical team to be prepared for any age-related issues that the newborn may experience. One of the
greatest responsibilities of the nurse in caring for a newborn and their family is health promotion and risk reduction,
which is the purpose of estimating gestational age.

The Brazelton Neonatal Behavioral Assessment gives nurses an opportunity to assess the newborn's personality but
also to assess the bonding that is (or is not) occurring between the parents and the newborn. Early intervention and
a referral to a social worker is key if there is a problem, and providing resources before the couplet leaves the
hospital is best practice. Additionally, this assessment gives the parents time to observe and interact with their
newborn's personality for the first time, while allowing the nurse one more chance for anticipatory guidance and
discharge education.

Key Terms

adrenogenital syndrome (also: congenital adrenal hyperplasia) syndrome in which excessive amounts of
    androgen and other hormones secreted by the adrenal gland can present as edema of the genitalia

anterior fontanelle larger of the two fontanelles, located in the anterior of the fetal skull, diamond shaped
apnea condition occurring when breathing has stopped for 20 seconds or longer
appropriate for gestational age (AGA) newborn whose weight and/or length measures within the 10th and the

    90th percentile compared to all other newborns their age, according to the CDC growth chart
arm recoil part of the Ballard estimation of gestational age assessment, assessing passive flexor tone of the

    biceps
Ballard Score (also: estimation of gestational age by maturity rating) tool developed by Ballard that measures

    physical and neuromuscular findings to determine the approximate gestational age of the newborn
Barlow maneuver assessment of the newborn for congenital hip dysplasia done by adducting the hip while

    applying pressure on the knee to direct the force posteriorly
brachial palsy partial or complete paralysis of portions of the arm resulting from trauma to the clavicle during the

    birth process
Brazelton Behavioral Assessment comprehensive psychologic assessment completed on a newborn to assess

    their capabilities for social relationships
caput succedaneum benign condition that crosses the suture lines in which edema is observed on a newborn's

    scalp shortly after birth and is related to trauma during the delivery
cephalohematoma condition in which there is an accumulation of serosanguineous or bloody fluid below the

    periosteum of the skull that does not cross the suture line, typically from an instrument-assisted birth
cryptorchidism condition in which the testes do not descend
dermal melanocytosis bluish-gray spots of the skin occurring on the back across the shoulders, hips, near the
1026 23 · Assessments

    buttocks, and legs (formerly called Mongolian spots)
Dimension I: Interactive Process assesses the newborn's alertness, orientation, and responsiveness to visual and

    auditory cues
Dimension II: Motoric Process assesses the newborn's motor tone and activity level
Dimension III: Organizational Process assesses the newborn's ability to achieve and maintain a state of

    alertness, not be irritable, and not be disturbed by stimuli
Dimension IV: Physical Response to Stress assesses physical symptoms in the newborn in response to being

    handled and dressed
epispadias condition in which the urethral meatus is located on the dorsal side of the penis
Epstein pearls small, firm, white cysts containing keratin that are sometimes found on the gums of a newborn's

    mouth
erythema toxicum normal newborn rash abruptly occurring as yellow or white papules over an erythematous base

    on the newborn's body except the palms; occurs in 30 percent to 70 percent of newborns
fontanelle soft spot located on the newborn's head where the cranial bones meet and leave openings to allow for

    molding of the head during birth
frenulum tiny fold of mucous membrane that runs from the floor of the mouth to the midline of the tongue's

    underside
hydrocele condition in which there is a collection of fluid in the scrotal sac
hypospadias condition in which the urethral meatus is located on the ventral side of the penis
imperforate anus condition in which the opening to the anus is missing or blocked
lanugo fine, soft hair that covers the newborn's back, shoulders, cheeks, forehead, and scalp; more common in

    newborns that are born early and often disappears within 4 weeks after birth
large for gestational age (LGA) newborn whose weight and/or length measures above the 90th percentile

    compared to all other newborns their age, according to the CDC growth chart
meconium ileus condition in which there is no passage of meconium in the first 24 to 48 hours after birth
milia exposed sebaceous glands that look like baby acne on the newborn's face, nose, or chin, or all three
neonatal jaundice condition that arises from an excess of bilirubin in the blood due to an increase in breakdown of

    red blood cells and that manifests in a newborn as a yellowish discoloration of the skin, sclera, and mucous
    membranes
Ortolani maneuver assessment of the newborn for congenital hip dysplasia done by placing anterior pressure on
    the greater trochanters, then gently and smoothly abducting the newborn's legs
phimosis condition in which the opening of the foreskin is small and cannot be pulled back over the tip of the penis
polydactyly condition in which there are more than five digits in the newborn's hands
posterior fontanelle smaller of the two fontanelles, located at the junction of the parietal bones and the occipital
    bone on the fetal skull
small for gestational age (SGA) newborn whose weight and/or length measures below the 10th percentile
    compared to all other newborns their age, according to the CDC growth chart
square window sign part of the Ballard estimation of gestational age assessment, assessing passive flexor tone of
    the biceps muscle
strawberry hemangioma raised capillary nevi, occurring anywhere on the body, that often increase in size for the
    first few months of life, slowly decreasing in size over time, and disappearing by 10 years of age
syndactyly condition in which there is a presence of webbing or fusion of fingers or toes
telangiectatic nevus (also: stork bite) pale pink or reddish discoloration at the base of the neck, lower axilla,
    around the nasal bridge, and on the eyelids
tongue-tie (also: ankyloglossia) abnormally short frenulum or a frenulum that is attached near the bottom of the
    tongue
vernix caseosa cheesy, white substance covering and protecting the skin during intrauterine life; coverage at birth
    directly related to gestational age

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. A new parent asks the nurse why the 36-hour-old newborn has a yellow skin tint. What should the nurse
        explain to the parent?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                  23 · Assessments 1027

       a. The newborn's liver is not functioning as well as it should.
       b. The yellow color indicates possible brain damage.
       c. The infant's bowels are not excreting bilirubin.
       d. The color is a sign of physiologic jaundice, a normal finding.

2. At birth, a newborn weighed 6 pounds, 12 ounces. Three days later, the newborn weighs 5 pounds, 10
    ounces. What conclusion should the nurse draw regarding this newborn's weight?
       a. This weight loss is within normal limits.
       b. This weight gain is within normal limits.
       c. This weight loss is excessive.
       d. This weight gain is excessive.

3. The nurse is completing an initial assessment of the newborn. The newborn's ears appear to be parallel to the
    outer and inner canthus of the eye. How does the nurse document the ear placement?
       a. low set
       b. high set
       c. a normal position
       d. facial paralysis

4. A new parent is concerned about a mass on the newborn's head. The nurse assesses this to be a
    cephalohematoma based on what characteristics?
       a. The mass just appeared.
       b. The mass is on one side of the head and does not cross suture lines.
       c. The head is boggy and the crosses suture lines.
       d. The mass increases when the infant cries.

5. What condition can result from a long, difficult labor and is characterized by a localized, soft area on the
    newborn's head?
       a. caput succedaneum
       b. molding
       c. depressed fontanelles
       d. cephalohematoma

6. During an assessment of a 12-hour-old newborn, the nurse notices pale pink spots on the nape of the neck.
    How does the nurse document this finding?
       a. nevus vasculosus
       b. Mongolian spots
       c. nevus flammeus
       d. telangiectatic nevi

7. How would the nurse elicit a rooting reflex in a newborn?
       a. Gently rub a finger on the side of the newborn's cheek.
       b. Put a finger into the palm of the newborn's hand and wait for them to grab on.
       c. Put a gloved finger into the newborn's mouth and stimulate the roof.
       d. Grab both arms, pulling upward, and let them go, watching for a startle response bilaterally.

8. The nurse notices that a 6-hour-old newborn patient's urethral opening is on the dorsal side of the penis. The
    nurse knows that this is called what?
       a. hypospadias
       b. epispadias
       c. phimosis
       d. unispadias
1028 23 · Assessments

    9. The nurse is completing a gestational assessment on a newborn whose parent was treated for preeclampsia
        during labor. The neonate is demonstrating "frog-like" posturing. The nurse knows this is likely due to what
        medication during labor?
           a. fentanyl in the epidural
           b. penicillin for treatment of group B strep infection
           c. magnesium sulfate for treatment of preeclampsia
           d. prenatal vitamins

  10. The nurse knows that a full-term newborn presents with ears that include what assessment characteristics?
           a. slightly curved pinna; soft; slow recoil
           b. well-curved pinna; soft; ready recoil
           c. thick cartilage, ear stiff
           d. pinna flat, stay folded

  11. The nurse is assessing a newborn girl born at 40 weeks of gestation based on the parent's LMP. What
        assessment finding of the genitalia confirms this gestational age?
           a. labia majora covering clitoris and labia minora
           b. clitoris prominent, labia minora enlarged
           c. small labia minora, clitoris enlarged
           d. labia majora enlarged, labia minora small

  12. What are the characteristics of a 40-week preterm newborn male's genitalia?
           a. scrotum empty, faint rugae
           b. testes in upper canal, rare rugae
           c. testes down, appropriate rugae
           d. testes pendulous, deep rugae

  13. When assessing the newborn for the presence of lanugo, where should the nurse look for it?
           a. on the newborn's face
           b. on the newborn's extremities
           c. on the newborn's back near their buttocks
           d. on the newborn's back between the scapulae

  14. The nurse is assigned to the postpartum room of a 12-hour-old neonate, and the EHR has a task reminder
        prompting the nurse to complete a Brazelton assessment on the newborn. Why is this not appropriate?
           a. This newborn has been born to a person who is placing the infant up for adoption.
           b. This newborn has been born to a person who birthed by cesarean section.
           c. This newborn is only 12 hours old.
           d. This newborn is experiencing pathologic jaundice.

  15. The nurse is assigned to the room of a 15-year-old person who gave birth to a newborn 72 hours ago. Why is
        this newborn a perfect candidate for the Brazelton assessment?
           a. This parent-newborn couplet is at risk for delayed attachment.
           b. The newborn is likely going home soon.
           c. The EHR is prompting her to do so.
           d. The infant is likely withdrawing from a substance.

  16. What categories are in the Brazelton assessment? Select all that apply.
           a. interactive process
           b. organizational process
           c. behavioral process
           d. motoric process

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       23 · Assessments 1029

  17. The nurse knows that during the interactive process of the Brazelton assessment, the newborn will receive an
        exceptionally good rating by reacting to what? Select all that apply.
           a. turns their head toward a familiar voice
           b. stays awake
           c. focuses on an object
           d. cries inconsolably

  18. The nurse knows that during the motoric process, the newborn will be rated poorly if they do what?
           a. They have good reflexes.
           b. They have hyper- or hypotonic movements.
           c. They have good head control.
           d. They have moderate activity levels.

  19. The nurse knows that during the organizational process, the newborn will be rated as exceptionally good if
        they do what? Select all that apply.
           a. They will remain alert.
           b. They will be highly irritable and demonstrate mood swings.
           c. They will demonstrate self-soothing and quieting techniques.
           d. The newborn will shut down body responses to stimuli when drowsy.

  20. The nurse knows that newborns that are high-risk for delayed attachment with their parents/caregivers are at
        risk for what? Select all that apply.
           a. poor breast-feeding initiation
           b. not bonding with their parents
           c. hard to wake to feed
           d. not feeling happy

  21. When the nurse determines they have a high-risk newborn and birthing person in their care, what can they do
        to mitigate the situation?
           a. Document in the chart.
           b. Reassure the parent that everything will be fine.
           c. Refer the couplet to social work for early intervention.
           d. Refer to a pediatric health-care provider for well-baby checkup.

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. Why is it important that newborns with hypospadias and epispadias not be circumcised until they are seen by
        a pediatric urologist?

    2. A full neurologic assessment of a newborn includes evaluation of each newborn reflex. List the newborn
        reflexes and the expected finding for each.

    3. A newborn is feeding and acting fussy when the nurse walks into the room to complete a Ballard Assessment.
        What should the nurse know about timing the Ballard Assessment?

    4. Explain why it is important that the nurse not perform the Ballard Assessment on a newborn that is possibly
        withdrawing from substances.

    5. Summarize why the nurse must wear gloves the entire time they are completing an assessment on a newborn
        that has not yet had a bath post birth.

    6. Describe two reasons the nurse would want to perform a behavioral assessment on a newborn before
        discharge home.

    7. After completing a physical assessment and noting weight and measurements, the nurse completes a Ballard
        Assessment on a newborn.
1030 23 · Assessments

                                 SIGN             SCORE

                                 Posture          3

                                 Square Window    2

                                 Arm Recoil       3

                                 Popliteal Angle  3

                                 Scarf Sign       3

                                 Heel to Ear      2

                             TOTAL SCORE

TABLE 23.4 Neuromuscular Maturity Scoring

                                 SIGN             SCORE

                                 Skin             2

                                 Lanugo           2

                                 Plantar Surface  3

                                 Breast           2

                                 Eye/Ear          2

                       Genitals (Male/Female)     2 female

                             TOTAL SCORE

TABLE 23.5 Physical Maturity Score

Based on the indicated scores, what overall maturity score would this newborn receive?

Reflection Questions

    1. As the nurse, how would you involve the new parents who are watching you complete the initial newborn
        assessment?

    2. As a nurse, how would you explain to new parents of a newborn the blueness in their child's hands and feet,
        which was present at birth?

    3. As a nurse, how would you respond to parents who ask why you are doing a gestational assessment on their
        infant?

Critical-Thinking Questions about Case Studies

    1. Refer to Newborn Care: Part 2.
        A nurse has stimulated Marcus's Moro reflex. The parents are present and ask when the reflex will go away.
        What is the nurse's best response?

           a. Moro, or startle, reflex is present at birth and usually disappears at around 2 months of age.
           b. The Moro, or startle, reflex is abnormal at birth and is present in toddlers.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          23 · References 1031

           c. The Moro, or startle, reflex is present at birth and remains present throughout life.
           d. The Moro, or startle, reflex is abnormal at all times.

    2. Refer to Newborn Care: Part 2.
        Marcus is assessed and found to have a weak or absent suck reflex. What could this be indicative of?

           a. an abnormal neurologic condition
           b. a sleepy presentation
           c. a fully fed newborn
           d. an abnormal HEENT condition

    3. Refer to Newborn Care: Part 2.
        Why is it important to perform a complete head-to-toe assessment on every newborn?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. While conducting a head-to-toe examination, you identify an abnormality in the newborn's musculoskeletal
        system. How would you integrate this finding into the overall care plan, considering potential impacts on vital
        signs and neurologic reactions?

    2. As a maternity nurse, you are assigned to care for a newborn with a history of maternal substance misuse.
        During routine vital sign assessment, you notice some abnormalities. How would you approach this situation,
        considering both the vital signs and the potential neurologic reactions?

    3. The health-care team needs to estimate the gestational age of a newborn using the Ballard estimation tool.
        Discuss the key physical and neurologic indicators you would assess and explain how these indicators
        contribute to determining gestational age.

    4. Working in a pediatrician's office, you are asked to determine a newborn's social adequacy and capabilities
        using the Brazelton Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale. Explain the key components of this assessment
        tool and how they contribute to understanding the newborn's social well-being.

References

Anekar, A. A., & Brodoni, B. (2022). Palmar grasp reflex. StatPearls [Internet]. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    31985926/

Ansong-Assoku, B., Shah, S. D., Adnan, M., & Ankola, P. A. (2022). Neonatal jaundice. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30422525/

Azevedo, I. G., Holanda, N. S. O., Arrais, N. M. R., Santos, R. T. G., Araujo, A. G. F., & Pereira, S. A. (2019). Chest
   circumference in full-term newborns: How can it be predicted? BMC Pediatrics, 19(1), 341. https://doi.org/
    10.1186/s12887-019-1712-3

Ballard Score. (2019). The Ballard Score Maturational Assessment of Gestational Age in Newly Born Infants.
    https://www.ballardscore.com

Ballard, J. L., Khoury, J. C., Wedig, K., Wang, L., Eilers-Walsman, B. L., & Lipp, R. (1991). New Ballard Score,
   expanded to include extremely premature infants. Journal of Pediatrics, 119, 417-423.

Ballard, J. L., Khoury, J. C., Wedig, K., Wang, L., Eilers-Walsman, B. L., & Lipp, R. (2014). Ballard Score Calculator.
    https://perinatology.com/calculators/Ballard.htm

Basdas, O., Erdem, E., Elmali, F., & Kurtoglu, S. (2018). The Brazelton Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale: A
   validity and reliability study in a Turkish sample. Turkish Journal of Medical Science, 48(2), 399-404.

Boyd, K. (2022, February 1). Vision development: Newborn to 12 months. https://www.aao.org/eye-health/tips-
    prevention/baby-vision-development-first-year

Buckner, E. B. (1983). Use of Brazelton Neonatal Behavioral Assessment in planning care for parents and newborns.
   Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nurses, 12(1), 26-30.
1032 23 · References

Callister, L. C., & Sudia-Robinson, T. (2011). An overview of ethics in maternal-child nursing. The American Journal
   of Maternal/Child Nursing, 36(3), 154-159.

Children's Hospital of Philadephia. (2022). Assessments for newborn babies. https://www.chop.edu/conditions-
    diseases/assessments-newborn-babies

Chin, F., & Teti, D. M. (2013, September). Infants at double jeopardy: Socioeconomic, medical, and attachment-
   based predictors of maternal engagement with an early intervention program. Infant Mental Health Journal,
   34(5), 420-434.

Cleveland Clinic. (2022, March 3). Meconium ileus. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/
    22448-meconium-ileus

Committee on Obstetric Practice, ACOG; American Academy of Pediatrics; Committee on Fetus and Newborn, ACOG.
   (2015). Committee Opinion Number 333: The Apgar Score. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 126, 52-55.
    https://doi.org/10.1097/00006250-200605000-00051

de Omena Filho, R. L., Petroli, R. J., Soardi, F. C., de Paula Michelatto, D., Mazzola, T. N., Fabbri-Scallet, H., de Mello,
   M. P., Zanotti, S. V., Gubert, I. C., Monlleo, I. (2022). Italian Journal of Pediatrics, 48(1), 89-94. https://doi.org/
    10.1186/s13052-022-01284-9

Desiraju, M. (2018, October). Your newborn's growth. https://kidshealth.org/en/parents/grownewborn.html

DiTomasso, D., & Cloud, M. (2019, November). Systematic review of expected weight changes after birth for full-
   term, breastfed newborns. Journal of Obstetic, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nurses, 48(6), 593-603.

Frothingham, S. (2020, October 28). What is the tonic neck reflex? https://www.healthline.com/health/baby/tonic-
    neck-reflex

Gardner, S. (2020, June). Assisted thermoregulation. https://www.rch.org.au/rchcpg/
    hospital_clinical_guideline_index/Thermoregulation_in_the_Preterm_Infant/

Hand, I., & Noble, L. (2022). Vitamin K and the newborn infant. Pediatrics, 149(3), 1-6.

Health Resources and Services Administration. (2023, December). Newborn screening process.
    https://newbornscreening.hrsa.gov/newborn-screening-process

Jensen, D., Wallace, S., & Kelsay, P. (1994). LATCH: A breastfeeding charting system and documentation tool.
   Journal of Obstetric, Gynecological, and Neonatal Nurses, 1(23), 27-32.

Johnson, P. A., & Schmölzer, G. M. (2020). Heart rate assessment during neonatal resuscitation. Healthcare (Basel,
   Switzerland), 8(2), 43. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare8010043

Kemper, A. R., Newman, T. B., Slaughter, J. L., Maisels, M. J., Watchko, J. F., Downs, S. M., Grout, R. W., Bundy, D. G.,
    Stark, A. R., Bogen, D. L., Holmes, A. V., Feldman-Winter, L. B., Bhutani, V. K., Brown, S. R., Maradiaga Panayotti,
    G. M., Okechukwu, K., Rappo, P. D., & Russell, T. L. (2022, September). Clinical Practice Guideline Revision:
   Management of hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics, 150(3),
    1-48.

Kondamudi, N. P., Krata, L., & Wilt, A.S. (2023, August 12). Infant apnea. StatPearls Publishing.
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK441969

Krone, N., & Arlt, W. (2009). Genetics of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Best Practice & Research Clinical
   Endocrinology & Metabolism, 23(2), 181-192. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2008.10.014

Levinson, B. (2020). Weight loss. American Academy of Pediatrics. https://doi.org/10.1542/aap.ppcqr.396125

Lipsett, B. J., Reddy, V., & Steanson, K. (2022). Anatomy, head and neck: Fontanelles. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31194354/

Lucock M. D. (2023). The evolution of human skin pigmentation: A changing medley of vitamins, genetic variability,
   and UV radiation during human expansion. American Journal of Biological Anthropology, 180(2), 252-271.
    https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.24564

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          23 · References 1033

Malak, R., Fechner, B., Sikorska, D., Rosolek, M., Mojs, E., Samborski, W., & Baum, E. (2021). Application of the
   Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale to evaluate the neurobehavior of preterm neonates. Brain Science,
   11(10).

Mattke, A. C. (2023, January 11). How much should I expect my baby to grow in the first year? Mayo Clinic.
    https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/infant-and-toddler-health/expert-answers/infant-growth/
    faq-20058037

Myron, M. M., Garner, T. A., Novak, C. M., Koblentz, A. R., Grieco, J. P., & Kline, S. K. (2017). Skin-to-skin contact, the
   new radiant warmer. Journal of Obstretric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nurses, 3(46), S47-S48.

Nichols, M. M. (1996) Routine chest measurement in the newborn. Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine,
   150(7), 771. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpedi.1996.02170320117028

QSEN Institute. (n.d.). QSEN competencies. https://www.qsen.org/competencies-pre-licensure-ksas

Ravi, D., Iacob, A., & Profit, J. (2021). Unequal care: Racial/ethnic disparities in neonatal intensive care delivery.
   Seminars in Perinatology, 45(4), 151411. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semperi.2021.151411

Remien, K., & Majmundar, S. H. (2022). Physiology, fetal circulation. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK539710/

Ro, A., Goldberg, R. E., & Kane, J. B. (2019). Racial and ethnic patterning of low birth weight, normal birth weight and
   macrosomia. National Library of Medicine, 118, 196-204.

Rosenberg, A. (2008). The IUGR newborn. Seminars in Perinatology, 32(3), 219-224. https://doi.org/10.1053/
    j.semperi.2007.11.003

Sarkaria, E., & Gruszfeld, D. (2022). Assessing neonatal pain with NIPS and COMFORT-B: Evaluation of NICU's staff
   competences. Pain Research & Management, 2022, 8545372. https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/8545372

Stanford Medicine, Childrens Health. (2022, January). Assessments for newborn babies.
    https://www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/topic/default?id=assessments-for-newborn-babies-90-P02336

Toney-Butler, T. J., & Unison-Pace, W. J. (2022). Nursing admission assessment and examination. StatPearls
    [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK493211/

Tveiten L, Diep L. M., Halvorsen T., & Markestad T. (2021). Heart rate during the first 24 hours in term-born infants.
   Archives of Disease in Childhood, Fetal and Neonatal edition, 106(5), 489-493. https://doi.org/10.1136/
    archdischild-2020-320761

Upadhayay, R. P., Singh, B., Rai, S. K., & Anand, K. (2012). Role of cultural beliefs in influencing selected newborn
   care practices in rural Haryana. Journal of Tropical Pediatriacs, 58(5), 406-408.
1034 23 · References
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 24

Care of the Typical Newborn

FIGURE 24.1 Nursing Care of the Newborn The nurse's care of the newborn is both patient- and family-centered: readying the newborn
for discharge and preparing their parents and support persons to care for them at home. The postpartum or newborn nurse provides
education and identifies any problems before the infant is discharged to home. (credit: "Newborn Baby Lee" by Joanne Lee/Flickr, CC BY
4.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
24.1 Basic Newborn Care
24.2 Care of Common Problems in the Newborn
24.3 Newborn Discharge Planning and Parent Education

INTRODUCTION The early days, weeks, and months of a baby's life are crucial for their growth and development
and their overall well-being. Caregivers, parents, and health-care professionals require a comprehensive
understanding of newborn care, encompassing various aspects such as hygiene, feeding, sleep patterns, soothing
techniques, and general health assessments like newborn screening. Recognizing signs of illness, knowing when to
call the provider, identifying variations from normal, and understanding the importance and timing of immunizations
are also important for newborn care. By gaining knowledge in these critical areas, nurses can confidently navigate
the challenges of newborn care, ensuring the well-being and healthy development of these vulnerable persons.

24.1 Basic Newborn Care

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Identify universal care items for the newborn
    · Describe successful infant feeding along with the preparation and storage of both formula and breast milk
    · Describe the expected voiding and stooling pattern of a newborn, including that of a breast-fed newborn

        and a formula-fed newborn
    · Discuss circumcision care in the newborn and when to notify the physician if a problem occurs
A nurse's responsibility in any scenario is multifaceted. In caring for the birthing parent and newborn after birth,
1036  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      basic newborn care is a priority. At this time, new families are experiencing a myriad of emotions. They are thrilled
      and excited, exhausted and exhilarated, anxious and confident all at the same time. What they want and need is
      gentle, reassuring guidance from their nurse, informing them that their feelings are perfectly normal and what they
      are doing is perfectly fine. The nurse can let the parents know that because their voices were audible to the fetus in
      utero, their baby learned to recognize them in the third trimester (Yale University, 2018). Therefore, after birth,
      newborns can recognize the parents' voices and those of siblings and other family members, depending on prenatal
      exposure. Information such as this helps to promote parental bonding and ease anxiety for new parents. Research
      also shows that as early as 1 week after birth, some newborns will turn their head toward a voice that they recognize
      to seek it out and will even recognize it in another room (Yale University, 2018). Therefore, parents should keep
      holding their baby close and talking softly to them.

      Safety questions will arise regarding prevention of newborn injury and timing of immunizations. Umbilical cord care
      and care of the circumcised and/or uncircumcised penis will also present as points for communication and
      education with the family. Probably foremost in the minds of parents is the issue of feeding because this comes up
      in the delivery room almost immediately after giving birth. Both breast-feeding and bottle-feeding mothers need
      assistance and teaching. The topic of what is normal for bowel movements for breast-fed and bottle-fed infants is
      another related topic. There is much for the maternal-newborn nurse to understand and to be able to teach the new
      parent about the basic care of the newborn.

      Protective Environment and Universal Well Newborn Care

      Immediately after birth, the nurse is responsible for essential newborn care, beginning with thorough drying. The
      baby's breathing is assessed after birth, and an Apgar score is assigned, usually by the nurse or by the provider who
      oversees the delivery. As part of the Apgar score, breathing and heart rate are assessed and, if needed, resuscitation
      is begun. (For an explanation of Apgar scores, see Chapter 22 Immediate Care of the Newborn.)

      The primary goal of care immediately after birth is to assist the newborn in their transition to extrauterine life by
      establishing effective respirations. If the baby appears stable, skin-to-skin contact with the birthing parent is
      initiated, and breast-feeding or chest-feeding, when feasible and desired, is begun. The newborn is wet with
      amniotic fluid, blood, and body fluids, so temperature regulation is also a priority, and protection from heat loss is
      essential. The nurse dries the infant thoroughly, removing all wet linen, and covers the newborn with warm, dry linen
      while the baby remains skin-to-skin or in the parent's arms. Research (Mardini et al., 2020) shows that delaying the
      baby's first bath, in addition to preventing hypothermia while maintaining body heat, is one way to protect the infant
      from infection. At birth, babies often have a white substance called vernix on their skin, which is made up of skin
      cells from earlier in development (Figure 24.2). Vernix helps to fight against bacterial infections such as those
      caused by group B streptococcus and Escherichia coli (E. coli), which can lead to pneumonia and meningitis. Vernix
      also helps to stabilize the baby's blood sugar levels by preventing the production of stress hormones in response to
      bathing too early. Delaying the first bath also provides more time for parents and baby to bond without interruption,
      which in turn promotes and supports a better start to breast-feeding.

      Access for free at openstax.org
24.1 · Basic Newborn Care                                                                                                             1037

         FIGURE 24.2 Vernix This newborn has vernix on the back and legs. (credit: "Vernix" by Upsilon Andromedae/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Before bathing, infants are covered in amniotic and maternal bodily fluids, as noted previously. Medical staff could
risk infection by any number of viruses and infections through exposure to these fluids. By following universal
precautions, the medical staff protect themselves and ensure a healthy and protective environment for the baby.
Universal precautions will continue to be used for both the birthing parent and baby, even after the baby's first bath.

Newborn screening begins at 24 to 48 hours after birth, while they are still hospitalized. All babies in the United
States get newborn screening after birth, with approximately 4 million babies being screened each year (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 2021b). Several drops of blood are obtained from a heel stick, and the
blood is sent to a laboratory, where it is analyzed for biochemical and genetic markers indicative of hidden
congenital disorders. If markers are found, follow-up programs exist so that the baby can receive immediate
medical attention and services to minimize the effects of the underlying disorder, which may be entirely
asymptomatic at this point.

Newborn screening consists of three essential components:

  1. Blood test: The primary element of newborn screening involves a blood test to detect uncommon yet severe
        health issues. These conditions, such as PKU (phenylketonuria), are rare and are mostly treatable. The nurse
        or other health-care provider will prick the baby's heel to obtain a small blood sample, which is then collected
        on specialized paper and dispatched to a laboratory for analysis. Typically, the results are available by the time
        the baby reaches 5 to 7 days of age. If parents are curious about the need for newborn screening, the nurse
        can provide the example of PKU, which is treatable but, if not diagnosed early, leads to severe cognitive
        impairment.

  2. Hearing screening: This examination aims to evaluate the baby's hearing capabilities and to identify potential
        hearing loss. Specialized computer equipment assesses the baby's response to auditory stimuli. If the initial
        results show no response, more in-depth hearing evaluations are done later in coordination with the primary
        care provider.

  3. Heart screening: This screening is intended to identify specific heart conditions referred to as critical
        congenital heart defects (also known as critical CHDs or CCHDs). It employs pulse oximetry, which measures
        the oxygen levels in the baby's blood using a pulse oximeter machine and sensors placed on the baby's skin.

        LINK TO LEARNING

To learn more about Critical Congenital Heart Defects Screening Methods (https://openstax.org/r/77heartdfctscrn)
available, see the algorithm and explanations of results at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
website.
1038  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      All newborns in the United States get newborn screening, but the specific requirements differ from state to state.
      Some states require that babies have newborn screening for a second time at about 1 to 2 weeks after their first
      screening.

              LINK TO LEARNING

      The National Newborn Screening and Genetics Resource Center (NNSGRC) (https://openstax.org/r/
      77NewbornscrnUS) lists conditions screened in newborns by U.S. states and territories.

      Preventing Infant Abduction
      Safety is an essential component of nursing instructions to new parents and is always a primary concern. The nurse
      is responsible for identifying the infant, even in emergent situations, at the time of delivery (even in the operating
      room, or OR), before the baby is removed from the room or taken to the nursery. This will occur even if the baby is
      transported to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). Identifying the newborn consists of placing two identification
      (ID) bands on the baby, usually one on each ankle, and one on the birthing parent's wrist at the time of birth. Exact
      placement of ID bands is dictated by hospital policy. The ID bands contain the following information: sex, date and
      time of birth, parent's last name, and doctor or midwife (Figure 24.3). An electronic security device with an
      imprinted number is placed on the infant, usually on the ankle. This device has the same identifying numbers as the
      other ID bands on the infant and parent, and it will sound an alarm at any of the unit exits for additional security. The
      device will be removed by the nurse at the time of discharge. Other methods for identifying the infant include
      footprints, usually taken at the time of delivery, along with the birthing parent's fingerprint.

      FIGURE 24.3 Identification Band Immediately after birth, (a) an identification band is placed on both the newborn and birthing parent as a
      safety measure. (b) An anti-theft device may also be placed on the infant's ankle. (credit a: "Newborn baby's foot with identification tag" by
      "rawpixel"/freerangestock.com, CC0; credit b: reproduced with permission from Regina Prusinski)

      Hospitals around the world are prepared to protect against infant abductions by using security systems. This
      requires that special tamper-detecting bands are placed on the infant, usually on an ankle, but sometimes on the
      cord clamp, depending on the manufacturer. These bands have a number, which matches a band placed on the
      parents of the infant. All hospital staff are instructed to check the ID bands for matching numbers prior to leaving
      the baby with the parents. All parents are directed not to leave the baby with anyone who does not have a hospital
      picture ID. The security ID band will sound an alarm when the infant is brought within a certain distance of any of
      the unit exits. When this happens, all exits lock immediately; security cameras activate on the unit, in stairwells, and
      at all exits. In addition, an immediate search to account for all newborns on the unit is undertaken by nursing staff
      and security. When parents are discharged to home with their baby, the ID bands are removed by the nurse with a
      special tool so that alarms do not sound when babies leave the unit.

      Common hospital safety instructions to parents include the following:

          · Never release your baby to anyone who does not have a hospital picture ID badge.

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      24.1 · Basic Newborn Care  1039

    · If you see anyone acting suspiciously on the unit, report them to the nursing staff or call hospital security with
        the phone in your room.

    · Never leave your baby unattended in your room. You can take your baby's crib into the bathroom with you or in
        the hallway with you.

    · If you are going to take a nap, ask the nurses to take your baby to the nursery if a family member is not in the
        room with you.

    · When the baby is in the room with you, position the crib on the side of your bed furthest and opposite from the
        door.

    · Do not sleep with the baby in the bed with you. Do not let your partner sleep with the baby in the bed with
        them.

    · Do not leave the infant alone on the bed or propped up on a pillow or with pillows.
    · Do not prop up the baby with a bottle of formula for feeding.
    · Do not leave your baby unattended in the arms of a child or sibling.
    · In the hospital and during your early weeks at home, wash your hands before handling your newborn. Your

        newborn is particularly susceptible to infection.

Immunizations
An immunization is the process by which someone becomes protected against a disease through injections into the
skin, nasal spray, or by mouth. The term can be used interchangeably with vaccination or inoculation. The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, 2023b) and the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP; 2023c) work
together each year to recommend the same carefully planned childhood vaccine schedule to protect infants and
children from vaccine-preventable diseases. Newborns receive their first vaccine shortly after birth, often while still
in the hospital. They will be given several vaccines during their first months. Following the recommended vaccine
schedule in the first months and years of life will keep them on track for life-long immunity to childhood diseases.
See Figure 24.4 for the current vaccine schedule from birth to 15 months of life.
1040  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      FIGURE 24.4 Recommended Immunizations The CDC and American Academy of Pediatrics recommend numerous vaccines between birth
      and 15 months of age for establishing lifelong immunity. These recommendations must be read with the notes published online with the
      schedule. For those who fall behind or start late, catchup vaccinations should occur at the earliest opportunity as indicated by the green
      bars. To determine minimum intervals between doses, see the catchup schedule. (credit: "Birth to 15 Months" by National Center for
      Immunization and Respiratory Diseases/cdc.gov, Public Domain)

      The hepatitis B vaccine is the first vaccine the baby will receive, most likely within the first 24 hours of life. The
      vaccination will be held and provided later if the newborn weighs less than 2 kg (4.4 lb). They will receive a second
      dose of the hepatitis B vaccine during their 2-month well-baby checkup and a third dose at 4 or 6 months to

      Access for free at openstax.org
24.1 · Basic Newborn Care                                                                                                1041

complete the three-dose vaccination series. Hepatitis B infection can cause slow, persistent liver damage in a child.
The virus is found in the blood and body fluids and can last on a surface for up to a month. This vaccine is
recommended for all babies to protect against infection, which can lead to complications such as chronic liver
disease, liver cancer, and even death (CDC, 2023b).

        LINK TO LEARNING

The Vaccine Information Sheet for the hepatitis B vaccine (https://downloads.aap.org/AAP/PDF/
immunization_refusaltovaccinate.pdf) should be given to new parents to read before their baby receives the
vaccine.

Nurses should share important facts with parents regarding vaccinations and prevention of diseases. These
medications go through rigorous safety testing before they are introduced to the public, and they are constantly
being monitored for side effects after they are introduced. Vaccines may cause mild side effects that will not last
long. After the infant receives a vaccine, the site may be sore for a day or two, or the infant may be irritable, but
vaccination is one of the most important things parents can do to protect their children against serious and
preventable illness.

Parents consider their health-care provider and staff, particularly nurses, to be the most trusted source of
information when it comes to the health of their newborns and vaccine information (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, 2021c). When discussing vaccines with parents, it is important to assume that they plan to
vaccinate their newborns. Discuss the vaccine schedule and which vaccines the baby is due to receive as if you
presume the parents are ready to accept the recommended vaccines for their child during that visit. For example,
rather than saying "Have you decided what you want to do about your baby's shots today?" say "Your child's DTaP,
Hib, and Hepatitis B vaccinations are scheduled today." Research shows that more parents accept vaccines for their
children, especially when offered the first time, when care providers take a presumptive approach in discussions
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2021c).

        LINK TO LEARNING

The CDC's recommended vaccine schedule for children and adolescents ages 18 years and younger
(https://openstax.org/r/77vaccinesched) is updated often and should be referred to prior to any vaccination plan.

If parents express vaccine concerns, then providers should share their strong recommendation. Because the
opinion of doctors and nurses is consistently valued highly, responses such as "This office strongly recommends
that your child get these vaccines today" or "I strongly believe in following this vaccine recommendation and have
vaccinated my own children with these vaccines at the same age" can be persuasive. You can also say, "Vaccines
are very important to protect children from serious diseases." When parents have vaccine-related concerns, the
nurse should show their willingness to listen. This will play a major role in building a foundation of trust in you and
your strong recommendations. Answer all their questions to the best of your ability.

Parents have the right to refuse vaccinations, and it is not appropriate for the nurse to argue with them. Try to end
the conversation at that visit on a positive note. Continue the conversation about vaccines during the next visit and
restate your strong recommendation. Discuss with the parents some clinical examples of vaccine-preventable
diseases, including early symptoms of such diseases. Remind parents that if the child remains unvaccinated, they
will need to call the office, clinic, or emergency department before visiting so that arrangements can be made to
prevent contact with other patients who may be too young to be vaccinated or who may have weakened immune
systems. Some providers have parents sign "AAP's Refusal to Vaccinate" form (see the following Link to Learning)
each time a vaccine is refused, to have a record of the refusal in the child's medical record. Because a parent has
refused a vaccine once does not mean that they will refuse every vaccine. Continue the conversation with vaccine-
hesitant parents. Encourage them to read information that you provide them and continue to remind them about the
importance of keeping their child up to date on vaccines during future visits.
1042  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

              LINK TO LEARNING

      Many pediatric providers have parents sign the AAP's form Documenting Parental Refusal to Have Their Children
      Vaccinated (https://openstax.org/r/77vaccinerefuse) for each vaccination refused.

      Umbilical Cord Care
      During pregnancy, the umbilical cord supplies the developing fetus with nutrients and oxygen. After birth, the
      umbilical cord is no longer needed, so it is clamped and cut, leaving a short stump and a clamp. The clamp is
      removed when the cord stump dries out and before the baby leaves the hospital. The umbilical cord stump will
      eventually dry up and fall off, usually within 1 to 3 weeks after birth. In the meantime, parents need to be taught
      how to care for the umbilical cord stump at home. Keeping the cord stump and surrounding skin clean and dry,
      which prevents infection and helps the stump to fall off and the navel to heal more quickly, is called cord care.

              CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

      QSEN Competency: Patient-Centered Care: Parental Instructions for Umbilical Cord Care

      Definition: Recognize the patient or designee as the source of control and full partner in providing compassionate
      and coordinated care based on respect for the patient's preferences, values, and needs.

      Knowledge: Describe strategies to empower patients or families in all aspects of the health-care process.

      Skill: Engage patients or designated surrogates in active partnerships that promote health, safety and well-being,
      and self-care management.

      Do not pull the stump off, even if it appears to be hanging on. Let the cord fall off naturally.

          · Sponge bathe the baby. No tub baths until the cord has fallen off on its own.
          · Keep the stump dry. Expose to air to help the cord dry at the base and separate.
          · Fold down the front of the baby's diaper to avoid covering the stump. If the stump gets soiled between diaper

              changes, wash with gauze and water only and air dry.
          · Watch for signs of a local infection at the stump site:

                foul-smelling, yellow drainage from the stump
                redness, swelling, or tenderness of the skin around the stump
                oozing pus
                development of a pink, moist bump in the surrounding area
          · Be aware of more serious signs of infection:
                poor feeding
                fever of 100.4° F (38° C) or higher
                lethargy
                floppy, poor muscle tone
          · When healing, the cord may scab at the stump, and it may bleed a little when it falls off. Both are normal. Any
              continuous oozing of blood is not normal, and the baby's health-care provider should be notified.
          · Sometimes instead of completely drying, the cord forms a pink scar tissue called a granuloma, or the
              granuloma drains a light-yellowish fluid. This will usually go away on its own in about a week. If it does not,
              the baby's health-care provider should be notified.
          · If the stump has NOT fallen off in 3 weeks, call the baby's health-care provider. This may be an indication of a
              problem such as an infection or an immune system disorder.

      (Pruthi, 2023)

      Knowledge: Value active partnerships with patients or designated surrogates in planning, implementation, and
      evaluation of care.

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      24.1 · Basic Newborn Care  1043

Umbilical Cord Problems
The umbilical cord should dry and fall off between 10 days and 2 weeks after birth. Parents may notice a few drops
of serous drainage or blood on the diaper around the time that the umbilical stump falls off. This is normal. If at any
time the umbilical cord or stump is actively bleeding, parents should be instructed to call their health-care provider
immediately, as it will require medical treatment. Cord infections are uncommon, but if caregivers notice any of the
following, they should notify their health-care provider:

    · foul-smelling yellowish discharge from the cord or stump
    · red skin around the base of the stump
    · crying when the cord or the skin around it is touched

Feeding the Newborn

The newborn period is a time of great nutritional need, greater than any other time in a person's life. The infant will
be entering a time of exponential growth and maturation in the upcoming year and will need the best nutritional
composition and health-promoting feedings possible to support and sustain them. Breast milk, or human milk, is the
ideal food for human infants (American Academy of Pediatrics [AAP], 2021c). For those birthing parents who cannot
or do not wish to breast-feed their newborns, infant formula is an acceptable and nutritious alternative to breast
milk (AAP, 2021c). Most commercially prepared infant formulas are based on cow's milk and have been modified to
closely resemble the nutritional composition of human milk. Both provide 20 kcal/ounce (30 mL) but vary in other
metrics of nutritional content.

Formula-Feeding
Parents and the infant's health-care provider will need to pay attention to the baby's pattern of feedings to make
sure they are getting enough to eat and are growing properly. Regular checkups and growth monitoring are the best
way to do this. Formula provides parents with an option to supplement maternal breast milk, as an additional
feeding method for the newborn if they desire. It allows others the opportunity to feed the newborn and provides
the nursing parent with respite from breast-feeding. Formula can be prepared ahead of time and can remain in a
refrigerator for up to 48 hours. If an infant is fed formula exclusively, there is no need for maternal breast pumping
or emptying if breast-feeding is missed. When formula-feeding, bottles, nipples, and clean water will be needed, as
will a place to store the equipment. If the caregiver is traveling, they will need to make bottles in advance. Formula
can be fed at room temperature, but it depends on what the individual infant is used to. Pacifiers may be introduced
immediately after the baby is born, which will provide nonnutritive sucking, decrease the risk of sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS), and provide comfort to the crying baby.

Formula Characteristics
Infant formula is easily accessible for purchase in the United States in pharmacies, grocery stores, warehouse clubs,
and via the Internet. One can purchase ready-to-use formula in bottles or in cans, and concentrated formula is also
available in liquid or powdered form. Concentrated liquid formula requires water to be added to it before it can be
fed to the baby. Powdered formula, also referred to as dry formula, must also be mixed with water before feeding it
to the baby. The scoop that comes with the formula must be used to measure the right amount of powder. Then, the
powder must be mixed with the correct amount of water.

No brand of formula is best for all babies, and not all babies have the same nutritional needs. The U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) regulates commercial infant formulas to make sure formulas meet minimum nutritional
and safety requirements. The CDC and the AAP strongly recommend using only infant formulas purchased in the
United States and those that are iron-fortified (CDC, 2022b; AAP, 2021c). Enfamil, Similac, and Gerber's Good Start
are three common formula brand names found in the United States, each offering many different varieties to meet
the individual nutritional needs of normal newborns as well as premature, special, or prescription formulas.

Parents can work with their infant's health-care provider to determine if these or other formulas are best for their
baby. When they find a formula that their baby tolerates well, it is best to use that brand only, without switching
between brands. Parents should notify their baby's health-care provider if the baby develops gas, a rash, diarrhea,
or vomiting. These may be signs that the formula is not right for their baby and that they may have to change to
another. This should be done with the guidance of the health-care provider. Their baby may have developed an
allergy to one of the ingredients of the formula. Neither homemade infant formulas nor formulas from outside the
1044  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      United States are recommended by the CDC or the AAP because these formulas are not regulated by the FDA, and
      their ingredients may not be trustworthy. These formulas also do not usually contain iron. Both homemade and
      foreign formulas have an increased risk of contamination, and thus are more likely to make babies ill with infection.

      There are three kinds of infant formula (AAP, 2022b; March of Dimes, 2019):

        1. Ready-to-use liquid formula. This formula is ready for infant consumption and can be poured directly into the
              baby's bottle. This is the "no-mix, no-measuring, no-fuss" method, but it is also the costliest.

        2. Concentrated liquid formula. This formula requires the addition of water, according to specific directions on
              the container before it can be fed to the baby. This is the "just add water and shake" option for formula. All
              brands of concentrate call for equal amounts of water and concentrate to reduce error in preparation (AAP,
             2022b). To make 4 ounces of prepared formula, you will need to mix 2 fluid ounces of concentrate with 2 fluid
             ounces of water. Concentrated formula is not as costly as ready-to-feed formula but is more costly than
              powdered formula. Once mixed, this formula can be refrigerated for up to 48 hours.

        3. Powdered formula (may also be referred to as dry formula). Most powdered formulas need to be used within 1
              month of opening the container (check label). Once a container has been opened, write the date on the lid as a
              reminder. Never use formula after the "use by" date on the container.

      Once mixed, formula needs to be used within 1 hour from the start of feeding and within 2 hours of preparation
      (AAP, 2022b; March of Dimes, 2019). If it is not going to be used within 2 hours, immediately store it in the
      refrigerator for up to 48 hours (AAP, 2022b). Any formula left in the bottle after a feeding should be discarded. The
      combination of formula and infant's saliva can cause bacteria to grow; therefore, "leftovers" should not be
      refrigerated or saved for another feeding.

      Safe Preparation of Formula in the Hospital
      In the United States, most hospitals use ready-to-feed formula when feeding infants. This formula requires no
      preparation, no unique storage, and is, as its name implies, "ready-to-feed." Infant formula is frequently supplied to
      hospitals and birthing centers free of charge by formula companies. This is a form of advertisement and promotion
      of their products to new parents. Care providers make the final decision about what formula an infant will receive
      while in the hospital, regardless of what formula has been donated or purchased.

      When an infant requires special formula--for example, lactose-free, hypoallergenic, or high-iron--the nurse may
      need to mix it from a powdered formula if it is not available in ready-to-feed bottles. If that is the case, hospitals
      strictly follow the protocol for mixing powdered formula, using sterilized (disposable) bottles and nipples as well as
      bottles of sterilized water. Bottles are filled with the correct amount of water before adding the powdered formula.
      An incorrect amount of water mixed with formula can be harmful to the infant. Formula mixed from powder must be
      disposed of within 1 hour of the start of the feeding. It can be stored in the refrigerator for only 24 hours after being
      mixed; therefore, bottles are marked with the name, date, and time before being refrigerated. Families that do not
      have access to clean running water or electricity must have alternative ways to safely mix and store formula.

              CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

      Competency: Safety: Preparing Powdered Infant Formula

      Definition: The preparation minimizes risk of harm to patients and providers through both system effectiveness and
      individual performance.

      Knowledge: Examine human factors and other basic safety design principles as well as commonly used unsafe
      practices (such as workarounds and dangerous abbreviations).

      Skill: Use appropriate strategies to reduce reliance on memory (such as forcing functions, checklists).

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             24.1 · Basic Newborn Care                    1045

Step  Make sure the container is not expired and is in good condition (no dents, puffy ends, or rust spots).
  1   Ensure that the container is labeled for infants, not toddlers. Toddler formulas are not safe for infants
      until they are 1 year of age. Store unopened formula containers in a cool, dry, indoor location--not in
      vehicles, garages, or outdoors.

Step  Clean the countertops and wash hands with soap and warm water before preparing bottles. Use a clean
  2   bottle and nipple.

Step  Use water from a safe source to mix with the formula. Tap water is usually safe but contact the local
  3   health department if unsure.

Step  Use the exact amount of water and formula listed on the instructions of the infant formula container.*
  4   Always measure the water first and then add the infant formula powder. Never dilute formula by adding
      extra water. This can make the baby sick.
      *NOTE: Most powdered formula is mixed according to the same recipe: 1 scoop of formula mixed with 2
      fluid ounces of water to make 2 ounces of formula (AAP, 2022b) unless otherwise specified by the
      provider.

Step  Shake infant formula in the bottle to mix. Do not stir.
  5

Step  Infant formula does not need to be heated before feeding. If you decide to warm the formula, place the
  6   bottle under running warm water or into a bowl of warm water for a few minutes. Avoid getting water into
      the bottle or nipple. This could contaminate the prepared formula. Test the temperature of the formula
      before feeding it to the baby by putting a few drops on the inside of your wrist. It should feel warm, not
      hot.
      Never warm infant formula in a microwave! Microwaving creates hot spots, which can burn a baby's
      mouth!

Step  After feeding, be sure to thoroughly clean the bottle and nipple before the next use.
  7

(AAP, 2022b)

Attitude: Value the contributions of standardization/reliability to safety.

Patient Education for Parents Who Are Formula-Feeding
Teach parents to watch for signs that their baby is ready to eat and, whenever possible, to begin their feeding before
the baby becomes agitated or begins to cry. Instruct parents to let the baby take breaks to catch their breath,
drinking when the baby seems to want to. The baby does not need to suck continuously.

Demonstrate how to hold the baby close when feeding them a bottle. Encourage parents to make eye contact with
and talk softly to the infant. This contact is important to bonding and the baby's overall socialization. Explain to
parents the importance of always holding the bottle for the baby while feeding. Propping the bottle in the baby's
mouth can increase the baby's risk of choking, ear infections, and later tooth decay. Teach parents not to put their
baby to bed with a bottle. Infant formula can pool in the baby's mouth and cause choking. Later, it can pool around
the baby's teeth and cause tooth decay. Instruct parents not to force the baby to finish their bottle. Let the baby be
the judge of when the feeding is over. See Table 24.1 for signs that an infant is full. Teach these signs to the parents
so that they know to stop the feeding, even if the bottle is not empty.

        LINK TO LEARNING

If an infant is younger than 2 months old, was born prematurely, or has a weakened immune system, caregivers may
1046  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      want to take extra precautions when preparing infant formula. The CDC provides guidance on how to keep infants
      safe from Cronobacter sakazakii (https://openstax.org/r/77Cronobacter) which may be found in powdered infant
      formula.

                Cues

      Hunger    Rooting: when baby turns head toward anything that touches the cheek or mouth
                Sucking movements or sounds
                Putting hand to mouth
                Crying, a late feeding cue; best to feed before baby starts crying, particularly if breast-feeding

      Fullness  Starts and stops feeding
                Spits out the bottle or breast
                Slows down or falls asleep
                Is difficult to wake
                Gets easily distracted

      TABLE 24.1 Feeding Cues in the Infant

      Newborns eat approximately 2 to 3 ounces of formula every 3 to 4 hours. If the infant sleeps longer than 4 to 5
      hours at a time, they need to be awakened for a feeding. By the end of the second month, they will eat at least 4
      ounces every 4 hours. By the time they are 6 months of age, they will be eating approximately 6 to 8 ounces 4 or 5
      times a day (March of Dimes, 2019).

      In the baby's first few days of life, many parents are concerned that their infant is consuming too little during
      feedings. Breast-feeding parents often feel they need to supplement with formula at this stage. However, the natural
      content of colostrum, the first breast milk produced in breast-feeding, paired with the anatomic size of a newborn's
      stomach is such that only a very small amount of colostrum is needed to satisfy the infant's nutritional needs (Figure
      24.5).

      FIGURE 24.5 Capacity of a Newborn's Stomach A newborn's stomach capacity on the first day after birth is only the approximate size of
      a cherry, to accommodate colostrum. It grows to be approximately the size of an egg by 1 month. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

      Access for free at openstax.org
                   24.1 · Basic Newborn Care                                                                                     1047

OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Breast-Feeding
The AAP (2021c) and CDC (2023a) recommend exclusive breast-feeding for the first 6 months of an infant's life. For
the benefits of breast-feeding, see Table 24.2. Updated AAP breast-feeding guidelines emphasize an urgent need
for nurses and other health-care workers to provide a patient-centered approach to broaden awareness of the
benefits of breast-feeding and to promote equitable care (Meek et al., 2022). Knowledge imparted by the nurse in
the immediate newborn period has a powerful influence on the breast-feeding parent and infant.

Successful lactation practices developed at this time can help prevent infant readmissions for dehydration or
hyperbilirubinemia and can promote overall infant health. They can also serve as an important promotion of self-
efficacy for the nursing parent, thereby improving breast-feeding success and duration. The establishment of
frequent and efficient infant feedings (8 to 12 feedings in 24 hours) of unlimited length, where the infant is
positioned properly and latched on, will promote an adequate supply of breast milk and prevent many common
breast-feeding problems (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2022b). Beyond the initial 6 months, the
AAP recommends that breast-feeding continue for as long as desired by parent and infant and be supplemented
with nutritious complementary foods as needed (AAP, 2022b; Scott & Kirkland, 2023). The most significant change
in the revised guideline is the length of breast-feeding time recommended by the AAP, which has increased from 1
year to 2 years and beyond on the condition that it remains desired by both parent and infant.

         Benefits

Infant   · Breast milk has the right amount of fat, sugar, water, protein, and minerals needed for a baby's
            growth and development. As the baby grows, the breast milk will change to adapt to the baby's
            changing nutritional needs.

         · Breast milk is easier to digest than formula.
         · Breast milk contains antibodies that protect infants from certain illnesses, such as ear

            infections, diarrhea, respiratory illnesses and allergies, asthma, atopic dermatitis, childhood and
            adult obesity, diabetes mellitus, childhood leukemia, SIDS, and hypertension. The longer the
            baby breast-feeds, the greater the health benefits.
         · Breast milk can help reduce the risk of many of the short-term and long-term health problems
            that can affect preterm babies.

Nursing  · Breast-feeding reduces the nursing parent's risk of breast and ovarian cancer.
parent   · Breast-feeding reduces the nursing parent's risk of type 2 diabetes.
         · Breast-feeding reduces the nursing parent's risk of high blood pressure.
         · Breast-feeding boosts production of oxytocin, which helps breast milk flow and can calm the

            nursing parent.
         · Breast-feeding may help nursing parents lose weight and return to prepregnant weight more

            quickly.
         · Breast-feeding is cost effective; formula-feeding is estimated to cost over $1,500 per year

            versus $0 for breast-feeding.
         · Breast-feeding may help nursing parents be more productive at work. Research shows that

            parents who breast-feed may miss less work to care for sick infants than those who feed their
            infants formula.
         · Breast-feeding results in lower medical costs and copays.
         · Breast-feeding is better for the environment, using no bottles, cans, or plastic waste.
         · Breast milk comes prepackaged and prewarmed

TABLE 24.2 Benefits of Breast-Feeding (Meek et al., 2022; Scott & Kirkland, 2023; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
2021a)

Breast Milk Characteristics
Breast milk is complex and specific. As the infant grows, the consistency and nutritional content of the milk change
to meet the ever-changing needs of the baby. Breast-feeding is the best nutritional choice to feed a newborn, but
1048  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      not all parents choose to or can breast-feed their infants for a variety of reasons. In the United States, prepared
      formulas are developed to meet the nutritional needs of infants and to be as close to breast milk as possible. When
      breast-feeding is not possible or not chosen as a feeding choice, nurses and physicians should be supportive of a
      family's choice to formula-feed their infant.

              CULTURAL CONTEXT

      Breast-Feeding Practices

      Breast-feeding practices differ from one culture to another around the world. The World Health Organization (WHO)
      breast-feeding statistics show that 41 percent of babies below 6 months of age experience exclusive breast-feeding
      (EBF). One major difference is the length of time that nursing parents breast-feed their infants. Culture often has an
      influence on this practice (Table 24.3).

      Country    Length of Breast-      Notes
                 Feeding

      Turkey     12-24 months           Only 1% of babies are NOT breast-fed. Paid parental leave of 46-56
                                        weeks encourages high breast-feeding rates.

      France     3-6 months             41% of mothers find it awkward to breast-feed in public.

      United     6-12 months            The United States has many support groups available to promote breast-
      States                            feeding for new mothers, but most hospitals provide free formula to
                                        parents at discharge.

      China      6-12 months            Research demonstrates that exclusive breast-feeding determinants
                                        include urban residence, mode and place of delivery, and where early
                                        initiation of breast-feeding took place, more so than the mother's wishes
                                        alone.

      Brazil     6-12 months            Brazil has the most milk banks globally, numbering over 200. The
                                        government bans advertising of infant formula.

      Hungary    6-12 months            7% of mothers find it awkward to breast-feed in public.

      Mexico     6-12 months            13% of mothers find it awkward to breast-feed in public.

      Canada     6-12 months            91% initiate breast-feeding after birth, but 40%-50% stop after 6
                                        months.

      India      Varies                 There is a widespread belief that colostrum is impure and dirty, and it is
                                        thus discarded. Infants are given formula the first few days of life. Some
                                        give infants hot water, tea, goat/cow milk, or honey, etc. Unpasteurized
                                        honey is unsafe for newborns.

      Guatemala  8-12                   Many believe colostrum is not clean and discard it, giving babies coffee,
                 months(exclusive       soda, and sugar water in the first days of life. Some breast-feed until
                 breast-feeding may     solids for financial reasons.
                 be due to financial
                 constraints)

      TABLE 24.3 Breast-Feeding Norms around the World (Expatica, 2023; Fey, 2022)

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                         24.1 · Basic Newborn Care                                                         1049

Country      Length of Breast-    Notes
             Feeding

Philippines  A high percentage    The government encourages breast-feeding for up to 6 months. It is illegal
             will practice mixed  to advertise infant formula.
             feeding (breast and
             formula).

Muslim       Approximately 2      Parents often see breast-feeding as a religious duty. The Qu'ran states
countries    years                that babies should be breast-fed by their mothers or a wet nurse for
                                  approximately 2 years.

TABLE 24.3 Breast-Feeding Norms around the World (Expatica, 2023; Fey, 2022)

It is important to let nursing parents know that longer feedings do not usually lead to sore nipples or breast-feeding
problems if the baby is latched-on properly. If nursing parents feel feedings are lasting too long or if nipples are
becoming sore, encourage evaluation by a lactation consultant.

Donor Breast Milk
With breast-feeding recommended exclusively for the first 6 months of life and with the possibility that it may
remain part of the nutritious diet for the first 2 years of age and beyond, it is important that breast milk be available
as a first alternative feeding choice for those infants who cannot or will not be breast-fed. Breast milk provides a
wide range of benefits for the infant, as mentioned in Table 24.2, that simply cannot be replicated by any other
source of nutrition. When the nursing parent has an insufficient volume of breast milk, pasteurized breast milk is a
viable option as an alternative feeding. Human milk banks exist throughout the United States and around the world.
It is important to note that human milk is species specific and considered superior to all other supplements or
alternatives.

Although cow-, goat-, and soy-based formulas have been made that approach the fat, protein, and carbohydrate
composition of breast milk, they do not replicate the complexity or purpose of the bioactive factors found in breast
milk (Canadian Paediatric Society, 2020; Quigley et al., 2019). Breast milk helps ensure optimal growth, immune
function, and neurodevelopment at minimal financial costs to families. Benefits are seen in both the short and long
term, with positive effects seen in both maternal and child health.

Preterm and ill infants may not be able to nurse directly at the breast from birth, but with appropriate and continued
support, they can begin to breast-feed when they become developmentally ready or stable enough. When breast-
feeding itself is not possible, the first choice is to feed expressed milk from the infant's own birthing parent. When
that parent's milk is not recommended, is unavailable, or is limited in volume, pasteurized donor human milk
(PDHM) from a regulated milk bank is recommended for supplementary, bridging, or replacement feedings (Quigley
et al., 2019). Most hospitals are connected to milk banks in the area in the event that pasteurized donor human milk
is requested for premature or ill infants or for mothers who are unable to breast-feed due to illness. Milk from
lactating persons who pump or express breast milk and donate it to a regulated breast milk bank following their
policies and procedures is called donor breast milk.

To donate to a breast milk bank, donors are first screened extensively. Guidelines vary by center, but in general,
donations are accepted only from donors who are seronegative for hepatitis B and C, human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), human T-cell leukemia virus (HTLV), SARS (COVID-19), and syphilis; do not take medications (with some
exceptions); and do not consume alcohol, tobacco, or cannabis or use illicit drugs (Canadian Paediatric Society,
2020). If a donor experiences illness or uses medication, they are temporarily excluded from donation. The centers
educate all accepted donors to ensure they follow safe breast milk handling techniques and storage.

        LINK TO LEARNING

"Breast is Best" is a global mantra started in 1991 by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations
1050  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      Children's Fund (UNICEF) after breast-feeding rates decreased in the 1980s, to help increase breast-feeding rates
      worldwide. "Fed is Best" (https://openstax.org/r/77FedIsBest) is the new mantra, launched in 2016. It is not meant
      to diminish the message that breast-feeding is still considered the best feeding choice but is meant to ensure that
      babies do not experience any complications due to a facility's protocols, and that parents do not feel shame for
      choosing other feeding options.

      Successful Breast-Feeding Patterns of the Newborn
      To ascertain successful breast-feeding, the nurse needs to assess the breast-feeding process. There are five
      common maternal-infant positions for breast-feeding (Murray, 2021); however, others may be used effectively
      based on the needs and preference of the person. The nurse's assessment of the infant at the breast focuses on the
      infant's latch, coordinated suck, and swallow during breast-feeding. The nurse first checks the placement of the
      infant's lips, gums, and tongue.

      Then, the nurse listens for the infant's swallowing pattern. After several sucks in a row, a soft "k" sound should be
      heard. This is easier to hear once the parent's milk is in and has let down, with copious milk secretion. Therefore,
      this may not be observed in the first 24 hours of life or prior to discharge of parent and infant.

      Finally, the nurse should observe the nipple shape immediately after the infant is removed from the breast. The
      nipple should be round. If a nipple is extended, with a shape resembling that of lipstick, that suggests a shallow
      latch and will lead to sore or damaged nipples.

      The general guidelines for latching on involve correct placement of the infant's mouth to ensure good stimulation for
      milk supply, promote good milk transfer to the infant, and decrease and/or prevent maternal nipple soreness. The
      steps of the procedure are as follows:

        1. Have the nursing parent stroke the center of the infant's top lip with the nipple to elicit a rooting reflex and
              wait for the infant to open mouth wide.

        2. With the infant's mouth wide open, the parent should pull the infant in close (using pressure on the infant's
              upper back and neck). Note that the breast should not be brought to the baby, but rather the baby should be
              brought to the breast.

        3. The nipple should be deep in the infant's mouth; more of the areola should be covered by the lower lip than by
              the top lip; both lips are flanged; chin is positioned deep into the breast, with infant's head tipped back slightly
              to clear the nose.

        4. The nursing parent can remove the infant from the breast by breaking the suction; insert a clean finger into the
              corner of the infant's mouth, between the infant's gums.

      The expected outcomes are as follows:

          · Infant's mouth is open wide, lips are not tucked or curled.
          · Infant's tongue is positioned under the breast.
          · Infant does not slip off the breast.
          · Infant demonstrates rhythmic sucking and swallowing.
          · The nursing parent has few or no complaints of sore nipples. Infant is satiated after feedings.

      To assist with and teach breast-feeding techniques, the nurse ensures that both the nursing parent and the infant
      are positioned comfortably. The parent should be made as comfortable as possible before the feeding begins. If
      they have recently delivered, particularly if they have had an operative delivery, provide pain medication as needed.
      Pain or an awkward position can interfere with the letdown reflex and cause the parent to tire easily. Be sure to
      provide privacy and prevent unnecessary interruptions. It is best to begin the feeding process when the infant shows
      feeding cues and before they are crying (which is a late cue to hunger). A crying infant is often difficult to settle,
      particularly because nursing parents often become anxious and unsettled themselves. The five commonly used
      maternal-infant breast-feeding positions (Murray, 2021) are described in detail here and shown in Figure 24.6. It is
      important to note that that these five positions are in no way inclusive, and many other positions can be utilized for
      breast-feeding as long as they are comfortable for both parent and infant and are conducive to the infant's
      successful latch, suck, and swallow at the breast.

          · Football-hold position: This may also be called the "clutch position." This position is frequently recommended

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                 24.1 · Basic Newborn Care  1051

   to nursing parents after cesarean birth or to those with a premature infant because it offers good control of the
   infant with little or no abdominal pressure for the parent. The infant is placed on a pillow at the parent's side.
   The parent supports the infant's upper back with their arm and supports the infant's neck in their hand. The
   infant's head is level with the breast. It is important that the infant's body is turned toward the parent in a
   belly-to-body position, rather than looking upward, and that the infant's head and body are in alignment
   (facing the same direction) facing the parent. If the head is facing the breast but the body is facing upward, it
   is difficult if not impossible to swallow, and feeding will not happen. Have the parent use their opposite hand
   to support the breast, fingers off the areola, with the index finger under the breast. The palm should remain
   facing the rib cage, and the nipple should gently tip down toward the infant's mouth. Steps for successful
   latch-on can continue at this point forward.
· Cradle-hold position: For the cradle-hold position the parent positions the infant's body across the front of
   their own, with the infant's head at or near the antecubital space and level with their nipple. The parent's arm
   is supporting the infant's body, with the baby lying belly-to-belly with the parent and the infant's bottom
   shoulder tucked in slightly closer to the parent's stomach than the top shoulder. The parent grasps the infant's
   bottom and tucks the infant's lower arm next to the parent's stomach. The parent's other hand is free to
   support the breast in a "C" hold, fingers behind the areola, index finger under the breast. The parent lifts from
   under the breast until the nipple is directly in front of the infant's mouth; the parent should continue to
   support the breast during the early weeks of breast-feeding.
· Cross-cradle hold position: This position is similar to the cradle-hold position in that the infant is placed
   across the nursing parent's stomach as in the cradle hold but is held with the parent's opposite hand placed at
   the infant's upper back, supporting the back of the infant's neck. Once again, the infant is belly-to-belly with
   the parent and is held close by tucking the parent's forearm around the infant's bottom and pulling the infant
   close. The other hand supports the breast with the thumb coming up from the bottom of the breast. The nipple
   should be gently tipped toward the infant's mouth. At this point, the parent follows the tips for successful
   latch-on. The cross-cradle hold offers the parent more control over the infant's position than the cradle-hold.
· Prone position: In this position, the nursing parent is semi-reclined with head, neck, and body supported by
   the bed or the chair. The infant is placed on the parent's body in a way that allows the front of the infant's body
   to be in full contact with the parent's body. The infant's head is at the nipple, and the infant is allowed to self-
   attach to the breast. The parent (or an assistant, as needed) supports the infant on the body to maintain the
   ideal position and for safety. The infant's chin position is allowed to gently extend to allow proper mouth and
   chin placement with latch-on.
· Side-lying position: Nursing parents need to be well supported in this position. Infants are placed on their
   side, facing the parent (belly-to-belly) with their head and body in alignment. Parent and baby may require a
   pillow or blankets behind their backs to maintain this position during learning. Have the parent support the
   breast with the opposite hand (the top one), while the other hand (the bottom one) either supports the
   parent's head or cradles the baby, depending on the parent's preference. With the breast supported, the
   parent pursues a successful latch-on. For safety, it is important that the parent does not fall asleep in this
   position while feeding the baby. This position is often preferred for parents who have had an operative
   delivery.
1052  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      FIGURE 24.6 Breast-Feeding Positions The (a) football, (b) cradle, (c) cross-cradle, (d) prone, and (e) side-lying positions are considered
      the five basic breast-feeding positions, although many more exist. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
      license)

      To make the nursing parent more comfortable, pillows can be used behind the back, over the abdominal incision (if
      present), and to support the arms. It is important that the parent's shoulders be relaxed, and they should not be in a
      hunched position. Pillows or blankets can be used to elevate the infant to the level of the nipple to prevent pulling
      and tension on the nipple, which will cause sore, cracked, and broken-down nipples.

      Healthy infants are generally alert and active at the breast, particularly at the beginning of a feeding. If the baby is
      sleepy and has already gone 2 to 3 hours since the last nursing session, the nursing parent should be encouraged to
      frequently massage their breasts in a downward motion while feeding and arouse their baby to ensure adequate
      breast emptying. Providers should inquire about pain or discomfort during breast-feeding as well as observe a
      feeding when possible. This helps screen for ineffective latch, nipple trauma, and/or poor milk transfer. If there are
      any concerns regarding the infant's status, the health-care provider should conduct a complete feeding evaluation
      and complete a comprehensive feeding plan, while also scheduling frequent follow-up visits until the issues have
      been resolved. Additionally, the provider should also gauge the parent's overall well-being and the parent-infant
      bonding. Poor maternal-infant bonding may be an indication of perinatal mood or anxiety disorders (O'Dea et al.,
      2023).

      Breast-feeding is most successful when infants are not subject to scheduled feedings but are allowed to nurse as
      frequently and for as long as they show feeding cues (see Table 24.3). Frequent feedings are required to establish
      and maintain milk supply. The AAP (Scott & Kirkland, 2023) states that a benchmark for breast-feeding is that
      infants should nurse between 8 and 12 times in a 24-hour period. But it is important to note that these feedings
      may not be evenly spaced, and the duration of each feeding may be different. Frequent feedings are particularly
      important in the first days of life when lactation is being established and the infant's stomach capacity is small. The
      nurse should explain to parents that the hormone prolactin is being released in increased amounts while the infant
      is suckling, and this is responsible for milk production. This will help them understand the relationship between
      frequent feedings and milk supply. Long stretches of time between feedings increase the likelihood of breast
      engorgement.

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      24.1 · Basic Newborn Care  1053

Research demonstrates that early skin-to-skin contact between the nursing parent and the newborn may improve
lactation confidence and help facilitate exclusive breast-feeding (Kellams, 2022; Scott & Kirkland, 2023). When milk
supply diminishes for reasons of decreased stimulation, infant inability to nurse, maternal illness, or any other
cause, breast milk volume can be supported and increased by the following:

    · Have the nursing parent offer both breasts at each feeding, while increasing the frequency of feedings (or
        pumping) to more than 8 times per 24 hours.

    · Instruct the nursing parent to allow the infant to feed on one breast until audible swallowing has decreased in
        frequency, and then switch to the other breast.

    · Have the lactating parent apply warm compresses to the breast prior to feeding to assist in letdown. Instruct
        the parent to massage the breasts in a downward motion, toward the nipple, immediately before and during
        the feeding or pumping.

    · Suggest to the nursing parent to consider breast-feeding for infant comfort or skin-to-skin contact between
        feedings.

    · If the lactating parent is supplementing with breast milk or to increase supply, encourage pumping after
        feeding at the breast to stimulate supply, especially during the waking hours. Encourage maternal rest and
        sleep at night.

    · Maternal intake of adequate fluids as well as continued consumption of a well-balanced nutritional diet is
        essential to produce healthy breast milk. As a basic guideline, encourage nursing parents to drink at least 8
        ounces of water or fluids each time they breast-feed or pump (Ndikom et al., 2014).

For specific information on fluid amounts and dietary recommendations, parents should be directed to their health-
care provider.

When an infant spaces several feedings closely together, with little time between the end of one feeding and the
beginning of another, it is called a cluster feeding. These are often followed by a longer spacing between feedings.
Infants may demonstrate cluster feedings on the second or third night home from the hospital after birth or in later
weeks when experiencing a growth spurt (Kim et al, 2023). Cluster feeding is a way for the infant to increase the
milk supply at each feeding. An infant's need to nurse more frequently may lead a nursing parent to question
whether they have an adequate milk supply for the baby when in fact they probably do and this behavior is normal.
Nurses should give parents anticipatory guidance through this often difficult time, particularly when cluster feedings
are at night, and encourage daytime resting whenever possible.

Because breast milk cannot be measured as it is consumed directly from the breast, parents must be given other
tools to determine if their infant is getting enough to eat. Obviously, the number of feedings, frequency, and length of
time on each breast are a measure, along with hearing auditory suck and swallow during feedings. But that still
leaves a question regarding the volume consumed. The most accurate short-term sign of intake is the infant's output
(i.e., voids and stools). The nurse should note the time of the first void and stool on the infant's chart because
absence of either or both in the first days may indicate an anomaly. Another sure sign of successful breast-feeding is
infant weight and hydration status. Weight gain below the 75th percentile on the newborn weight and height graph,
failure to regain birth weight by day 14 of life, and/or gaining less than 0.5 ounce daily are all indicators that the
provider should investigate the root cause(s), refer the nursing parent and baby to a lactation specialist, and
potentially advise supplementation, depending upon individualized assessment and findings, according to the
Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine (ABM) guidelines (Scott & Kirkland, 2023). The ABM encourages continued
infant cueing and expressed breast milk as the first choice for supplementation, given after nursing and in limited
volume. Donor human milk is the second choice, followed by formula when donor milk is not available (Scott &
Kirkland, 2023). The ABM suggests specific volumes for supplementation based on the infant's age. Supplementing
with glucose water is not appropriate because it can cause hyponatremia.

Safe Handling, Storage, and Preparation of Expressed Breast Milk
Breast milk can be stored in several different ways for different lengths of time. It is important that specific
preparation guidelines and storage protocols be followed to maintain the integrity and safety of the milk. The nurse
teaches the nursing parent that before expressing or pumping breast milk, the parent must wash their hands well
with soap and water. If soap and water are not available, they may use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains
at least 60 percent alcohol.
1054  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      If pumping is required in the first 24 to 48 hours of life, a hospital-grade electric pump is most appropriate for
      establishing milk supply. Manual pumps, battery-operated or small electric pumps, or hand expression of milk
      should not be relied upon for establishing milk supply in the early days of breast-feeding. Many families are
      discharged with instructions on how to rent or borrow a pump from the birthing hospital or pharmacy. Nursing
      parents should inspect the pump kit and tubing to ascertain that it is clean, and they should immediately replace
      any tubing that is moldy. If using a shared pump, the parent should clean pump dials with a disinfecting wipe and
      clean the countertop.

      To store breast milk after expressing, the nursing parent should use breast milk storage bags or clean food-grade
      containers with tight-fitting lids and avoid plastics containing bisphenol A (BPA) (recycle symbol #7).

      Freshly expressed or pumped milk can be stored

                at room temperature (77° F/25° C or colder) for up to 4 hours,
                in the refrigerator for up to 4 days, and
                in the freezer. Up to 12 months is acceptable, but about 6 months is best. For specific storage

                    temperatures, see Table 24.4. Although freezing keeps food safe almost indefinitely, recommended
                    storage times are important to follow for best quality.

      (CDC, 2023a)

                                                                Storage Locations and Temperatures

      Type of Breast Milk                Countertop, 77° F      Refrigerator,  Freezer, 0° F (-18° C) or colder
                                         (25° C) or colder      40° F (4° C)

      Freshly expressed or pumped        Up to 4 hours          Up to 4 days       Within 6 months is best.
                                                                               Up to 12 months is acceptable.

      Thawed, previously frozen          1-2 hours              Up to 1 day    NEVER refreeze human milk
                                                                (24 hours)       after it has been thawed.

      Leftover from a feeding (baby did  Use within 2 hours after the baby is finished feeding.
              not finish the bottle)

      TABLE 24.4 Human Milk Storage Guidelines (CDC, 2022a)

      Tips for safe breast milk storage include the following:

      · Prior to storing, clearly label breast milk with the date it was expressed.
      · Breast milk should not be stored on the door of the refrigerator or freezer, to avoid exposure to temperature

         changes from opening and closing the door.
      · If breast milk will not be used within 4 days of expression, it should be frozen immediately to protect the

         quality of the milk.
      · Store breast milk in small amounts to avoid wastage of milk not used at a feeding. Amounts of 2 to 4 ounces or

         the amount usually taken at a feeding is appropriate.
      · Breast milk expands when frozen, so approximately 1 inch of space should be left at the top of the container

         to accommodate this.
      · If breast milk is given to a childcare provider, it should be labeled clearly with the child's name, and the

         provider should be given specific instructions about preparation and storage of breast milk.
      · Breast milk can be stored in an insulated cooler with frozen ice packs for up to 24 hours when families are

         traveling. When they reach their destination, they should use the milk right away, store it in the refrigerator, or
         freeze it.

      Access for free at openstax.org
24.1 · Basic Newborn Care                                                                                                   1055

        LINK TO LEARNING

The CDC provides more information on the safe storage and preparation of breast (https://openstax.org/r/
77brstmilksfty) milk. It includes tips for travel and home use of breast milk. After storage of breast milk, mixing will
be required because of the fat, which may have separated. Remember, breast milk is not naturally homogenized. If
the baby does not finish the bottle at a feeding, the leftover milk can be used to feed the baby within 2 hours after
completion of the initial feeding. After the 2-hour period, the leftover breast milk should be discarded.

Bottle-Feeding the Breast-Fed Infant
Even when a baby is breast-fed, sometimes it is necessary to introduce a bottle as a feeding alternative, whether to
feed expressed or pumped breast milk or formula. Depending on how long the breast-fed infant has been
exclusively nursing, the type of bottle nipple used and what is in the bottle will impact how quickly and how easily
the baby will transition to the bottle from the breast. In addition, infants vary in how easily they transition to the
bottle. Some babies transition with more ease than others. All babies will eventually make that transition if the
caregiver is persistent enough, but not all babies have to. Infants can successfully transition from the breast to the
cup, regardless of age, if the caregiver is patient and persistent.

Positioning for Bottle-Feeding
When introducing the bottle to a breast-fed infant for the first time, it is best to have the baby in an upright position,
keeping them comfortable and close, while giving them more control during the feeding. Similar to eliciting a latch-
on, touch the baby's bottom lip with the bottle nipple. This will encourage the infant to open their mouth wide. Place
the nipple inside the mouth slowly and gently. Be sure not to force the mouth open, instead allowing the infant to
open the mouth on their own. Try offering only ½ to 1 ounce of the bottle to the infant. This will allow them to learn
to drink from the bottle without feeling too full. Increase the amount of the feeding only if the baby seems hungry
and is giving cues for more. Introduce the bottle by giving it once a day between breast-feedings when the baby is
neither full nor hungry. This may help them to accept the bottle (as a new feeding method) with less stress. About
halfway through the bottle-feeding, switch the baby's position by moving them from one arm to the other. This helps
prevent the baby from developing a favorite side when feeding and allows for good eye contact with them as well,
helping the parent to better read their cues. Let the baby take breaks if they want to, just as they do when breast-
feeding. Never force them to finish the bottle (Kotowski et al., 2020).

If the baby refuses the bottle, several suggestions might help. It is best to offer the bottle when the baby is happy
and calm, rather than when they are upset. Remember that crying is a late feeding cue for hunger. Try comforting
the baby by holding them, singing to them, or playing with their favorite toy. Breast-feed the baby after they calm
down and try the bottle again later in the day. Babies may refuse to feed when they do not feel well, so check the
baby for signs of illness. Another suggestion is to hide the bottle with a blanket or washcloth during the feeding.

Frequency, Timing, and Quantity of Feedings
When breast-feeding an infant, it takes approximately 2 to 3 weeks to develop a good breast-feeding routine.
Breast-feeding a baby on demand is full-time and exhausting work. The nursing parent's body needs adequate
energy to produce enough milk. They must eat well, get adequate rest and sleep, and drink sufficient fluids. Drinking
at least 8 ounces of fluid each time they nurse helps address fluid needs. Nursing parents can expect that their
breasts will become swollen, engorged, and painful 2 to 3 days after giving birth (Zakarija-Grkovic & Stewart, 2020).
Their baby will need to be nursed often to relieve the discomfort and ease the engorgement. If a feeding is missed,
nursing parents should pump their breasts or express them. This can also be done if a feeding does not relieve the
pain of engorgement. During the first month, breast-fed infants will nurse every 1½ to 2½ hours during the day and
night. Breast milk is digested more easily than formula, and thus breast-fed infants will need to eat more frequently
than their formula-fed counterparts.

        LINK TO LEARNING

The American Academy of Pediatrics parenting website, healthychildren.org, provides a list of bottle-feeding tips
1056  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      (https://openstax.org/r/77bottlefeedtip) for concerns about overfeeding or underfeeding a baby.

      During growth spurts, babies increase the frequency with which they want to nurse. This frequent nursing works to
      increase the milk supply and allow for normal growth and development of the infant. The baby will breast-feed every
      30 to 60 minutes and stay at the breast for longer periods. The frequent nursing for growth spurts is temporary,
      lasting only a few days, until the milk supply increases to provide enough milk at each feeding to meet the needs of
      the baby. At that time, the baby will eat less often and for shorter periods. Growth spurts usually occur at around 2
      weeks, and then at 2, 4, and 6 months of age (Jacobson, 2022). To increase the milk supply, nursing parents need
      encouragement not to supplement with formula-feedings when their infant wants to feed frequently. Parents often
      feel that they are not making enough milk for their infant but need to know that this is normal and that their body
      will respond to their baby and make enough milk. Their baby is getting enough to eat if they: (Jacobson, 2022)

          · nurse every 2 to 3 hours
          · have 6 to 8 wet diapers each day
          · gain weight (about 1 pound, or 450 grams, each month)
          · make swallowing noises while nursing
          · are satiated when feeding is over

      Formula-fed infants also start out eating 8 to 12 times every 24 hours. As newborns, they might take in only ½ to 2
      ounces per feeding for the first day or two of life, depending on their birth weight, but usually average 1 to 2 ounces
      at each feeding. This amount increases to 2 to 3 ounces by 2 weeks of age. By the end of 1 month, the baby will be
      up to at least 3 to 4 ounces (120 mL) per feeding, with a fairly predictable schedule of feedings about every 3 to 4
      hours (AAP, 2022b). At about 2 months of age, babies usually take 4 to 5 ounces per feeding every 3 to 4 hours. At 4
      months, babies usually take 4 to 6 ounces per feeding. By 6 months, babies will consume 6 to 8 ounces at each of 4
      or 5 feedings in 24 hours (AAP, 2022b).

      Babies generally take in about 2½ ounces (75 mL) of infant formula a day for every pound (453 g) of body weight
      (AAP, 2022b). All babies are different, but most will drink more and go longer between feedings as they grow and
      their stomachs can hold more milk. Also, babies suck not only for hunger but also for comfort. At 6 months, babies
      may be taking up to 8 ounces every 4 to 5 hours. As a general rule, infants will increase the amount of formula they
      drink by an average of 1 ounce each month before leveling off at 7 to 8 ounces per feeding (Jain & Bunik, 2022).
      Solid foods are usually introduced at about 6 months (Jain & Bunik, 2022).

              LINK TO LEARNING

      The AAP also addresses parents' concerns about pacifier use (https://openstax.org/r/77pacifieruse) by providing
      guidelines for pacifier choice and use.

      In general, babies do a good job of self-regulating how much they eat. Infants who are bottle-fed may be more likely
      to be overfed because drinking from a bottle takes less effort than being breast-fed. Overfed babies can experience
      stomach pains, gas, spit up, or vomit and be at higher risk for obesity as adults. Offering less is a better choice
      because you can always offer more if the infant remains hungry. For babies who like to suck for comfort rather than
      nutrition, pacifiers are a good substitute when used after feedings. While research on the timing of pacifier
      introduction to the breast-fed infant (Orovou et al., 2022) is highly variable, most of the literature agrees that
      avoiding a pacifier in the early days (first 1 to 3 weeks) while breast-feeding is being established is valuable.

      Spitting up of stomach contents in infants, or reflux, that occurs when the lower esophageal sphincter muscle lets
      the stomach contents back into the esophagus because it is not fully developed is called physiologic regurgitation
      (AAP, 2022c). Spit up consists of milk flowing from the mouth during or after a feeding when the stomach is full and
      can be caused by overfeeding, air swallowed during feeding (therefore it may occur when burping), crying, or
      coughing. It is common for infants and children under 2 years of age to experience gastroesophageal reflux (GER),
      which is the spitting up of liquid or food, when the stomach contents move back up from a baby's stomach into the
      esophagus. Many infants who experience reflux have a normal physical exam and adequate weight gain, and present
      as healthy, happy newborns. This condition usually resolves itself by 12 months of age and does not require medical

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      24.1 · Basic Newborn Care  1057

management (AAP, 2022c).

        LINK TO LEARNING

For concerns about infant reflux, read Gastroesophageal Reflux in Infants and Children (https://openstax.org/r/
77infantreflux) from the American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP).

How to Burp a Baby
Burping is necessary because babies take in air when they are feeding. They may take in more air with the bottle,
but many babies take in air at the breast also. When a baby swallows air during a feeding, that air gets trapped in the
stomach. The trapped air can become uncomfortable "gas pockets," causing the baby to cry or fuss. Burping the
baby helps to remove that trapped air and prevent the "gas" from becoming a problem.
Before burping the baby, place a burp cloth, bib, towel, or cloth diaper under the baby's chin in case the baby spits
up during the process. This protects the caregiver's and the baby's clothing. There are three commonly used burping
positions that nurses can teach new parents (Figure 24.7):

    · Over the caregiver's shoulder: Hold the baby upright with their head over the caregiver's shoulder.
    · Sitting on the caregiver's lap: Set the baby on the caregiver's lap, facing away. Lean them forward and support

        their head (under the jaw) with the thumb and forefinger, while supporting their neck and chest with the hand
        and forearm.
    · Lying on the caregiver's lap: Place the baby on their belly, face down, across the caregiver's lap, and support
        their head with the caregiver's lap, arm, or hand.

FIGURE 24.7 Burping Positions The three most common positions for effective burping of an infant are (a) over the caregiver's shoulder,
(b) sitting on the caregiver's lap, and (c) lying on the caregiver's lap. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)

When the baby is in one of the preceding positions, gently rub or pat them on their back to help elicit a burp. There is
no need to pound harder on their back; this could cause injury and will not make them burp better or faster. If the
baby does not burp after a few minutes of trying, change their position and try again. If you cannot elicit a burp and
the baby does not appear to be in any discomfort, you do not need to worry about a burp. Babies do not need to
burp every time you try.

How often should a baby be burped? That depends on the baby and the circumstances. If a nursing parent is breast-
feeding and has a strong letdown reflex or an overabundant breast milk supply, the fast flow of breast milk can
cause the baby to swallow more air; thus, that baby would need to be burped more often. Usually, it is enough to
burp a breast-fed baby between breasts and at the end of the feeding. For bottle-fed infants, it depends on whether
they are vigorous feeders and whether they gulp their feedings. Initially, they may need to be burped after every ½
ounce, then gradually increase to halfway through the feeding, and then as the infant sucks more continuously and
efficiently, burp them when the feeding is finished. At any time during the feeding, if a breast-fed or bottle-fed infant
1058  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      begins to squirm or move around when they were previously still, they probably have gas and need to be burped
      (Deepti et al., 2024). If the newborn falls asleep at the breast or with the bottle, that is a good time to burp them.
      Burping may help to wake them up and keep them feeding a little longer. If the baby is feeding and actively sucking,
      you do not have to interrupt the feeding (breast or bottle) to burp them. Wait until they stop the feeding on their own
      and then burp them. Burping will help to get rid of the air that the baby naturally swallows as part of their feeding.
      The frequency of burping will ultimately be determined by the infant's individual needs.

      Voiding and Stooling Patterns in Newborns

      When a newborn voids and stools and how often voiding and stooling occur after birth is an important assessment
      for the nurse to note in the newborn's chart. Potential health concerns are raised when voiding or stooling does not
      occur. Educating the parents on the expected voiding and stooling patterns and what to do if these expected norms
      are not met is a part of the nursing role in educating the newborn's caregivers.

      Expected Stooling Patterns in the Newborn
      The newborn's initial stool is the same for both breast-fed and bottle-fed infants and is present for the first few days
      after birth. It is called meconium and is a thick black or dark green, tar-like substance that filled the fetus's
      intestines before birth (Figure 24.8). Meconium is passed within the first 24 to 48 hours of life; a delay in passing it
      may indicate an underlying health condition (Skelly et al., 2023). Babies have an immature digestive system, which
      accounts for the varying color and consistency of their stools. After the first day or two, the meconium starts to
      change in consistency, particularly after the baby starts to eat. After the meconium has passed, newborn stool
      changes to transitional stool, which is more yellowish-green. Then, stool becomes more consistently a "breast-fed
      stool" or "formula-fed" stool in appearance.

      FIGURE 24.8 Meconium Meconium is the newborn's first stool, and it is thick and dark. (credit: "Meconium Stool" by Sarah Evans/Flickr, CC
      BY 4.0)

      Regardless of feeding method, hard or very dry infant stools may be a sign that the infant is not getting enough fluids
      or that they are losing too much fluid due to illness, dehydration, fever, or heat (AAP, 2021b).
      Stooling Pattern of Formula-Fed Infants
      After meconium has passed, formula-fed infants have stools that are usually browner and firmer than those of

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      24.1 · Basic Newborn Care  1059

breast-fed infants. Bowel movements in formula-fed infants are on the brown color spectrum, meaning that yellow-
brown, tan-brown, and green-brown are all normal colors for stools. Consistency is like that of peanut butter.
Although the odor is stronger than that of breast-fed infant stool, it remains mild until the infant begins solid foods.

Stooling Pattern of Breast-Fed Infants
The bowel movements of breast-fed babies are different from those of formula fed babies after meconium has
passed. The stool is brownish-yellow, mustardy, or yellowish-green and often appears seedy (Figure 24.9). It is soft
and occasionally runny. Being runny is not a problem as long as the baby is feeding well and does not have other
issues, such as blood in the stool. Breast-fed babies may sometimes appear to have mucus in their stool. This is not
a cause for concern. It is not normal for their stool to be very hard or similar to the consistency of adult stool. This
would indicate constipation. Breast-fed babies rarely suffer from constipation, since breast milk contains a natural
laxative-like component. Conversely, very watery stool might be a sign of diarrhea, for which a concern would be
dehydration and illness. During the first 6 weeks of a baby's life, frequent bowel movements are an indication that
the baby is getting enough food. Most babies have two to five bowel movements per day and may stool after every
feeding (AAP, 2021b). A baby who has significantly fewer bowel movements than this or does not stool on most
days may not be getting enough breast milk. This may be an indicator that more frequent feedings are necessary or
that an evaluation with a lactation consultant is indicated to increase breast milk supply. Other breast-fed infants, by
3 to 6 weeks of age, may have a stooling pattern of only one bowel movement a week and still be considered normal
(AAP, 2021b). Breast milk leaves very little solid waste to be eliminated from the digestive system, but when these
babies do have a bowel movement they go in very large quantities. As long as their infrequent stools are soft and the
infant is otherwise healthy, it is not considered a problem. Caregivers need to be cognizant of any changes in their
infant's stooling patterns, as indicators of concerning issues.

FIGURE 24.9 Stool of a Newborn The stool of a breast-fed newborn is usually light in color and seedy. (credit "Newborn Stool" by Sarah
Evans/Flickr, CC By 4.0)

Breast milk stool has a very mild odor. The stool of babies who are both breast-fed and bottle-fed has a stronger
odor, as does the stool of those who have had solid foods introduced. These stools have more form to them and are
a darker color than breast-fed stools.
1060  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      Expected Voiding Patterns in the Newborn
      Regardless of feeding method, in the first 4 days of life, a newborn is expected to have at least one void per day of
      age plus at least one stool per 24 hours; on day 5, the newborn should have at least six to eight voids and one yellow
      seedy stool daily (Scott & Kirkland, 2023). Newborns often void at the time of birth, and this can easily go unnoticed
      because of the small amount and because of the very pale color. The nurse should note the time of first voiding on
      the infant's chart because absence of voiding in the first 2 days may indicate an anomaly. Usually, the first void
      occurs sometime during the first 12 to 24 hours of life. Disposable diapers are very absorbent, and the pale color of
      the infant's urine may cause very little, if any, color change on the diaper itself. The nurse may need to put gloves on
      and examine the inner layer of the diaper for clumping or dampness. Cotton balls or tissues may be placed in the
      diaper to better visualize small amounts of urine. Newborn's urine may contain uric acid crystals that cause a
      reddish or pink stain on the diaper, known as a brick staining, which might be frightening to parents who may
      mistake it for bleeding. It does not continue past the first few days as the kidneys mature. It is the nurse's role to
      notify the primary care provider if the infant does not meet the voiding expectations in the first days of life. If the
      infant is breast-fed, an additional lactation consultation is indicated to assess latch, suck, and swallow with the
      ultimate goal of increasing breast milk production and ingestion. Infants who are content, have good skin turgor,
      produce an adequate number of wet diapers, and have normal weight gain are considered to be consuming an
      adequate amount of either breast milk or formula (Scott & Kirkland, 2023).

      Circumcision of the Male Newborn

      Male circumcision is the surgical removal of the foreskin, the layer of skin that covers the glans (head) of the penis.
      In the newborn, circumcision is typically done in the hospital on the first or second day of life, before the birthing
      parent and baby are discharged. Circumcision is performed only if the parents request it and if the baby is healthy. It
      can be postponed if necessary. For religious or cultural reasons, some babies may be circumcised later in a
      nonhospital setting. Overall, approximately 25 percent to 33 percent of the world's male population is circumcised
      (Abdulwahab-Ahmed & Mungadi, 2013). Religious circumcision is practiced by those of the Jewish religion, while
      Muslims, Black Africans, Indigenous Australians, and other ethnic groups in different parts of the world practice
      religious and cultural circumcision (Gerharz & Haarmann, 2000). The United States is an outlier among other
      Western societies in its common circumcision of males who are not Jewish or Muslim (Abdulwahab-Ahmed &
      Mungadi, 2013).

      The three techniques used for infant circumcision are the Plastibell technique, the Mogen clamp, and the Gomco
      clamp.

          · Plastibell: A plastic bell-shaped tool is used for the procedure. The penis will have a plastic ring around it that
              will remain after surgery. The ring will fall off on its own in 5 to 7 days. There are no stitches with this
              procedure. Swelling may be present but will subside by approximately day 4. Change diapers often, rinsing the
              genitals and buttocks with water (do not use commercial diaper wipes). Give sponge baths until the umbilical
              cord has fallen off. If it is off, baths can be given daily beginning the day after circumcision until the ring comes
              off. Follow circumcision care instructions. There are no restrictions. The advantage to this method is reduced
              bleeding.

          · Mogen clamp: With use of this clamp, the foreskin is crushed along a line that is 1 mm wide, and the foreskin
              is then removed distal to the clamp. When the clamp is removed, the glans is then liberated by opening the
              crush line. The procedure usually takes only 3 to 4 minutes and is virtually bloodless. The Mogen clamp has
              been associated with shorter procedure time and less pain when compared with the Gomco clamp (Taddio,
              2001). This procedure was initially designed by Rabbi Harry Bronstein in 1954 and is one of the most
              commonly used techniques for ceremonial circumcisions outside hospital settings (Stanford Medicine, n.d.-b).

          · Gomco clamp: This is one of the most commonly used devices for newborn circumcision (Stanford Medicine,
              2023a). It has all the advantages of a steel bell, which protects the glans penis during the procedure, and the
              absence of a foreign body remaining on the penis after the circumcision (as it does with the Plastibell). It has
              been in continuous use for more than 70 years and gets its name from the company that originally
              manufactured it, the Goldstein Manufacturing Company (Stanford Medicine, 2023a).

      Nurses are often involved in the consent procedure for infant circumcision. Before obtaining any consent, the nurse
      must have a thorough understanding of the indications, contraindications, complications, and the need for emergent
      intervention. When obtaining parental consent for circumcision, the nurse is responsible for explaining these

      Access for free at openstax.org
24.1 · Basic Newborn Care                                                                                                 1061

elements to the parents, listening to their questions and/or concerns, and addressing them. The nurse then
witnesses parental signature on the consent. If the parent does not wish to sign the consent, the nurse then notifies
the physician prior to the procedure and any procedural preparation for the patient.

Circumcision is a quick procedure, and various surgical techniques can be used, but the basic steps are the same
(Stanford Medicine, n.d.-a):

    · Local anesthetic is applied.
          A topical cream (put on the penis) may be used. It takes about 20 to 40 minutes to take full effect.
          An injectable anesthetic requires less time to take effect and may provide a slightly longer period of
              anesthesia.
          Sometimes acetaminophen (Tylenol) is also given with the anesthetic to help lessen pain during surgery
              and for several hours later. Acetaminophen is an analgesic, which is a drug or medication that reduces
              pain or discomfort.
          A bottle nipple filled with a sugar water substance (also called a "sweetie" or "sweet ease") may also be
              given during the procedure to soothe the infant and lessen stress. A pacifier alone can also lessen stress
              and pain.

    · The baby is placed on a special table for the procedure.
    · The penis and foreskin are cleaned.
    · A special clamp is attached to the penis, and the foreskin is cut and removed.
    · After the procedure, special care is taken to protect the wound from rubbing against the diaper.

Circumcision may be done by the maternal health-care provider or by the newborn care provider. In some cases,
when it is done in a nonmedical setting for religious or cultural reasons, circumcision may be performed by another
person trained in how to do the procedure, how to relieve pain, and how to prevent infection in the baby. No single
treatment has been demonstrated to offer complete pain relief for every newborn undergoing circumcision.
Therefore, a combination of therapies is likely the most effective choice for pain management.

        PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

Medications Used in Male Circumcision

Lidocaine (Topical)

    · The application of a 1-g dose of lidocaine-prilocaine cream to the penis, about 60 to 80 minutes before
        circumcision, has been determined to be both safe and efficacious for newborns. The effectiveness of pain
        relief decreases during circumcision stages that involve significant tissue damage.

    · Additional research reports similar effectiveness when employing a 0.5-g dose of lidocaine-prilocaine cream
        applied beneath an occlusive dressing for 45 to 60 minutes before circumcision.

    · When comparing the effects of lidocaine 30 percent cream (1 g) and lidocaine-prilocaine cream (1 g), it was
        observed that the latter more efficiently reduced crying time and attenuated the increases in heart rate and
        blood pressure in neonates during circumcision. Additionally, it was deemed safe to use lidocaine cream in
        newborns, as there were no significant reports of systemic absorption of lidocaine.

Lidocaine (Dorsal Penile Nerve Block--DPNB)

    · Lidocaine 1 percent is administered through injection, with 0.2 to 0.5 mL injected into two dorsolateral sites
        located at the base of the penis, specifically positioned at 2 o'clock and 10 o'clock, approximately 3 to 8
        minutes prior to the circumcision procedure.

    · Research studies that used the Neonatal Infant Pain Scale (NIPS) scores as their endpoints reached the
        conclusion that neonates who received DPNB had significantly lower NIPS scores when compared to those
        who received lidocaine-prilocaine cream, demonstrating a more pronounced reduction in pain.

Subcutaneous Ring Block

    · The ring block technique involves the injection of approximately 0.8 mL of lidocaine 1 percent in a circular
        manner around the penis, placed halfway along the shaft, with this procedure being performed approximately
1062  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

              8 minutes before the circumcision.
          · Ring block was found to be the most effective in reducing pain during foreskin separation and incision, as

              demonstrated by reduced crying and a lower heart rate. Following ring block, DPNB was the second most
              effective anesthetic, while lidocaine-prilocaine cream was the least effective.

      NOTE: With DPNB and ring block, epinephrine should not be mixed with lidocaine due to the vasoconstrictive nature
      of epinephrine, which can lead to the risk of ischemia and tissue necrosis.

      Acetaminophen (Tylenol)

          · Acetaminophen is commonly used to reduce fever or pain in infants but is not recommended as the sole pain
              reliever for circumcision. Research has shown no significant difference in terms of pain tolerance and pain
              control between a placebo group of newborns and a group that received acetaminophen preoperatively and
              intraoperatively. The group who had received acetaminophen showed an increase in comfort level at 6 hours
              post procedure, demonstrating that the acetaminophen may be more effective after the initial postoperative
              period.

      Sucrose (oral)

          · Research indicates that using pacifiers dipped in or filled with a sucrose solution is more effective than using
              water-dipped pacifiers in neonates, resulting in reduced crying during painful procedures like circumcision
              and heel sticks.

          · Although sucrose is not as effective as lidocaine-prilocaine cream or DPNB for pain reduction, the
              combination of sucrose and other pain-relieving measures has been shown as more effective than either
              method on its own in alleviating neonatal pain during circumcision.

      Care of the Uncircumcised Newborn
      When parents choose not to have their baby boy circumcised, the uncircumcised penis does not require any
      specialized care. To keep it clean, simply wash the outside of the penis with a mild soap and water or use baby
      wipes when changing diapers. Do not attempt to pull back the infant's foreskin. The foreskin may not pull back
      completely until the child is older. This is normal. The child's pediatrician can tell parents when it is ready to be
      pulled back and cleaned (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2022).

      Care of the Circumcised Newborn
      After a baby has been circumcised, care must be taken to keep the area clean. Initially after the circumcision, the
      area will be checked every 15 minutes for an hour to assess for excessive bleeding at the surgical site. In addition,
      the nurse will monitor for swelling at the site and for the first void post circumcision. A dressing on the surgical site
      will consist of a gauze pad with petroleum jelly placed on the tip of the penis. Petroleum jelly can also be placed on
      the diaper in the area where the penis will touch. A clean dressing should be applied at every diaper change for the
      first day or two to prevent the surgical site from sticking to the diaper and to help keep the site clean. The tip of the
      penis will initially appear bright red. Even after the dressing is no longer needed, parents should put a dab of
      petroleum jelly on the penis tip or on the front of the diaper. It usually takes between 7 and 10 days for the penis to
      heal. Initially, the tip of the penis may appear slightly swollen, and a small amount of blood may appear on the
      diaper. That is to be expected and is not a concern. A slight yellow discharge or crust may also appear after a couple
      of days. This is a normal part of healing. If immediately after the circumcision or at any time during the recovery the
      penis is actively bleeding, the nurse or caregiver needs to apply direct pressure for 1 to 2 minutes to control the
      bleeding and must notify the provider. The provider may decide to apply silver nitrate to stop the active bleeding.

      When to Call the Health-Care Provider
      As with any surgical procedure, circumcision comes with the possibility of risks and complications. With
      circumcision, complications are rare and are usually minor. Possible complications include bleeding, infection, and
      scarring. It is less likely for complications to occur if circumcision is done in a medical setting.

      If any of the following problems are noticed, the doctor should be called immediately (American College of
      Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2022):

          · bleeding that is not stopping

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      24.1 · Basic Newborn Care  1063

    · more than a quarter-sized amount of blood on the diaper
    · redness getting worse or not going away after 7 to 10 days
    · fever, rectal temperature > 100.4° F or 38° C
    · other signs of infection, such as swelling or discharge getting worse, or pus-filled blisters
    · not urinating normally within 12 hours after circumcision.

        REAL RN STORIES

Nurse: Erin, BSN
Years in practice: 5
Clinical setting: Pediatric cardiology floor
Geographic location: The inner city of a large metropolitan area in Ohio

A 6-day-old baby boy with a known ventricular septal defect (VSD) was not given the opportunity to have a
circumcision done in the newborn nursery. After seeing his primary care provider and pediatric cardiologist, he was
introduced to pediatric surgery and had a circumcision done in the OR with postcare provided by the pediatric
cardiology floor.

Erin received a sign-out from the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU). Notably, the patient had had to have sutures
placed due to bleeding.

When he arrived on the floor, Erin found that he was tachycardic, pale, and irritable. His mother was concerned that
he was in pain. The floor provider prescribed Tylenol for pain.

Erin was also concerned as the patient continued to be inconsolable with a heart rate in the 170s to 180s. During
the second diaper change that evening, she found a red-filled diaper and active bleeding at the circumcision site.

Pediatric surgery was alerted to the acute change in the surgical site. Erin followed the orders of both teams as she
started infusing packed red blood cells (PRBCs) through a peripheral IV and utilized her change nurse to meet her
other patients' needs.

The pediatric surgery team was able to stop the bleeding without requiring further surgery, and the patient improved
significantly after receiving blood.

With quick intervention, almost all circumcision-related problems are easily treated.

Postprocedural Pain in the Circumcised Newborn
Postcircumcision pain and initial discomfort are expected and can be lessened for the newborn by:

    · providing a pacifier for sucking
    · nursing if the baby is breast-fed
    · swaddling, a traditional practice of wrapping up a baby gently in a light, breathable blanket to help them feel

        calm and sleepy (Figure 24.10)
    · administering acetaminophen as an analgesic
    · rocking the baby
1064  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      FIGURE 24.10 How to Swaddle an Infant Swaddling calms an infant. 1. Lay the newborn on the diamond-shaped thin cloth with their
      head on the overturned triangle at the apex. 2. Bring one side of the cloth over to the opposite side of the baby. 3. Tuck the end of the side
      that has crossed the newborn under them while bringing up the bottom of the diamond to the center and tucking it into the side that is
      anchored under the newborn. 5. Bring over the last side of the diamond and tuck it under the newborn. (attribution: Copyright Rice
      University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

              CULTURAL CONTEXT

      Circumcision around the World

      Table 24.5 lists the percentage of males who undergo circumcision at some point in their life, likely as a newborn.
      Cultural, religious, and ethical beliefs of the family result in the procedural choice.

                                       Country      Rate Country  Rate

                                       Afghanistan  99.8% Japan   9%

                                       Algeria      97.9% Jordan  98.8%

      TABLE 24.5 Culture and Ethnicity Count: Percentage of Circumcised
      Males in Countries throughout the World The National Institutes of
      Health (NIH) estimates that 37% to 39% of men globally are circumcised
      (Morris et al., 2016, p. 1).
      Note: This chart is not inclusive of all 237 countries and territories globally
      that are addressed by Morris et al.

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                     24.2 · Care of Common Problems in the Newborn                                          1065

Country     Rate Country             Rate

Australia   26.6% North Korea        0.1%

Austria     5.8% Libya               96.6%

Bolivia     0.11% Mexico             15.4%

Botswana    15.1% Morocco            99.9%

Brazil      1.3% Netherlands         5.7%

British Virgin Islands 1.2% Nigeria  98.9%

Canada      31.9% Norway             3.0%

China       14% Puerto Rico          0.14%

Colombia    4.2% Romania             0.34%

Egypt       94.7% Russia             11.8%

France      14% Saudia Arabia 97.1%

Gaza Strip  99.9% Turkey             98.6%

Germany     10.9% United Kingdom 20.7%

Iran        99.7% United States      71.2%

Iraq        98.9% Vietnam            0.2%

Israel      91.7% Yemen              99.0%

                                           TABLE 24.5 Culture and Ethnicity Count: Percentage of Circumcised
                                           Males in Countries throughout the World The National Institutes of
                                           Health (NIH) estimates that 37% to 39% of men globally are circumcised
                                           (Morris et al., 2016, p. 1).
                                           Note: This chart is not inclusive of all 237 countries and territories globally
                                           that are addressed by Morris et al.

24.2 Care of Common Problems in the Newborn

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Describe the pathophysiology and signs and symptoms of hyperbilirubinemia and the care of the
        newborn with hyperbilirubinemia

    · Describe the pathophysiology and signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia and the care of the newborn with
        hypoglycemia

    · List the common newborn infections and describe the care of the newborn with an infection
    · List common newborn dermatologic issues including the pathophysiology of both expected and

        pathophysiologic findings along with their care and management

This section provides a comprehensive understanding of significant issues that commonly arise during the early
stages of a newborn's life: hyperbilirubinemia, hypoglycemia, dermatologic problems, viruses, and bacterial
1066  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      infections. By understanding the pathophysiology, signs and symptoms, risk factors, and preventive measures, as
      well as the appropriate care and management, for each condition, nurses can effectively address these challenges.
      They can also differentiate between normal variations and abnormal conditions and can educate parents about
      both. In providing adept and knowledgeable care of newborns with these problems and educating their caregivers,
      nurses can help ensure the health and well-being of this vulnerable population.

      Hyperbilirubinemia

      One common problem in newborns is hyperbilirubinemia, characterized by elevated levels of bilirubin in the blood.
      Understanding the underlying pathophysiology, including the breakdown of red blood cells, helps identify infants at
      risk. Recognizing the signs and symptoms associated with hyperbilirubinemia enables prompt intervention and
      appropriate care to manage this condition effectively.

      Care of the Newborn with Hyperbilirubinemia
      Many normal and healthy babies develop jaundice, or hyperbilirubinemia, which is an increase in the concentration
      of bilirubin in the serum, the amber-colored, protein-rich liquid that separates out when blood coagulates. With
      jaundice, the skin and sclera of the eyes of the newborn may appear noticeably yellow due to the breakdown of fetal
      red blood cells. Mild jaundice is harmless. However, if the bilirubin level continues to rise and is not treated, it can
      lead to kernicterus, a type of brain injury. Jaundice tends to be more common in breast-feeding infants, particularly
      in those that are not feeding well. Therefore, breast-feeding parents should nurse their newborns at least 8 to 12
      times per day (or every 2 to 3 hours), which will help produce enough milk and keep bilirubin levels low.

              LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES

      Nurse's Response When Asked about the Preferred Way to Feed a Baby: Breast versus Bottle

      Each birthing parent has the autonomy to choose how they would like to feed their newborn. Each way of feeding a
      newborn has advantages and disadvantages. Human milk is recommended as the optimal source of nutrition for
      newborns due to the health benefits it provides for both the newborn and the lactating parent. Consequences of
      insufficient oral intake in the newborn and psychologic distress in the lactating parent may result when the plan
      does not work. When discussing the topic of feeding with the parent, the nurse must determine what the parent's
      goals are and what would work best for their newborn and themselves. Nurses have an ethical obligation to provide
      infant feeding support in a way that is sensitive, individualized, objective, and supportive to the person while
      avoiding harm.

      Pathophysiology of Neonatal Jaundice
      The primary source of bilirubin is the breakdown of hemoglobin, leading to the formation of unconjugated bilirubin
      and related substances. Unconjugated bilirubin then binds to albumin in the bloodstream to facilitate its journey to
      the liver. Once in the liver, hepatocytes take up bilirubin and, through the action of the enzyme uridine
      diphosphogluconurate glucuronosyltransferase (UGT), conjugate it with glucuronic acid, making it water-soluble.

      Due to the common occurrence of temporary jaundice in healthy infants, hyperbilirubinemia can be classified as
      either physiologic or pathologic. It can also be classified based on whether the hyperbilirubinemia is unconjugated,
      conjugated, or a combination. Additionally, classification by the underlying mechanism is another method. Most
      cases of neonatal jaundice involve unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Among the most common factors contributing
      to neonatal jaundice are physiologic hyperbilirubinemia, breast-feeding-related jaundice, breast milk-induced
      jaundice, and pathologic hyperbilirubinemia associated with hemolytic diseases. Dysfunction or disease of the liver
      may result in conjugated or mixed hyperbilirubinemia (e.g., parenteral alimentation causing cholestasis, neonatal
      sepsis, neonatal hepatitis) (Dysart, 2022).

      Jaundice first appears on the face, then the chest and abdomen, and finally the arms and legs in some instances.
      The whites of the infant's eyes may also turn yellow. At the present time, most newborns are routinely screened for
      jaundice in the skin 24 hours before leaving the hospital, using a painless handheld light meter called a
      transcutaneous bilirubin (TCB) monitor. If jaundice is suspected in the newborn based on skin color, age, and
      other factors, the pediatrician may order a blood test to make an accurate diagnosis. If parents notice a sudden
      increase in jaundice once they are home, they should call their health-care provider. The specific blood tests that

      Access for free at openstax.org
24.2 · Care of Common Problems in the Newborn                                                                               1067

may be ordered are as follows: (Cedars Sinai, 2023)

    · Direct and indirect bilirubin levels--This test will show if bilirubin is bound with other substances by the
        infant's liver. The level of indirect bilirubin is increased in normal physiologic jaundice. High levels of either
        type of bilirubin are seen with jaundice caused by more serious problems.

    · Red blood cell counts--This test is important because jaundice occurs as a result of the breakdown of fetal
        RBCs.

    · Blood type and testing for Rh incompatibility (the Coombs test or direct antiglobulin test [DAT])

One major differentiating factor between the four types of newborn jaundice is the timing of when the jaundice first
starts. Treatment will depend on the degree of jaundice, the bilirubin level, and the age and weight of the infant
(Cedars Sinai, 2023; Kemper et al., 2022).

    · Jaundice that develops after the first 24 hours of life in term infants is called developmental jaundice or
        physiologic jaundice. It is considered normal. The bilirubin peaks between the 2nd and 4th days of life and
        falls to normal levels by 57 days. Jaundice becomes visible when the bilirubin level is greater than 5 mg/dL
        (Cedars Sinai, 2023).

    · Jaundice that develops in the first 24 hours of life is called pathologic jaundice or nonphysiologic jaundice.
        When bilirubin rises higher than expected or remains elevated longer than expected, earlier treatment is
        needed to prevent severe hyperbilirubinemia. Abnormalities that cause excessive destruction of RBCs or
        problems in bilirubin conjugation result in nonphysiologic jaundice (Cedars Sinai, 2023; Kemper et al., 2022).
        These can include incompatibilities between the birthing parent's and infant's blood types, metabolic
        disorders, and infections. Phototherapy is often the treatment for nonphysiologic jaundice (Figure 24.11.)

    · Jaundice that develops in breast-fed infants within the first week after birth is called breast-feeding jaundice
        or early-onset jaundice. It involves bilirubin levels of >12 mg/dL and develops in 13 percent of breast-fed
        infants by 1 week of life (Kemper et al., 2022). The most common cause of jaundice this early in breast-fed
        infants is insufficient milk intake, dehydration, or low caloric intake. Serum bilirubin may reach dangerous
        levels if intake is not increased. An increase in enterohepatic circulation may also result from reduced bacteria
        in the intestine that act to convert bilirubin to nonresorbed metabolites (Dysart, 2022). Babies who are sleepy,
        have a poor suck, or nurse infrequently do not get sufficient colostrum. Colostrum has a normal laxative effect
        in eliminating bilirubin-rich meconium. When meconium is not eliminated, bilirubin may be deconjugated in
        the intestine, absorbed, and recirculated to the liver for conjugation again. Lack of suckling decreases
        production of breast milk and further increases the problem.

    · Jaundice that occurs after the first 5 to 7 days of life and lasts 3 weeks to as long as 3 months, peaking at
        about 2 weeks of age for some infants is considered true breast milk jaundice or late-onset breast milk
        jaundice. Bilirubin usually peaks at levels of 5 to 10 mg/dL and gradually decreases over several months, but
        for some infants, levels get as high as 20 to 30 mg/dL. Although the exact cause is unknown, true breast milk
        jaundice is thought to be caused by an increased concentration of beta-glucuronidase in the breast milk,
        which causes an increase in the deconjugation and reabsorption of bilirubin (Dysart, 2022). Infants show no
        signs of illness. Treatment consists of 8 to 12 feedings per 24 hours. If levels of bilirubin become too high,
        phototherapy may begin while the nursing parent continues to breast-feed. Interruption of breast-feeding is
        not usually recommended (Cedars Sinai, 2023; Kemper et al., 2022). This type of jaundice generally resolves
        without further morbidity concerns.

  CLINICAL JUDGMENT MEASUREMENT MODEL

  Take Action: Setting a Newborn Patient under the Phototherapy Light

  The nurse is caring for a 4-day-old who has been showing signs of hyperbilirubinemia with jaundice on the face
  down to the chest. The breast-fed infant had an elevated level when checked with the noninvasive bili tool
  (BiliTool) in the nursery.

  The nurse knows that to start phototherapy the newborn will need to be uncovered but will require eye
  protection and groin coverage before being placed under the phototherapy light.

  The nurse is successful in ordering goggles and groin coverage from hospital services, and phototherapy is
1068  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

        initiated. A follow-up bilirubin level will be checked in 6 hours.

      Nursing Care Plan for the Jaundiced Newborn
      Subjective data may come from the parents who may report or the nurse who may observe that the newborn is
      having difficulty with breast-feeding or is not taking the bottle well. The problem may be infant fussiness related to
      feedings or lethargy and difficulty in waking to feed. The problem could be an issue with latch or positioning or with
      suck and swallow. To accurately assess what is happening, the nurse must become more involved with feedings in
      general. A loss of color in the stool also warrants investigation.

      When assessing the infant in daylight, the nurse will most likely observe yellowing of the skin all over the body and
      in the sclera of the eyes. In newborns with dark skin, yellowing may not be visible, so jaundice should be confirmed
      with TCB (Ansong-Assoku, et al., 2023). Weight loss will be greater than expected (>10 percent). The infant will be
      difficult to awaken and, when awake, will be very fussy with a high-pitched cry.

      The nurse assesses the infant's skin for abnormalities, noting the color (yellowing) of skin or eyes. When
      determining yellowing of the skin, the nurse lightly presses on the skin of the baby's forehead. If the skin looks
      yellow where pressed, the baby is likely jaundiced.

      When assessing the infant for neurologic involvement, the nurse should keep in mind expected infant development.
      Infants experiencing hyperbilirubinemia are likely to be very fussy when awake and difficult to arouse when asleep.
      Consequently, many parents inadvertently delay waking their babies to feed them. More advanced stages of
      neurologic sequelae include hyperreflexia (twitching, overexcitability, sensitive reflexes, and convulsions).
      Symptoms can also include a high-pitched cry. An infant's change in feeding patterns is neurologically significant as
      well.

      Obtaining a good history, including a review of the pregnancy and delivery, may show a stressful delivery. When
      assistive devices such as vacuum or forceps have been used, they can increase infant trauma and, therefore, the risk
      of neonatal jaundice. The nurse is aware of high-risk disorders or diseases that may affect the infant (i.e., spleen or
      liver disease or hypothyroidism). As part of the physical assessment of the newborn, the nurse should obtain serum
      or transcutaneous bilirubin (TCB) values. TCB is preferred because of the noninvasive nature of the test. Any level
      greater than 12 mg/dL usually requires treatment, and the nurse should follow the provider's orders and hospital
      policy and protocol. If a serum bilirubin level is required, it is usually obtained by heel stick, per facility protocol. If
      the newborn is breast-feeding, the nurse should observe and offer assistance to improve latch, suck, and swallow.
      The nurse will encourage frequent feedings, every 2 hours, and may suggest that the parent supplement with
      formula as appropriate/or needed.

      Jaundice may be present if infants are having difficulty with breast-feeding, are dehydrated, or are taking in
      insufficient calories. Frequent feedings promote good hydration of the infant and help to boost the milk supply in the
      nursing parent. If breast milk is insufficient, even temporarily, infants may require additional calories and nutrients
      from formula.

      The nurse initiates phototherapy per facility protocol and health-care provider order. The newborn is placed under
      the bili lights in an incubator or thermoregulated environment or in an open crib wrapped in a bili blanket.
      Phototherapy helps improve the solubility of bilirubin for faster secretion through the stool and urine. This is a
      noninvasive treatment. The infant wears only a diaper, covering the genital area, and eye patches covering their eyes
      to allow maximum skin exposure to the phototherapy lights while protecting the genitals and eyes. The nurse
      assesses the skin and eyes every 2 hours when the infant comes out from under the lights for feeding. The nurse
      also monitors the infant's temperature for elevations or fever every 2 hours while phototherapy continues.
      Phototherapy can elevate an infant's body temperature to dangerous levels. Therefore, close monitoring of
      temperature is necessary during treatment. Additionally, the nurse notes any signs of infection or sepsis.

      Hyperbilirubinemia related to Rh incompatibility with the birthing person or severe anemia may require a blood
      transfusion. As for medication, the infant may require the administration of acetaminophen for fever or may be given
      phenobarbital, which acts to stimulate the liver to metabolize bilirubin more quickly (Dysart, 2022)

      Because much of this treatment and phototherapy itself can be done at home, particularly if parents use a bili
      blanket, it is essential that the newborn's caregivers receive thorough education about monitoring the infant's skin,

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      24.2 · Care of Common Problems in the Newborn  1069

the need for skin surfaces to be exposed, monitoring temperature, and encouraging feedings every 2 hours. It is also
very important that they keep scheduled appointments with their care provider because the infant's blood will need
to be monitored closely and frequently for bilirubin levels if it is not done by a visiting nurse. Infants who are
receiving phototherapy, whether at home or in the hospital, can have brief periods outside the phototherapy lights.
Ideally, this could be timed to occur every 2 hours when assessments and feedings occur. This is necessary so that
the infants can be cuddled and held and so that they can bond with their parents and breast-feed if that is desired.
Eye covers can be removed for parent-baby interaction and eye contact but must be replaced when the baby is
returned to phototherapy. Also, the nurse must ensure that phototherapy is turned off during the collection of blood
for serum bilirubin levels because both conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin are photo-oxidized when exposed to
white or ultraviolet light (Wang et al., 2021).

FIGURE 24.11 Jaundiced Newborn Receiving Treatment under a Bili Light. Treatment for hyperbilirubinemia may include the use of bili
lights with both ultraviolet and blue light. The newborn should not wear more than a diaper and eye protection to ensure effective
treatment. (credit: "Light Therapy for Nonphysiologic Jaundice" by Robyn Alvarez/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

Hypoglycemia

Hypoglycemia, another frequently encountered issue, refers to low blood glucose levels. Identifying infants at risk is
an important step in newborn care. Early recognition of signs and symptoms is crucial because it allows nurses to
implement appropriate care and management strategies. These include monitoring glucose levels and timely
feeding or administering glucose water or intravenous glucose in severe cases.

Care of the Newborn with Hypoglycemia
In the term newborn, hypoglycemia refers to a blood glucose level below 40 mg/dL. It is a common transient
occurrence in the immediate postpartum period; therefore, it is not necessary to routinely monitor the blood glucose
of all term newborns. Most hospitals and birthing centers have policies and procedures that require monitoring of
at-risk newborns rather than waiting for them to become symptomatic. The most common cause of hypoglycemia in
infants is hyperinsulinism, typically occurring right after birth. Newborns at risk include the following:

    · small for gestational age (SGA)
    · large for gestational age (LGA)
    · fetal growth-restricted (FGR) infants
    · infants of a diabetic mother (IDM) (Stanford Medicine, 2023b)

See Chapter 23 Newborn Assessment for a full discussion of gestational age.

Other causes of hypoglycemia in the newborn are poor nutrition of the pregnant parent, incompatible blood types
between birthing parent and baby (Rh incompatibility), neonatal pancreatic tumor, birth asphyxia or stressful birth,
cold stress, liver disease, preterm birth, being born to a birthing parent treated with terbutaline, and infection
(Stanford Medicine, 2023b).
1070  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      Hospitals, birthing centers, and nurses can help prevent or significantly reduce hypoglycemia in infants by:

          · encouraging breast-feeding initiation within the first 30 to 60 minutes after birth
          · promoting skin-to-skin contact between birthing parent and baby to prevent cold stress, which depletes the

              infant's glucose stores
          · encouraging breast-feeding 8 to 12 times a day
          · encouraging breast-feeding in response to infant feeding cues rather than a set schedule
          · teaching that crying is a late cue for hunger; instructing parents not to let the newborn cry for prolonged

              periods because crying rapidly depletes glycogen stores and can contribute to rapid drops in blood sugar
              levels
          · promoting continuous parent-baby rooming-in.

      Pathophysiology of Neonatal Hypoglycemia
      Neonatal hypoglycemia may present as transient or persistent. The developing fetus relies on maternal metabolism
      and placental circulation to obtain vital energy sources like glucose, ketones, free fatty acids, and amino acids to
      meet their energy demands. The placenta serves as a direct supplier of glucose to the fetal circulation. However,
      when the umbilical cord is clamped immediately after birth, it abruptly interrupts this continuous glucose supply,
      resulting in a rapid drop in the infant's blood glucose levels during the first 2 to 3 hours of life (Abramowski et al.,
      2023).

      Low blood glucose levels trigger the release of insulin and other hormones, including catecholamines, glucagon, and
      corticosteroids. These hormones stimulate the production of glucose through processes like glucogenesis and
      glycogenolysis while also enhancing the oxidation of fatty acids. This creates an internal source of glucose and other
      necessary energy substrates for the infant's metabolic requirements. As a result, blood glucose levels gradually
      increase over the next several hours to days. Disrupting the established sequence of these physiologic changes can
      pose a heightened risk of more severe or extended periods of low glucose in the infant. The highest likelihood of
      hypoglycemia occurs within the initial hours after birth (Abramowski et al., 2023). Persistent hypoglycemia may
      arise due to overproduction of insulin, insufficient cortisol or growth hormone, or inherent metabolic disorders
      (Abramowski et al., 2023).

      The signs of hypoglycemia are not always noticeable in the newborn, but those infants who are at risk should be
      tested per protocol regardless of the presence of symptoms. The diagnosis is made with a simple test on blood
      obtained by a heel stick. The most common symptoms of hypoglycemia in the newborn include shakiness or
      jitteriness, hypothermia (low body temperature), poor muscle tone (floppy muscles), lethargy (lack of movement
      and energy, out-of-the-ordinary sleepiness), seizures, and possibly cyanosis (blue tint to skin and lips) and apnea
      (stopping breathing) (Stanford Medicine, 2023b).

      Treatment of neonatal hypoglycemia depends on the baby's age and overall health and well-being. Depending on
      the facility's protocol, treatment usually includes giving the baby a fast-acting source of glucose. This may be as
      simple as an oral glucose gel ("Standard-Dose Oral Dextrose Gel for Neonatal Hypoglycemia," 2022), a glucose and
      water mixture, formula as an early feeding, or putting the baby to the breast if the infant nurses well. The baby's
      glucose level is checked after the treatment to see if the hypoglycemia has improved. The baby may need glucose
      given through an IV as further treatment (Stanford Medicine, 2023b). Because the brain needs glucose to function,
      severe hypoglycemia, or not enough glucose for a prolonged period, can impair the function of the infant's brain,
      causing seizures and brain injury. Thus, identifying and treating hypoglycemia as early as possible after birth. with
      the goal of stabilizing and maintaining a normal blood glucose level in the newborn, is optimal.

      Umbilical Cord Conditions

      After birth, the umbilical cord is cut, and the newborn is left with an umbilical cord stump that will fall off over time.
      The nurse educates the newborn's caregiver on caring for the stump at home and the signs or symptoms that would
      warrant a call to the primary care provider. Some common issues that arise from the stump include granulomas,
      hernia, and infection.

      Umbilical Cord Granuloma
      An umbilical cord granuloma is a small nodule of tissue, which can measure up to 1 cm, that may become evident
      after the separation of the umbilical cord (Poenaru, 2001). For some infants, after the cord has fallen off, a small

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      24.2 · Care of Common Problems in the Newborn  1071

granuloma will form. It will stay on the umbilicus and drain a light yellowish fluid. This condition will usually go away
on its own in about a week, but if it does not, the pediatrician may choose to cauterize the area to burn off the
granulomatous tissue (AAP, 2021a). Another treatment option for small granulomas may be an application of topical
silver nitrate. These procedures are commonly treated in the pediatrician's office. For larger granulomas or those
unresponsive to silver nitrate, surgical resection may be indicated (Poenaru, 2001).

Umbilical Hernia
An umbilical hernia is present when the baby's umbilical cord area appears to push outward when the baby cries. It
is caused by a small hole in the muscular part of the abdominal wall that allows the tissue to bulge out when there is
increased abdominal pressure (e.g., crying) (see Figure 23.9). It is not a serious condition and will usually heal itself
in the first 12 to 18 months of life (AAP, 2021a). The healing process may take longer in infants of color for unknown
reasons (AAP, 2021a). If the hole does not heal by the age of 3 to 5 years, it may require surgery.

        CULTURAL CONTEXT

Care of the Newborn

Culture has a strong influence on behaviors and practices during pregnancy, childbirth, and infancy. The challenges
arising from this exciting, yet demanding period of transition often prompt new parents to turn to traditional and
cultural practices. Some examples of cultural practices in the early newborn period include the following:

    · In Zambia, the care of a baby's umbilical stump involves three main methods: drying (using coal or powder on
        the cord), moisturizing (using engine oil on the cord), and protection (using breast milk, manure, or chicken
        feces on the cord).

    · Among Jordanian women and in several other cultures, it is a well-known practice to place a coin on the
        infant's umbilical stump, which is believed to be beneficial in preventing umbilical hernias.

    · In India, cultural practices include the application of cow's urine on the mother and refraining from breast-
        feeding the newborn for the initial 3 days of life.

    · In Bulgarian culture, safeguarding infants from malevolent magic is achieved through the wearing of amulets
        and protective "evil eye" beads (Kulu & Koçak, 2023).

Umbilical Cord Infection
After birth and until the umbilical cord naturally separates, bacteria can invade the umbilical stump and cause
infection called omphalitis. While caring for the infant, the nurse's main priority in preventing umbilical cord
infection is to keep the cord clean and dry and to teach the parents to do so as well. No dressing is necessary. When
changing diapers, the diaper is folded below the umbilical area to avoid urine-induced infection. As part of the
discharge instructions, the nurse instructs the parents that once the umbilical cord has separated, they should
maintain clean and dry precautions until the base of the umbilicus is dry without secretions. If the area still presents
with a large amount of discharge after more than 1 week, they should consult the baby's health-care provider.

The umbilical cord of the newborn is a direct line into the circulatory system. Therefore, if it becomes infected, the
infection can quickly spread systemically and become very serious. When an infection enters the bloodstream, it is
called sepsis, and it can damage the body's organs and tissues. For up to 15 percent of newborns who get an
umbilical cord infection, it is fatal, so it is considered a medical emergency (Healthline, 2019). A culture of the
infected area will be taken to determine which antibiotic is best, which will largely depend on the extent of the
infection.

If the cord infection is minor, the health-care provider may recommend application of an antibiotic cream to the area
a few times daily to fight the infection (Healthline, 2019). If it is more serious, the baby will most likely need to be
hospitalized to receive IV antibiotics for a course of 10 days (Healthline, 2019). This may be followed by oral
antibiotics. How long the baby is hospitalized is up to the health-care provider, but usually it is for the duration of the
IV antibiotic treatment. In some severe cases, the infection may need surgical intervention. Frequently, the infection
causes cells to die at the base of the umbilicus, and these dead cells may need to be removed surgically (Healthline,
2019).
1072  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      Common Dermatologic Conditions of the Newborn

      Newborn dermatologic conditions can be a source of great concern for parents, but most of these issues are benign
      and temporary. While they can be initially frightening, these conditions often resolve with time. From common
      rashes like baby acne, milia, and cradle cap to mild skin discolorations, most newborn skin problems pose no long-
      term harm. Pediatricians can provide guidance and reassurance to parents, helping them navigate these early
      challenges and ensuring the baby's skin health. Understanding that these conditions are a normal part of infancy
      can ease parental anxiety and promote a sense of confidence in caring for their newborn's delicate skin.

      Milia
      Tiny white bumps or cysts on the newborn's skin, usually on the face around the cheek, nose, or chin area are called
      milia (Mount Sinai, 2021) (see Table 23.2). Occasionally, there may be a narrow red halo around the base of the
      milia. Milia form when dead skin cells get trapped in small pockets near the surface of the skin. The protein in those
      cells, called keratin, hardens into tiny cysts that present as small raised white bumps on the skin (Mount Sinai,
      2021). No treatment is needed for milia because they will disappear on their own in the first few weeks of life.

      Baby Acne
      The common short-term skin condition that causes acne breakouts (papules and pustules) on a baby's face, chest,
      or scalp is called baby acne (Cleveland Clinic, 2022e) (Figure 24.12). It occurs on average at about 2 weeks of age,
      although some babies are born with it. It resolves within weeks. Infantile acne occurs after 2 months of age and is
      different from baby acne, lasting up to a year. If an infant develops acne after 2 months of age, parents should see
      their pediatrician for intervention. Baby acne can develop slowly or suddenly. The cause is varied and may be related
      to clogged pores, oily skin, maternal or placental hormones, or other causes. The acne starts as red dots and turns
      into raised pustules, but not blackheads, disappearing in a few days to a couple of weeks. Generally, this acne
      resolves without treatment other than washing the area gently with mild soap and water, keeping the area clean and
      dry, and not using lotions or oils on the baby's skin. An antifungal cream or low-potency topical steroid may be
      prescribed in serious cases (Cleveland Clinic, 2022e).

      FIGURE 24.12 Baby Acne Baby acne consists of pustules, not blackheads, and usually resolves on its own. (credit: "Babyakne" by "selbst
      erstellt (Fragegeist)"/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

      Erythema Toxicum
      The skin condition in newborns that causes a red rash and small, fluid-filled bumps on the infant's face and/or limbs
      is called erythema toxicum neonatorum (ETN) (Cleveland Clinic, 2022d) (see Table 23.2). ETN is not dangerous, it
      does not itch, and it is not uncomfortable for the baby. It does not have any long-term effects and may go away
      within 5 to 14 days after forming. The condition may come back and once again resolve in a week or two. Although
      often confused with baby acne, ETN is different. It can be differentiated by the fact that the bumps disappear and
      form in new areas over a few hours. Between the bumps, the skin has what appears to be a red rash or red patches.
      Symptoms usually show up only on parts of the body that have hair follicles, such as the arms, legs, chest, or face
      (Cleveland Clinic, 2022d). The bumps and rash will get paler when pressure is applied to them. No specific
      treatment is needed for ETN, and parents should be instructed not to squeeze or pick at pustules because that may
      cause infection or scarring.

      Pustular melanosis
      The normal and harmless skin condition that affects term newborns and presents with skin bumps, pustules, or
      blisters anywhere on the infant's body is called transient neonatal pustular melanosis (TNPM) (Cleveland Clinic,
      2022a). The pus-filled bumps are noticeable at birth and will rupture, causing white-encircled dark spots on the

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      24.2 · Care of Common Problems in the Newborn  1073

skin. The darkened skin will fade in 3 to 4 weeks (Cleveland Clinic, 2022a). Because blisters rupture easily, care
must be taken to avoid infection. TNPM affects boys and girls equally and affects infants of color more than white
infants. TNPM is benign, and it does not itch or cause scarring. The condition resolves without treatment.

Management of Common Newborn Skin Ailments
Most common skin ailments in the newborn are benign and require little management. It is important to understand
the expected and pathophysiologic findings in the skin. Nurses can differentiate between normal variations and
abnormal conditions and can educate parents about both. Appropriate care and management approaches are
discussed to address issues effectively.

Diaper Rash
A common form of dermatitis, skin inflammation, in the diaper area of the buttocks, thighs, and genitals is called
diaper rash (Mayo Clinic, 2022b). Diaper rashes are often uncomfortable and tender, causing fussiness and crying
during diaper changes and in between. They can be caused by:

    · Delay in changing wet or soiled diapers. Babies have sensitive skin. Diarrhea may also cause a rash.
    · Chafing or rubbing. Rash may also occur if diapers are too tight or too small.
    · Using a new product such as baby wipes, diapers, detergent, bleach, or fabric softener. Ingredients in lotions

        or oils might add to the problem.
    · Developing a bacterial or yeast (fungal) infection. Skin creases around the diaper area are perfect breeding

        grounds for bacterial or yeast infections because they are moist and warm. If a yeast infection has developed,
        parents might notice red dots in the area, and the skin may be bright red and painful.
    · Introducing new foods. As infants are introduced to new foods, their stool changes. This increases the
        likelihood of developing a diaper rash.
    · Having sensitive skin.Infants with skin conditions such as atopic dermatitis (eczema) are more likely to
        develop diaper rashes (Mayo Clinic, 2022b). The skin affected by eczema is usually in areas not covered by
        diapers.
    · Using antibiotics. Antibiotics can contribute to rashes by killing off bacteria that keep yeast growth in check,
        thereby allowing yeast to grow. Antibiotic use also increases the risk of diarrhea.

The best way to prevent a diaper rash is to keep the area clean and dry and to change diapers often. The nurse
should teach the parents to use warm water and a mild soap to cleanse the area, or a baby wipe that does not
contain alcohol, which would sting when a rash is present. Most commercial wipes do not contain alcohol. Parents
or caregivers should gently pat the area dry or let it air dry. Cream, paste, or ointment should be applied regularly to
the diaper area as a barrier to protect the skin. Petroleum jelly and zinc oxide are ingredients present in many
proven diaper rash products. Diapers should fit securely but not too tightly, and when possible, the baby should
have time without wearing a diaper. After each diaper change, it is important to maintain good handwashing to avoid
the transfer of bacteria and yeast to other parts of the baby's body, to the caregiver, or to other people.

Cradle Cap
The common, harmless skin condition on an infant's scalp that presents as yellow scaly patches with a red rash is
called cradle cap or seborrheic dermatitis (Cleveland Clinic, 2020). It is not uncomfortable for the baby, and it is
not contagious. The exact cause of cradle cap is unknown, but overproduction by sebaceous glands in the baby's
scalp or a type of yeast in the oil produced by these glands may contribute to this condition (Cleveland Clinic, 2020).
Infants who have family members with eczema or asthma are more likely to have cradle cap. It occurs equally in
males and females and does not affect one ethnicity more often than another. Cradle cap looks like a reddened area
with crusty brown or yellow scales on the scalp that resemble fish scales. The scales feel flaky, or waxy and greasy,
to the touch. Cradle cap is seen in the first weeks or months of life and usually disappears completely by 12 months
of age. Home treatment is all that is needed to manage most cases of cradle cap. Parents should massage
petroleum jelly or mineral oil into the scalp, use a soft brush to gently remove the scales, and wash the baby's hair
daily with a mild baby shampoo. If this does not resolve the cradle cap, other over-the-counter baby products are
available for this purpose. Once the cradle cap is resolved, the infant's hair should be washed 2 to 3 times weekly
with a mild baby shampoo to prevent it from returning.

Eczema
The common skin condition that causes patches of skin to become dry, itchy, and scaly is called eczema. It most
1074  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      commonly affects babies on their face, scalp, feet, hands, and legs. Eczema is a chronic condition that is not
      contagious. In the United States, baby eczema affects 15 percent to 20 percent of infants up to the age of 2 years
      (Cleveland Clinic, 2022b). This condition can come and go unexpectedly throughout life regardless of age. It is
      believed that a combination of genetics and environmental factors causes baby eczema, and these factors include:

          · skin irritants and allergens, including fabrics, soaps, and certain foods
          · immune system reaction
          · genetics

      Treating eczema can often be a frustrating experience for parents. The first step is to eliminate skin irritants and
      allergens. To do that, parents need to know what they are. Unfortunately, that is often a process of elimination and
      trial and error. If parents can identify these triggers, avoiding them will help the baby's skin to heal and will prevent
      or lessen future flare-ups. Next, parents may use topical corticosteroids, which are rubbed on the baby's skin like
      lotion. These are steroids prescribed by the infant's provider, generally for no more than twice a day for 2 weeks.
      Longer or more frequent use may lead to discoloration or thinning of the infant's skin. Finally, parents can apply
      moisturizers to the baby's skin. By keeping the skin well hydrated, symptoms will be reduced, skin will be soothed,
      discomfort will be alleviated, and flare-ups will be prevented. Moisturizers without fragrance should be used and
      can be applied after bathing and several times a day as needed for dry skin.

      Common Newborn Illnesses

      Differentiating between common newborn viral illnesses and bacterial infections is not always easy and often
      requires a trip to the pediatrician. However, viral illnesses are more common than bacterial infections in the
      newborn period. Both may cause similar symptoms, such as fever, irritability, and listlessness, while the treatments
      for each are different. Testing may be required to determine the causative factor.

      Management of Common Newborn Viral Illnesses
      Some common viral agents in the newborn include herpes simplex viruses, HIV, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and
      hepatitis B. Intrapartum infection with HIV or hepatitis B can occur as the newborn passes through an infected birth
      canal or by ascending infection if delivery is delayed after rupture of membranes (Tesini, 2022). It is possible for
      these viruses to also be transmitted transplacentally, which commonly occurs. Specifically, CMV (cytomegalovirus)
      is commonly transmitted in this manner.

      Upper Respiratory Infections
      Many common newborn viruses, such as upper respiratory infections (URIs), or "common colds," present with a
      runny nose, cough, low-grade fever with decreased feeding, and difficulty in sleeping. No antibiotics or antiviral
      medications will help the infant recover more quickly from a cold. Treatment is to keep the infant as comfortable as
      possible. Clear their nasal passages so that breathing and eating are easier. Advise caregivers to not overdress the
      infant with a fever and to medicate as directed by the infant's care provider with acetaminophen (Tylenol) or
      ibuprofen (Motrin). Aspirin should not be given to newborns. Aspirin has been linked to Reye syndrome, a serious
      and potentially fatal condition for infants and children that causes swelling of the liver and brain after a viral
      infection. Acetaminophen is a safer alternative for fever or pain in babies up to 6 months of age, while both
      acetaminophen and ibuprofen are recommended for use in infants 6 months and older.

      Caregivers should monitor the baby's temperature, and if it gets worse, notify the pediatrician. Parents should be
      alert for signs of dehydration, particularly if the baby is not eating well because of a runny or stuffy nose. Infants can
      dehydrate very quickly due to decreased feedings and the immature nature of the neonatal kidneys, which are not
      as efficient in concentrating urine. For infants and children, the "common cold" can last from 10 to 14 days, and they
      occur an average of 6 to 8 times per year (Duke Health, 2019) and up to twice as often for infants in daycare.

      Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV)
      The contagious virus causing an illness more serious than a cold or upper respiratory infection is called respiratory
      syncytial virus (RSV). Its symptoms start similarly, with fever (over 100.4° F or 38° C or higher), cough (dry or wet
      sounding), congestion, runny nose, sneezing, fussiness, and poor feeding. Symptoms may progress to bronchiolitis,
      a lower respiratory infection, which includes cold symptoms as well as rapid breathing; nasal flaring (when the
      nostrils flare out with each breath) and head bobbing with breathing; rhythmic grunting (occurs during breathing
      out, which is the infant's way of trying to keep air in the lungs so the lungs will stay open); abdominal breathing;

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      24.2 · Care of Common Problems in the Newborn  1075

intercostal retraction (a sucking-in between the ribs when the infant breathes in) or an upside-down V shape under
the infant's neck when breathing in; and wheezing. These are all signs that the infant is working too hard to breathe.
If their skin turns blue or purple, they are not getting enough oxygen. On darker skinned infants, look for changes in
color to lips, tongue, gums, and around the eyes. Parents should be educated to notify their health-care provider if
infants develop symptoms of bronchiolitis; dehydration (less than 1 diaper every 8 hours); long pauses (greater than
10 seconds between breaths) or difficulty in breathing; gray or blue color to tongue, lips, or skin; or significant
decrease in activity and/or alertness (AAP, 2023b). For infants and certain toddlers, the RSV immunization
nirsevimab (Beyfortus) can be administered via injection and may be integrated into their routine immunization
schedule. Nirsevimab has been proven to reduce the risk of RSV-related hospitalizations and health-care visits in
infants by approximately 80 percent (AAP, 2023b). This injection functions uniquely compared to traditional
vaccines. It supplies antibodies that initiate immediate protection for infants, offering safeguarding throughout the
standard RSV season. A single nirsevimab dose is suggested for infants under 8 months of age, to be given during or
just before the RSV season. Additionally, a single dose is recommended for certain children between 8 and 19
months of age who are entering their second RSV season and face an increased risk of severe illness (AAP, 2023b).

Influenza
Another viral illness, influenza--also commonly referred to as the flu--can cause many of the same symptoms as
the common cold but is accompanied by severe body aches and higher fever. If diagnosed within the first 48 hours
of illness, influenza can be shortened by antiviral medication (Duke Health, 2019). A dose of flu vaccine (or two
doses given a month apart in the young child receiving the flu vaccine for the first time) given at the start of each flu
season can help to prevent influenza infections. The American Academy of Pediatrics (2023a) recommends annual
influenza vaccination for all children without medical contraindication starting at 6 months of age (injection or
intranasal). Although all children, particularly those under the age of 5 years, are considered at a higher risk for
complications from the flu virus, the highest risk is for those younger than 2 years.

COVID-19
Infants and children of all ages can get COVID-19, an infectious illness caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 that
became a pandemic disease in 2020. In fact, babies can test positive from birth if the birth parent is positive, which
is why it is important for pregnant persons to keep up to date with their immunizations and monitor their health.
Newborns can get COVID-19 from the people who care for them. The nurse provides education on good
handwashing techniques when caring for their infant. The infant's crib can remain in the room with the parent while
in the hospital, but keeping a reasonable distance from the newborn when not providing direct care or feeding is
important. These precautions help to keep the risks of the infant getting COVID-19 low. If the birth parent is very
sick and symptomatic, it would then be best to temporarily separate parent and baby by moving the baby out of the
parent's room (Mayo Clinic, 2023b).

Infants who have tested positive for COVID-19 but remain asymptomatic may be allowed to return home from the
hospital, depending on the circumstances. To ensure protection, it is recommended that the caregivers of the baby
wear face masks and maintain rigorous hand hygiene. Continuous monitoring and follow-up with the infant's health-
care provider, conducted through phone consultations, virtual check-ins, or in-person visits, are necessary for the
next 14 days. Infants who test negative for COVID-19 may also be discharged from the hospital (Mayo Clinic,
2023b).

In the United States, vaccinations for COVID-19 are not available for infants under the age of 6 months. The Pfizer-
BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine can be given at age 6 months if requested by the parents. It is given to children
between 6 months and 4 years and consists of three doses to bring the child "up to date" with the vaccine. After the
first dose, the second dose is given 3 to 5 weeks later, and the third dose is given at least 8 weeks after the second
(Mayo Clinic, 2023b). The alternative is the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine, which can be given between ages 6 months
and 5 years. This vaccine consists of two doses, with the second dose given 8 weeks after the first (Mayo Clinic,
2023b).

Management of Common Newborn Bacterial Infections
Bacterial infections are any illness or condition caused by bacterial growth or toxins. Harmful bacteria can attack the
skin, gastrointestinal (GI) system, lungs, heart, brain, blood, or anywhere in the body. Most bacteria are not harmful,
and many are helpful. Many of the vaccines that infants and children receive are meant to prevent serious bacterial
infections.
1076  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      Commonly seen bacterial agents affecting newborns include group B streptococci, enteric gram-negative organisms
      (primarily Escherichia coli or E. coli), Listeria monocytogenes, gonococci, and chlamydia (Tesini, 2022).

      With bacterial infections:

          · Symptoms tend to persist longer than the 10 to 14 days that a virus usually lasts.
          · Fever is usually higher than expected from a virus.
          · Rather than improving, the fever and symptoms get worse a few days into the illness.

      Antibiotics can treat most bacterial infections, but only a few viral infections have medications that can treat them.
      The primary treatment for neonatal bacterial infections is prompt empiric antimicrobial therapy with drugs such as
      ampicillin and gentamicin or ampicillin and cefotaxime (Tesini, 2022). Once culture results are returned, the drug,
      dose, and frequency will be adjusted to best fight the identified organism.

      Bacteria in the blood, or sepsis, and a bacterial infection in the lining of the brain and spinal cord, or bacterial
      meningitis, are two serious and concerning kinds of bacterial infections. Infants have few subjective symptoms.
      Diagnostic tests are required to ascertain that bacterial infections are part of their current or presenting illness.

              LINK TO LEARNING

      Read the current guidelines from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) and AAP
      (https://openstax.org/r/77groupBstrep) regarding prophylactic treatment of group B streptococcus (GBS) sepsis, a
      dangerous pathophysiology resulting from a bacterial infection.

      Helping Parents Recognize and Respond to Signs of Illness in a Newborn
      Having a newborn is both exciting and stressful for new parents for many reasons. One of these is concern for the
      baby's health. How does a new parent know if their baby is getting sick? They may not know what their baby's
      normal behavior is, and that makes it difficult to determine if their newborn's behavior is not normal. Changes in
      newborn behavior can be subtle, so they are not always easy for new parents to spot. The best advice the nurse can
      give a new parent is to have them note any behavior that seems abnormal to them. Use the following list to teach
      new parents about signs of illness in newborns. New parents should watch for:

          · any suspicion of illness, such as crying more than usual, irritability, coughing, diarrhea, or vomiting (if vomit is
              green, which means bile, notify the health-care provider immediately)

          · changes in feeding patterns, such as having to wake the baby for feedings or if the baby no longer finishes
              their feedings, which could indicate illness

          · a fever of greater than 100.4° F (38° C), which warrants a call to the health-care provider
          · low body temperature, less than 96.8° F (36° C), which warrants a call to the health-care provider
          · changes in the baby's cry--if the cry becomes weak, sounds strange, or becomes frantic or inconsolable
          · weak suckling or not being able to suck for very long
          · sweating while eating
          · sleeping more than usual
          · decreased muscle tone, floppy limbs, floppy neck when the infant previously could hold head up
          · moaning or grunting noises when breathing, with or without flaring of nostrils
          · decreased urination (fewer wet diapers) and dry mouth (dehydration)
          · any color change, such as pale, bluish, or gray arms and legs

      Any of these signs and symptoms of infant illness can occur independently or in combination. Babies do not often
      get sick, but when they do, they can deteriorate quickly (Kliegman et al., 2020).

      When Contacting Health-Care Providers: Be Prepared
      When contacting health-care providers or taking a baby to the emergency department (ED) for any problem or
      emergency, parents should be prepared to assist medical personnel in understanding what is happening with their
      baby and why they are concerned. Table 24.6 provides a summary of the helpful information parents will be asked
      to give health-care providers who are caring for their child. Being prepared will save both parents and their health-
      care provider time during a phone call, office visit, or trip to the ED, when time is of the essence. Parents need to be

      Access for free at openstax.org
                          24.2 · Care of Common Problems in the Newborn                                                 1077

as objective as possible in relaying the facts of the situation. When parents can accurately and calmly describe in
detail what they observed and what took place as well as any pertinent history, this allows the health-care provider
to make quick and necessary assessments and decisions to provide the best care for their baby. Photos or videos of
concerning symptoms can also be valuable.

Category     Information

The baby's   What prompted parents to contact their health-care provider or seek medical advice?
symptoms

The baby's   Be prepared to discuss the history of the current symptoms or illness. When did it start? How has
medical      it progressed? Is the baby up to date on their immunizations?
history

Changes in   Is the baby feeding on a normal schedule, retaining feedings, spitting up, vomiting? Do parents
the baby's   need to wake the baby for feedings, is the baby refusing to eat, not interested in feeding, not
feeding or   taking the full feeding? Does the baby show signs of watery stools, diarrhea, change in stool
bowel        volume, consistency, amount, effort? Are there any known allergies or sensitivities to food,
movements    formula? Are there any known chronic conditions?

Changes in   What is the baby's temperature, and what time was it last taken? Make sure to mention how it
the baby's   was taken (e.g., rectally, axillary, temporally, forehead).
body
temperature

Any home     Has the infant been given any home remedies, over-the-counter, or prescription medicines? If so,
remedies or  what strength, what dose, and when?
medicines

Possible     Is anyone in the household or daycare ill? Has the infant been exposed to anyone who has been
exposures    ill? Has the baby or any family member recently received any immunizations (e.g., COVID-19 or
             flu)?

TABLE 24.6 Information Parents Should Know When They Suspect Their Baby Is Ill

Parents should be prepared to record any specific care instructions from their care provider, either on their phone or
with paper and pen. They should also carry with them the phone number and location of their family pharmacy in
case a prescription is ordered.

Parental education regarding common conditions that may occur in newborns is important to fostering parental
bonding and feelings of confidence and competence as parents. The American Academy of Pediatrics (2021a) has
identified a number of conditions common during the first couple of weeks of life as being of particular importance
to new parents of newborns.

Abdominal Distention
Most babies have round bellies that stick out right after a feeding, but the abdomen (stomach) should feel soft
between feedings. If it feels swollen or hard, there could be a problem with gas or constipation. If the baby has not
had a bowel movement in more than a day or two, if the stool is like currant jelly or has blood in it, or if they are
vomiting, a swollen stomach could be an indication of an intestinal problem. Parents should notify the baby's
health-care provider immediately.

Birth Injuries
Babies can be injured during birth, particularly if they are very large. While they usually recover quickly from these
injuries, some symptoms may persist. Occasionally, a broken collar bone may occur. During the initial assessment,
the nurse will detect a concavity (the curving in of a surface) and/or crepitus (a crackling or crunching sound made
by the damaged bone) when palpating the newborn's clavicle. After a few weeks, a small lump may form at the
1078  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      fracture site, a sign that new bone is forming to mend the injury.

      Muscle weakness, or brachial plexus injury, is another common injury. This occurs during labor when pressure,
      compression, or stretching damages the nerves that send signals from the spinal cord to the shoulder, arm, and
      hand. Muscles are usually weakened on one side of the face or one shoulder or arm and generally return to normal
      after several weeks. Nurses and health-care providers can show parents how to nurse and hold the baby to promote
      healing of the muscles and nerves. Chapter 25 Care of the Newborn at Risk provides more information on birth
      injuries and their management.

      "Blue Baby"
      Newborns may have acrocyanosis, mildly blue or purple hands and feet, when they are cold, which is normal
      (Kutlubay et al., 2017). This condition is not related to the infant's temperature and is very common in newborns in
      their first few hours of life as they adjust to extrauterine circulation and life. Acrocyanosis is caused by the
      constriction of the small blood vessels that deliver oxygen-rich blood to the extremities. An infant's face, tongue, or
      lips may occasionally turn a little blue when the newborn is crying hard, but once they are calm, their color should
      quickly return to their typical shade. However, persistent blue coloring, or grey coloring in darker skinned infants,
      blue coloring circling the mouth, or blue coloring plus breathing or feeding difficulties is an emergency. It could
      mean that the heart or lungs are not working correctly, and the baby should be taken to the emergency department
      or 911 should be called immediately!.

      Unusual Bowel Movements
      Unusual bowel movements or stooling patterns can include failure to pass meconium during the first 48 hours after
      birth. If the newborn has not passed the meconium in that time, evaluation of the lower bowel is indicated to detect
      potential problems.

      Blood in newborn stool is not expected. Newborns may have a small amount of blood in their stool in the first few
      days of life. If this occurs, it usually means the infant has a fissure, or tiny crack, opening, or split, in the skin or
      tissues of the body, such as the anus from stooling (AAP, 2021a). Although this is generally harmless, it is suggested
      that parents notify their health-care provider about any signs of blood to confirm the reason because other causes
      require further investigation and treatment.

      Coughing
      Newborns may cough, gag, or sputter as they learn to feed. If breast-feeding, this may happen if the nursing
      parent's milk lets down very fast or when switching from the breast to a bottle. When solely bottle-feeding, the size
      and shape of the nipple could be the issue. If the baby coughs or gags regularly when trying to feed and adjustments
      have not helped, parents should consult their care provider because these symptoms could indicate an underlying
      problem in the lungs or digestive tract.

      Excessive Crying
      All newborns cry and sometimes for no reason at all. If a newborn is crying, the parent or caregiver should "go to the
      basics" by making sure the baby is fed, burped, and have a clean diaper. After that, swaddle them and hold them,
      rock them, talk softly, sing, sway, or do whatever works to calm them down. The nurse should teach parents that
      they cannot "spoil" a newborn by picking them up and holding them, so they should not hesitate to do that when
      their baby is crying. Soon enough, parents will know their baby's crying patterns and be better able to tell why they
      are crying. If the baby's crying sounds different, such as shrieking, or it goes on for an unusually long time, parents
      should call their health-care provider.

      Forceps Marks
      If forceps were used to assist in the delivery, they can often leave bruised, red marks or even superficial scrapes or
      scratches on the newborn's face and head. These marks may not appear immediately after birth and may first
      appear as redness or puffiness of the face (Figure 24.13). It may take a few hours for bruising and forceps marks to
      become visible. These marks will generally disappear within a few days of birth. Sometimes, a firm, flat lump
      develops in one of these areas due to damage of the tissue under the skin and bleeding in that area. Parents could,
      and should, bring this to the attention of their newborn's care provider, who will likely tell them that this will go away
      within 2 months (AAP, 2021a).

      Access for free at openstax.org
24.2 · Care of Common Problems in the Newborn                                                                                              1079

FIGURE 24.13 Marks from Forceps Delivery If forceps were used to assist in the delivery, they can often leave bruised, red marks, or even
superficial scrapes or scratches on the newborn's face and head. (credit: "Forceps Marks" by Joanne Lee/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

Lethargy and Sleepiness
Newborns sleep an average of 16 to 17 hours in a 24-hour period. Some may sleep even more. They will most likely
set their own sleep-wake patterns, waking every 2 to 4 hours for feedings throughout the day and night. Parents
need to expect their newborns to spend most of their time asleep. If they wake every few hours, eat well, seem
content, and are alert at least part of the day, it is perfectly normal for babies to sleep the rest of the time. If the
baby is rarely alert, does not wake on their own for feedings, or seems too tired or uninterested to eat, those are
indicators that parents should contact their health-care provider. This lethargy--particularly if it is sudden or a
change in their usual behavior pattern--may be a symptom of a serious illness.

Respiratory Distress
Within a few hours after birth, the typical newborn has settled into a relaxed, comfortable, and stable breathing
pattern. After this, if the newborn has trouble breathing, it is most likely because their nasal passages are blocked.
Newborns are nasal obligate breathers (Hamming & Walner, 2012), meaning they breathe through their noses. The
only time newborns breathe through their mouths is when they are crying. Therefore, clear nares are necessary for
effortless breathing. When at home, troubled breathing is normally easy to remedy by using saline. It may become
necessary to suction the infant's mouth and nose to provide an open airway and to remove secretions or
regurgitated feeding from these areas. The mouth must always be suctioned before the nose. When the nose is
suctioned, the infant will often gasp, choke, or aspirate any contents in the mouth. Suctioning the mouth first
reduces the risk of aspiration.

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

QSEN Competency: Safety: Nasal and Oral Suctioning

Definition: Minimize the risk of harm to patients and providers through both system effectiveness and individual
performance.

Knowledge: Examine human factors and other basic safety design principles as well as commonly used unsafe
practices.

Skill: Demonstrate effective use of technology and standardized practices that support safety and quality.

Procedure for suctioning of the infant's mouth and nose using a bulb syringe:

Thoroughly wash and dry hands prior to suctioning the infant's mouth and nose.

  1. The infant's head is positioned to the side, as the infant is prone. This position will allow fluid to pool in the
        lower cheek.

  2. The bulb syringe is compressed prior to inserting it into the lower cheek. (Do not compress while it is in the
        mouth because any secretions that are in the bulb will be expelled back into the mouth and may cause
        choking or respiratory distress).

  3. Gently position the tip of the bulb syringe into the side of the infant's mouth between the cheek and the gums.
        Do not insert it into the back of the throat, which could stimulate the gag reflex, causing regurgitation, or
        produce a vagal response that could result in bradycardia or apnea.
1080  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

        4. Release the bulb while it is in the infant's mouth, between the lower gums and cheek. This will cause the bulb
              to suction or draw secretions into the bulb. Remove the bulb syringe and empty it by compressing it several
              times, outside the mouth, before using it again. Emptying it prepares it for use again.

        5. Repeat the procedure to suction the mouth again. Suction the nose following the mouth, only if necessary.
              Infants may gasp when the nose is suctioned and might aspirate secretions in the mouth if it is not cleared
              first. Therefore, always suction the mouth before the nose.

        6. If suctioning the nose is necessary, do it gently. Suctioning of the nose can cause edema and trauma, which
              will obstruct the delicate nasal passages and cause unnecessary respiratory difficulties. It is best to suction
              the baby's nose before a feeding or bedtime. Do not suction after a feeding because it may cause the baby to
              vomit.

        7. When suction is completed, clean the bulb syringe with hot soapy water, squeezing water from the bulb. Air
              dry. This will prepare it for future use.

      Procedure for suctioning of the infant's nose using a NoseFrida (Frida.com, 2003):

      Thoroughly wash and dry hands prior to suctioning the infant's nose.

        1. The disposable hygiene filter needs to be in place to prevent mucus or bacteria transfer. Be sure that the
              assembly is complete and secure.

        2. Place the large tube against the child's nostril, not inside the nostril, creating a seal.
        3. Use the red mouthpiece to suck out the mucus from the nostril. Wipe the exterior if needed and repeat by

              creating a seal against the child's other nostril.
        4. After the mucus-sucking session is completed, dispose of the filter.
        5. Wash the large tube with warm soap and water. Clean the tube with a few drops of rubbing alcohol.
        6. Firmly snap dry pieces together, inserting a new filter in place, preparing for the next use.

      By following this procedure, the item is cleaned, assembled, and ready for use.

      Attitude: Value the contributions of standardization/reliability to safety.

      24.3 Newborn Discharge Planning and Parent Education

      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

          · Summarize individualized parent teaching that will enhance parents' confidence and abilities to care for a
              newborn during the first month at home

          · Verbalize safety needs of the newborn
          · Identify activities that parents should include in the activities of daily living for the newborn

      Many new parents enjoy their time in the hospital after giving birth. It is a time to relax, get to know their newborn,
      and begin their lives together as a family while having the comfort and convenience of nursing staff to assist with
      care issues and needed education. Other parents feel just the opposite. These new parents are anxious to be
      discharged with their newborns to begin their lives as a family in the comfort of their home. Education in anticipation
      of discharge of the normal newborn is the topic of this section.

      Ideally, discharge teaching, also referred to as parent education, should begin after delivery. If the nurse waits until
      discharge to begin the parent education, the amount of information can be overwhelming for the parents. Much of
      the information may be forgotten or lost in the flurry of activity that surrounds an infant's homecoming. Because
      hospital stays are relatively short after childbirth, providing necessary parental education can be challenging to the
      nurse, who must be organized and persistent in education efforts. Nurses use various educational methods, such as
      videos, classes, and educational handouts available in various languages, to supplement their discharge education
      sessions. Additionally, some hospitals provide an educational channel on TV featuring parenting videos that
      demonstrate infant bathing, feeding, use of car seats, and other necessary skills. Hospitals may also provide
      websites with additional information and support for patients. After discharge, referrals for visitation by home care
      nurses may be an option for follow-up care, as well as support groups, when necessary.

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         24.3 · Newborn Discharge Planning and Parent Education  1081

Parent Education about Newborn Behaviors

Often, new parents do not know what is considered "normal" or expected behavior for a newborn. Even parents who
have other children at home may not know or remember what to expect. Babies develop at different rates, but they
all engage in many of the same behaviors and behavioral patterns. Parents appreciate anticipatory guidance from
nurses regarding continuing infant care. Being given the tools to recognize and understand behaviors and patterns
demonstrated by their newborns provides parents with a sense of accomplishment and control in their newly
acquired roles. It also allows them to move forward in the bonding process with less worry and more confidence.

Breathing Patterns of the Newborn
Often a concern for new parents is their newborn's breathing pattern: the rate and rhythm of breathing, which in the
newborn is "regularly irregular." Because newborns often have irregular breathing patterns, their breaths should be
counted for a full minute, preferably when they are quiet and at rest. They are noisy breathers who have been known
to squeak, gurgle, grunt, and whistle while breathing "normally." Newborns are obligate nose breathers, and
synchronous abdominal movement occurs with each breath. Chest movement is symmetric and not labored. But
newborns can experience occasional periods of irregular respirations in which they may stop breathing for 5 to 10
seconds and then start breathing again on their own without any intervention. This is considered an expected
breathing pattern for a newborn (Mohr et al., 2015). Parents should be informed about these periods of irregular
breathing so that they do not worry unnecessarily. If their baby stops breathing for more than 10 seconds or begins
to turn blue, they should call their provider or take their baby to the nearest emergency department. When an infant
stops breathing for 20 seconds or more and develops cyanosis and bradycardia, the infant is said to have apnea.

Sleep Patterns of the Newborn
The nurse educates the new parent on expected newborn sleeping patterns prior to discharge. Many parents do not
know how to recognize the signs of sleep readiness in their newborns, how long a newborn may sleep in a day, or
what sleep position is best for their baby. The nurse can answer these questions and more.

Although every baby is different, most will show one or more of the following signs when they are ready for sleep:

    · rubbing eyes
    · yawning
    · looking away, ignoring behavior
    · fussing, irritability, possibly crying (depending on how long the other signs are ignored)

These are also signs of overstimulation. These signs will progress if they are ignored. That is, the initial behaviors
will become fussing, then fussing will progress to irritability, irritability will become crying, and crying will worsen to
inconsolable crying (Kim, 2011).

Not every baby knows how to put themselves to sleep. Many parents want to rock their baby or breast-feed their
baby to sleep. Most experts recommend establishing a bedtime routine, and they suggest not putting a baby to
sleep in a parent's arms or while feeding. A bedtime routine may include a bath, soft music, turning the lights down,
reading a bedtime story, or rocking in a chair. If the baby were to go sleep only while being held, this would become
a habit. The baby could quickly learn to expect this behavior and not go to sleep on their own. Most experts
recommend placing the baby into their sleep space while still awake. This will help the baby learn to go to sleep on
their own or will help condition the newborn to establish sleep time behaviors.

The average newborn sleeps approximately 16 to 17 hours per day, but this can vary greatly. Some may sleep close
to 20 hours a day. Generally, they sleep about 8 to 9 hours in the daytime and about 8 hours at night. Most babies do
not begin sleeping through the night (6 to 8 hours) without waking until they are at least 3 months of age or weigh
12 to 13 pounds (Raising Children Network, 2023; Stanford Medicine, 2023c). Once again, this will vary greatly
depending on the infant. Some babies will not sleep through the night until they are closer to a year old. Newborns
and young infants have small stomachs and need to be fed often. The infant's age as well as what they are being fed
will determine how often they wake to be fed. For instance, breast-fed infants need to be fed more frequently than
formula-fed infants because breast milk is digested more easily and therefore more quickly than formula. In most
cases, the infant will awaken and be ready to feed every 3 hours or less with an average of 8 to 12 feedings per day.

Babies will generally set their own sleep patterns. Parents should be educated that if their baby is sleeping
consistently and suddenly begins waking, it might be an indication of a growth spurt, a developmental change, or
1082  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      overstimulation. If it continues and their infant shows other signs such as pulling or rubbing their ear or unusual
      irritability, they should consider notifying their health-care provider for a possible ear infection or other problem.

      Infants do not sleep as deeply as adults, spending approximately 50 percent of their time in REM (rapid eye
      movement) sleep (Raising Children Network, 2023). In REM sleep, babies often make noises loud enough to wake
      parents in the same room. They may also move about in their crib as if they are about to awaken. Going to them at
      this time will surely awaken them because they are in a very light sleep. If left alone, infants may return to a quiet
      sleep. It is not uncommon for babies to experience these cycles as they pass from deep sleep to light sleep in the
      first few months of life.

      Growth and Development Patterns of the Newborn
      During the first year, an infant goes through a time of rapid change. Their birth weight usually doubles by about 4 to
      6 months and triples by the end of their first year (Boston Children's Hospital, 2023). During this period, they grow
      approximately 1 foot in height. At about 6 months, teeth begin to erupt; and by the end of their first year, they have
      between 6 and 8 deciduous teeth. Their physical growth and development are largely dependent on the birthing
      parent's prenatal nutrition and the quality and type of feeding in infancy. The changes in body proportions mirror
      changes in developing internal organs. The nervous system demonstrates increased control over body movements,
      which allow infants to sit, stand, and walk, usually taking their first steps around 1 year old. Generally, walking is
      mastered sometime between 12 and 18 months, and many infants walk much earlier. Sensory function also
      improves, allowing infants to discriminate visual images, sounds, and tastes. Kidney and liver function helps older
      infants excrete drugs or other toxic substances much more efficiently than newborns do.

      Cognitively, the brain continues to increase in complexity during this time. Most of the growth involves maturation of
      cells. For example, a newborn's eyes may widen in response to a sound, whereas a 1-year-old will turn their head to
      the sound and recognize its significance. A 2-month-old cries and coos, and a 1-year-old says a few words and
      understands many more. A 6-week-old infant grasps a rattle for the first time while a 1-year-old infant reaches for
      toys and self-feeds. Infants receive input from the environment from birth onwards, and as they age, their internal
      cognitive abilities continue to mature, as does the ability of their growing brain to interpret external stimuli (State of
      Michigan, 2023).

      Parent Education about Safety of the Newborn

      Supporting parents, particularly new parents, as they prepare to go home involves education and forethought
      regarding the future developmental needs of the newborn. It is normal for parents to feel a mix of excitement and
      fear when caring for a newborn at home for the first time, or even the tenth time. This section focuses on parent
      education surrounding the safety of the newborn.

      Safe Sleep Practices
      Parental education is essential regarding safe sleep practices. Approximately 3,500 preventable infant deaths occur
      each year in the United States due to unsafe sleeping arrangements (CDC, 2024). The unexplained death, usually
      during sleep, of a seemingly healthy baby that is less than a year old is called sudden infant death syndrome
      (SIDS) (Mayo Clinic, 2022a). The cause of SIDS is unknown, but it may be associated with defects in the infant's
      brain that control breathing and arousal from sleep (Mayo Clinic, 2022a).

      Although SIDS can strike any infant, research has identified the following potential risk factors (AAP, 2022a; Mayo
      Clinic, 2022a; Moon et al., 2016):

          · Sex--Boys are slightly more likely to die of SIDS.
          · Age--Infants are at the highest risk for SIDS between the 2nd and 4th months of life.
          · Race--Non-White infants are at a higher risk for developing SIDS.
          · Family history--Infants who have had a sibling or a cousin die of SIDS are at a higher risk of SIDS.
          · Secondhand smoke--Infants who live with smokers or are exposed to secondhand smoke are at a higher risk

              for SIDS.
          · Prematurity--Both prematurity and low birth weight increase an infant's chances of SIDS.

      To reduce the risk of SIDS, it is important not to overheat the infant. Advise parents to use an infant sleep sack or
      other sleep clothing to keep their baby warm rather than additional blankets (see Figure 23.20). When possible,
      breast-feeding is recommended for at least 6 months because it lowers the risk of SIDS (AAP, 2022a; Mayo Clinic,

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         24.3 · Newborn Discharge Planning and Parent Education  1083

2022a). Offering the baby a pacifier without a strap or string at naptime and bedtime may also reduce the risk of
SIDS (AAP, 2022a; Mayo Clinic, 2022a). Parents should also make sure that the infant continues with routine
immunizations. Some research reports that routine immunizations reduce the risk of SIDS. Parents should not use
products for sleep that are not specifically marketed for infant sleep.

According to the CDC (2024) and the American Academy of Pediatrics (2022a), parents should follow these
recommended guidelines to keep infants safe while sleeping:

  1. Place the baby on their back for all sleep times, naps, and at night. Supine is the safest position to place a
        newborn to sleep.

  2. Always use a firm sleep surface, such as a safety-approved mattress and crib. The sleep surface should be flat
        and non-inclined.

  3. Eliminate all soft bedding, blankets, pillows, crib bumper pads, soft toys, and stuffed animals from the baby's
        sleep space.

  4. Have the baby share the parent's room, but not their bed.

Safe Transportation
The American Academy of Pediatrics most recently updated its car-seat guidelines in 2018 (Durbin & Hoffman,
2018). All 50 states require the restraint of infants and young children in car seats when they are riding in
automobiles (Durbin & Hoffman, 2018). The nurse should teach parents that the safest place for their baby in the
car is in a rear-facing infant safety seat located in the middle of the back seat. An infant that is held by an adult in a
moving vehicle, even if that adult is wearing a safety restraint, is not safe.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Review this information on the proper use of car seats, car seat ratings, and recalls of car seats
(https://openstax.org/r/77carseats) from the National Transportation Safety Board.

Infant and child safety seats are essential to reduce injury and death to infants and children when accidents occur.
Infants and toddlers are at greater risk for head and spinal cord injuries if they are in a forward-facing car seat
instead of a rear-facing car seat, which provides better head and neck support (Durbin & Hoffman, 2018). Infants
should remain in the rear-facing car seats for travel until they reach the highest weight or height allowed by the
seat's manufacturer. Most infant-specific car seats range from birth to 1 year or a weight less than 20 lb (9 kg)
(Durbin & Hoffman, 2018). The car seat must be latched at 2 points to the car at the base of the car seat. Once
installed, car seats should not move more than 1 inch side to side or front to back by regulation. Most local police,
hospitals, and fire departments can advise parents where to have car seats fitted locally.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Safe Kids Worldwide connects users to Car Seat Fitting Stations (https://openstax.org/r/77carseatfitting) all over the
world. For the United States, the user can start at the state level to find a site.

An infant discharged from the hospital is placed into a rear-facing infant car seat in the back of the automobile by a
parent. Many hospitals do not permit staff to place the infant in the car seat due to potential liability. Some hospitals
have technicians who are specially trained to determine if car seats are installed properly and if they have been
correctly fitted to the newborn. It is generally up to the parent to see that the car seat has been properly installed
prior to hospital discharge. New car seats come with detailed instructions for installation in the packaging, but most
local police and fire stations offer car seat installation services free of charge with appointments.

Infant CPR Caregiver Education
The American Heart Association has long claimed that the sooner cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is begun
after a cardiac event is witnessed, the better the chances of reviving the person will be. Each second that the heart
is not pumping oxygen-rich blood to the brain and organs, brain cells are lost. Infant CPR training is often offered to
parents after birth and prior to discharge from the hospital in the form of CPR videos, written materials, or physical
1084  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      classes or instruction. Other hospitals offer Infant CPR Anytime Kits to parents prior to their discharge. These kits
      give parents the opportunity to learn infant CPR in the hospital setting with an infant manikin that they can take
      home with them to practice on. The whole self-instruction course takes about 20 minutes to complete, and parents
      have nurses to help if they have any questions (American Heart Association, 2023). The fact that caregivers can
      practice at home helps them become more confident in the skills and more likely to act should an emergency occur,
      and CPR be needed.

              LINK TO LEARNING

      The Infant CPR kit (https://openstax.org/r/77InfantCPRkit) contains everything parents need to learn lifesaving
      skills at home. The self-learning kit is perfect for anyone who wants to learn infant CPR and choking skills but does
      not need a course completion card to meet a job or school requirement.

      Preventing Newborn Injury
      Hundreds of infants younger than 1 year old die every year in the United States because of injuries--most of which
      could have been prevented (AAP, 2017). Injuries often occur because new parents are not aware of what their
      newborns can do, such as rolling off a bed or grabbing a hot cup of coffee. Therefore, parental education about
      newborn/infant safety issues is an important responsibility of the nurse during the postpartum period and
      throughout the first year of life. The most common accidents are falls, burns, choking, and suffocation.

      Babies wiggle, move, and push against objects from the moment they are born. In fact, they have been practicing
      these movements in utero for months. Even these very first movements can result in accidental falls. Nurses should
      remind parents to be especially cautious when the infant is wet after bathing or when in the arms of a sibling.
      Newborns should never be held by a young unsupervised child due to babies' sudden, unpredictable, and jerky
      movements. Caregivers should not leave the baby alone on changing tables, beds, sofas, or chairs. As the infant
      grows and can roll over, they may fall off unless protected. When the baby is not being held, they should be placed in
      a safe spot, such as a crib, play yard, or infant seat. Infants can crawl as early as 6 months (AAP, 2017). Parents or
      caregivers should be advised to use gates on staircases and to close doors to rooms where infants may get injured.
      Parents should install window guards on all windows above the first floor. Baby walkers should not be used because
      they can tip over, and the baby could be injured. In addition, an infant in a baby walker can fall down the stairs,
      causing serious head injuries. If the infant falls and does not act normally after the fall, parents should call the
      health-care provider or take the child to the emergency department.

              LINK TO LEARNING

      The American Academy of Pediatrics provides information about newborn falls (https://openstax.org/r/
      77newbornfalls) and how to prevent them.

      Nurses should educate parents never to carry the baby and hot liquids, such as coffee, tea, or soup, at the same
      time. The baby could easily be burned. Also, parents should check the baby's bath water prior to putting the baby in
      it. If the infant is burned, immediately put the burned area in cold water, keeping it in cold water for several minutes
      to cool it off. Then, parents should cover the burn loosely with a dry bandage or clean cloth and call their doctor. If
      the burned area is blistering, parents should take the baby to the emergency department immediately. House smoke
      alarms should be checked every month for battery life, and batteries should be changed every year unless long-life
      batteries are installed.

      Babies explore their world by putting everything into their mouths whether it is edible or not. Nurses should remind
      parents never to leave small objects in the baby's reach, even for a short time. Parents of a newborn should be
      educated about the risks of suffocation and instructed to not leave loose blankets in the baby's sleep area. They
      also need to be informed to keep all plastic wrappers and plastic bags away from their infants because these can
      form a tight seal covering the mouth and nose and can suffocate the infant. Many hospitals and pediatric offices will
      provide parents with instruction on how to care for a choking infant.

      Access for free at openstax.org
24.3 · Newborn Discharge Planning and Parent Education                                                                     1085

        LINK TO LEARNING

To learn what to do when an infant is choking (https://openstax.org/r/77infantchoking) check out these safety
actions recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

About Activities of Daily Living with a Newborn
Relationships between parents and their child begin before birth and continue throughout the lifespan. Attachment
is a strong emotional bond that can begin in the newborn period when the baby is first introduced to their birthing
parent after birth. Immediately after birth, newborns are typically in a quiet alert state when they are receptive and
follow the parent's face carefully with their eyes. This first interaction fosters bonding between the birthing parent
and the baby. For many families, this experience also involves bonding with the other parent and the siblings. In the
first months of life, the newborn quickly learns about food, safety, and security. When those needs are met, the
newborn learns to trust the people who provide needed care and to explore their environment more actively. During
periods when the baby is more alert, they will focus on the faces of their caretakers and learn the positive aspects of
interpersonal relationships. Before long, the newborn will be trading smiles, making faces, sticking out their tongue,
laughing, and imitating behaviors.

Educating Parents on How to Soothe a Newborn
Newborns may cry or fuss for several hours a day. It is their way of letting others know that they need or want
something or that something is wrong. Crying peaks at approximately 6 weeks of age at about 3 hours per day. By 3
months, crying decreases to about 1 hour per day (Feigelman, 2016). Infants have no other way of communicating
that their needs are not being met. Parents find infant crying most frustrating when they do not know why the baby
is crying. When the cause of newborn crying is not obvious, parents often see it as a sign of their own inadequacies.
Research has shown that when an infant's needs are met consistently in a calm, warm, and prompt manner, trust
begins to develop between the newborn and their caregiver. Additionally, infants who are held consistently when
they are in distress have been found to cry less at 1 year of age and be less aggressive at 2 years of age (Sanford
Health, 2022).

Often, parents can determine the cause of the infant's distress by the nature of the crying. Newborns will cry when
they:

    · are hungry
    · are tired
    · are too cold or too hot
    · need their diaper changed
    · have gas
    · are overstimulated
    · are bored
    · are sick

Sometimes, though, it is not possible to determine why a newborn is crying, and it may not be possible to comfort
the baby. This need not be the fault of the parent or caregiver. If the newborn cries more than usual, cries at
different times of the day than usual, or if the crying sounds different or more frantic than usual, it is a good idea to
contact the health-care provider. These might be signs that the newborn is sick.

Treating Known Causes of Crying
If the infant is hungry and it has been more than 30 minutes since the last feeding, suggest that parents try feeding
the baby. It is possible that an air bubble may have caused a feeling of fullness before the baby had completed the
last feeding. The infant may also be going through a growth spurt and need more frequent feedings to provide the
nutrients to support rapid growth. Remind parents of the signs of satiety so that they can avoid overfeeding, which
will cause abdominal discomfort, fussiness, and potential spitting up.

Teach parents that when the infant is pulling up their legs or crying with bursts or intermittent screams of pain and
kicking, it is likely that the baby is "gassy" and has gas or air bubbles. Fussy infants may need more frequent burping
during and after feedings compared to other infants, regardless of whether they are breast-fed or bottle-fed. It is
1086  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      also helpful to burp during crying spells because the infant may swallow air then. Changing the baby's position to
      lying prone across a parent's lap (or over a warmed blanket) may help expel gas. Placing the infant in the supine
      position and gently flexing the knees on the infant's abdomen may also help a gassy baby.

      Most newborns do not seem to mind wet or soiled diapers but may fuss or cry if they get a chill or if their skin
      becomes irritated. It is best to set up a schedule for diaper changes, perhaps before every feeding, to help wake the
      infant fully. Teach parents that consistent diaper changes will help prevent skin irritations and rashes.

      The nurse should show parents how to check the infant's clothing for anything that could cause discomfort (buttons,
      zippers, tags, stiff collars or seams, tight elastics, etc.). Remind parents not to overheat the newborn. They should
      place the palm of their hand on the baby's abdomen to feel the baby's body. It should feel comfortably warm, not
      hot or cold, even if the infant's feet and hands are slightly cool. The newborn should be dressed as warmly as the
      parent, with one additional layer, such as a receiving blanket or a sweater (American Academy of Pediatrics et al.,
      2019). Babies who are overdressed do not perspire but will cry instead to show their discomfort.

      If the newborn is overstimulated--from too much noise, too many visitors, too many people "playing" with them, or
      too many lights--this can also be a cause for crying. Holding or swaddling the infant in a quiet, preferably darkened,
      environment and gently rocking, walking, or swaying the infant may prove helpful.

      Soothing Techniques for Crying Newborns
      The best advice to soothe a crying baby is to remain patient and calm. Most babies will calm and be comforted by
      gentle rocking, talking softly, or swaddling in a blanket (see Figure 24.10). Once the baby is calm, the caregiver can
      go about their investigation to find the cause of the initial crying.

      When an infant is difficult to soothe, it can lead to parental frustration. When possible, the parent or caregiver
      should seek relief and have someone else attempt to soothe the baby. Friends and family members can assist as
      well. This will help to keep parents fresh, ease their frustration, and give them a chance to rest. Often, something as
      simple as a change in position when transferring the baby from one person to the next is enough to end a bout of
      crying. But there are times when infants cry inconsolably for long stretches of time, starting when they are around 2
      weeks old and continuing until 3 to 4 months of age. Inconsolable crying can last up to 5 hours a day and is a normal
      part of development, termed the period of PURPLE crying (National Childbirth Trust [NCT], 2022). Each letter of
      PURPLE represents a characteristic of the crying: "P--Peak of crying, U--Unexpected, R--Resists soothing, P--Pain-
      like face, L--Long lasting, E--Evening" (NCT, 2022). Since 2007, the National Center on Shaken Baby Syndrome has
      run the Period of PURPLE Crying Program. It is an evidence-based program for the prevention of shaken baby
      syndrome/abusive head trauma (SBS/AHT). This program has a dual purpose:

          · offering support to parents and caregivers in understanding and coping with a baby's early heightened crying
          · working to decrease the frequency of SBS/AHT incidents. (National Center on Shaken Baby Syndrome, n.d.)

      Unfortunately, a parent's or caregiver's feelings of helplessness, frustration, and anger are often closely related to
      their inability to cope with an infant's inconsolable crying. Remind parents that if their efforts at soothing their baby
      are not working, it is all right to feel frustrated, and it is all right to ask for help. While it is hard to bear, infant crying
      is unavoidable. If parents are feeling overwhelmed and helpless, let them know that these are normal feelings. Have
      them place the baby down in a safe place and reach out for help before their frustrations cloud their judgment or
      impede their mental health. Instruct them to call a friend or family member to come and help them. If no one is
      available and the baby is in a safe place, they should step into another room and calm themselves before returning
      to the baby and trying again.

      Instruct the parent or caregiver to contact the baby's health-care provider immediately if the infant displays any of
      the following symptoms (Colicky crying, n.d.):

          · if nonstop crying lasts more than 2 hours
          · if the infant cries out when you touch, move, or hold them
          · if the infant looks or acts abnormal
          · if the infant has a temperature >100.4° F (38° C) or higher
          · if the infant has bulging or swollen fontanelles
          · if the infant has a swollen groin
          · if the infant is vomiting

      Access for free at openstax.org
24.3 · Newborn Discharge Planning and Parent Education                                                                      1087

    · if the infant refuses to drink or consumes very little for more than 8 hours

Educating Parents on Skin Care for the Newborn
Bathing their newborn is an experience that many new parents find terrifying at first and enjoyable after they are
confident in their skills. The bath is a time for bonding and watching their newborn relax in the warm, soothing
water. At least that is how it is supposed to be. But not all newborns enjoy the bath right away. The air is cold, and
the water is a shock. The washcloth is rough, and the baby wash is cold. Babies do not quite know what to make of
it, and it is not unusual for them to cry through the first few experiences with bathing.

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

QSEN Competency: Patient-Centered Care: Giving Baby a Bath

Definition: Recognize the patient or designee as the source of control and full partner in providing compassionate
and coordinated care based on respect for patient's preferences.

Knowledge: Examine common barriers to active involvement of patients in their own health-care process.

Skill: Remove barriers to the presence of families and other designated surrogates based on patient preferences.

  1. Sponge baths are needed until the umbilical cord stump falls off. This will happen between 10 days and 2
        weeks postpartum. Infection prevention is the primary reason for this. Sponge baths allow for normal healing
        to take place and for the cord to dry and fall off. Sponge bathing includes regular "wipe downs" of the face,
        hands, feet and genitals and any other areas that may be visibly dirty. Continue to give sponge baths once to
        twice weekly until the cord stump falls off.

  2. Once the cord falls off, plan on bathing the baby 1 to 3 times a week. More frequent bathing may dry and
        irritate the skin. Plan bath time for when the baby is well rested and not hungry.

  3. Bath products should be natural, unscented, and simple.
  4. Gather supplies before putting the baby in the bath. You will need a well-cushioned and well-supported baby

        tub, warm water in the tub or sink, bottles open and ready to pour, and washcloths and towels at the ready.
        Baby washcloths are very soft. Placing a bath pad or towel under the baby can help keep the baby in one spot.
  5. Fill the baby tub or sink with a few inches of warm water. You will want just enough water to cover the bottom
        of the baby's body. To gauge the temperature of the water, use the inside of your wrist or elbow. It should feel
        warm, about 100° F (37.8° C).
  6. Thermoregulation is a primary concern with the newborn, who will have difficulty maintaining body
        temperature. Keep the baby covered during the bath. Even in a warm bath, the baby can lose body heat
        quickly. Use a warm washcloth to cover the baby and swap it out as needed.
  7. Go slowly and stay calm. The baby will stay calm if you are feeling relaxed. Make sure your setup feels relaxed
       to you before beginning the bath. Never, under any circumstances, leave a baby alone in the bath.
  8. Start washing the face first (no soap), then the rest of the body. Clean around their mouth, behind their ears,
        and under their chin, where milk and drool can hide in the folds. Rinse the washcloth and wash the rest of
        their body, getting into the creases and folds, under their arms and between their fingers and toes. When it
        comes to their genitals, wash girls from front to back and between their skin folds. For boys, uncircumcised or
        not, wipe their penis clean. Other than their face, use soap on the rest of their body, being sure to rinse it off
        completely so their skin will not dry out.
  9. Skip the lotions and powders unless advised. Babies normally have dry, peeling skin that will soften on its own
        after peeling. Lotions or creams are unnecessary and may cause skin irritation. When the bath is completed,
        wrap the baby in a warm, soft towel and cuddle them close. Dry them and dress them warmly. Be sure to cover
        their head to avoid heat loss until their hair is dry.

Attitude: Respect patient preferences for degree of active engagement of care.

When to Take a Baby's Temperature
It is often difficult to discern when a baby has a fever or when to take a newborn's temperature because their
behavior can often mimic normal newborn behavior. Caregivers need to be cognizant of the signs and symptoms of a
fever in infants and be mindful if these changes in behavior occur. When they are observed, the baby's temperature
1088  24 · Care of the Typical Newborn

      should be taken. Behaviors often indicative of newborn fever are the following (Mayo Clinic, 2023a):

          · Crying or fussiness--If occurring more than usual, this is often the first sign of fever or illness.
          · Excessive fatigue--If the newborn would rather sleep than eat, it might be a sign of fever or illness.
          · Decreased appetite--If the infant is not waking for meals or eating with their usual appetite, check their

              temperature.
          · Cold/Flu symptoms--If the baby has developed a cough or congestion, check their temperature. (Then notify

              the pediatrician.)
          · Spitting up--If the baby is spitting up more frequently and in excess quantities, this could point to vomiting

              rather than spitting up.
          · Feeling warm--It can be hard to gauge the temperature of your baby, especially on a warm day. Taking their

              temperature internally, that is, rectally (rather than just feeling their forehead) is the best way to be sure.
          · Pulling at ear--Ear infections can cause discomfort in the ears. Because babies cannot communicate with

              words, pulling at their ear is a tell-tale sign that they are feeling pain or discomfort in that area. Take their
              temperature.
          · Rash--Any type of rash should be evaluated by your pediatrician, especially if your baby has been exposed to
              or has chickenpox symptoms. Take their temperature.

      The preceding situations are examples of when to take a baby's temperature, but they are not exclusive. Simply
      stated, when in doubt, take the baby's temperature.

      Educating Parents about Taking a Baby's Temperature
      Digital thermometers make taking a baby's temperature quick and easy. The nurse should teach parents to always
      use a digital thermometer to check a baby's or infant's temperature. Never use a glass mercury thermometer
      because health and safety risks are inherent with their use. If parents report having a glass thermometer, the nurse
      should instruct them to take it to their pharmacy or health department for proper disposal.

      For babies and toddlers up to 3 years of age, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends taking the
      temperature rectally using a rectal thermometer placed in the baby's anus (Johns Hopkins Medicine, 2019). This
      method is accurate and gives a quick reading of the baby's internal or core temperature. Teach parents that oral and
      rectal thermometers have different shapes and should not be used interchangeably. Using oral thermometers
      rectally can cause damage. A rectal thermometer has a round rather than an elongated security bulb at the insertion
      end specifically for safely taking rectal temperatures.

      To take a baby's rectal temperature, the parent should place the baby across their lap or on a changing table, on
      their abdomen, facing down. Next, they place their hand nearest the baby's head on their lower back and separate
      the baby's buttocks with their thumb and forefinger. Using the other hand, they gently insert the lubricated end of
      the thermometer ½ to 1 inch, or just past the anal sphincter muscle. The thermometer should be pointed toward the
      infant's umbilicus or belly button. The parent should hold the thermometer with one hand on the baby's buttocks so
      that the thermometer will move with the baby. The parent uses the other hand to comfort the baby and prevent
      moving. Caution parents never to leave a baby unattended with a rectal thermometer inserted. They should hold the
      thermometer until it beeps or signals, remove the thermometer, wipe the bulb, and read and immediately record the
      temperature. The thermometer can be cleaned with soap and water or rubbing alcohol. If the baby has a rectal
      temperature of 100.4° F (38° C) or higher, parents should call the baby's health-care provider (Johns Hopkins
      Medicine, 2019).

      An axillary temperature is taken under the arm (in the armpit). If parents are more comfortable checking the
      infant's temperature this way, they must be careful that none of the infant's clothing gets between the thermometer
      and the skin. The thermometer should have skin touching it on all sides. Axillary measurement may be used as a
      "screening" method to get an idea of whether an infant is febrile. If it shows a fever, a more accurate measure
      should be utilized. Digital thermometers are used for axillary measurement.

      A tympanic thermometer uses an infrared ray to measure the temperature inside the ear canal. This method may
      not be accurate for newborns or any infant under a year old. Parents should refer to the manufacturer's
      recommendations. These thermometers need to be positioned very carefully within the ear canal to get a precise
      reading, which is not possible in newborns. Skin strips that are pressed on the skin to measure temperature are also
      not recommended for babies. Touching the skin of a baby can let the care provider know if the infant is warm or

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         24.3 · Newborn Discharge Planning and Parent Education  1089

cool, but it cannot measure body temperature.

Another, newer method to measure temperature is called temporal artery thermometry, which measures the
temperature of the blood flowing through the temporal artery on the forehead. This method is approved for
newborns, infants, and toddlers under the age of 3 years. This method causes less discomfort than a rectal
thermometer and is also considered very accurate. To take a baby's temporal artery temperature, place the
thermometer sensor in the middle of the baby's forehead. Press and hold the scan button. Slowly move the
thermometer across the baby's forehead toward the top of the baby's ear, making sure the sensor always touches
the skin. Stop at the hairline and release the scan button. Remove the thermometer and read the temperature. If a
baby's temporal temperature is 100.4° F (38° C) or higher, parents should call the baby's health-care provider
(Johns Hopkins Medicine, 2019).

Educating Parents about Follow-up Care
When the infant is born and before discharge, they are given a complete physical examination by their health-care
provider. The provider assesses the baby's eyes, ears, mouth, skin, hips, legs, abdomen, heart, lungs, and genitalia.
This exam is a precursor to nursery admission, eye prophylaxis, vaccinations, hearing tests, blood work, feedings,
and eventual discharge. Newborn infants born vaginally are usually discharged after 48 hours but can leave as early
as 12 to 24 hours with provider permission and from certain birthing facilities. For babies delivered by cesarean
section, discharge does not usually happen until 72 hours after birth but may occur earlier.

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2022a) strongly recommends that newborns see their health-
care providers a minimum of 6 times before their first birthday, to have a complete assessment of physical and
behavioral changes. The nurse should explain to parents the reasons for and the importance of these early health-
care visits. The first year of life sees such tremendous periods of growth and change that regular visits are
important.

The infant's first visit with their provider outside the hospital should take place after they have been home for 2 to 3
days, making the newborn 3 to 5 days old (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2022a). The health-care
provider will assess weight, length, head circumference, signs of jaundice, number of wet and stooled diapers in a
24-hour period, and number of feedings in a 24-hour period. If the infant is formula-fed, they will ask how much
formula the baby takes at each feeding and how often the baby is fed. If the infant is breast-feeding, they will want
to know how often the baby is nursing and for how long on each side. They will probably ask about the latch to
ensure that the baby is not suckling on the nipple alone but has a good deal of the areola in the mouth. The provider
may ask to observe a feeding.

After that initial visit, the infant should be scheduled to see their provider at 1 month of age, 2 months of age, 4
months of age, 6 months of age, and 9 months of age (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2022a). This
equals the 6 visits before the first birthday. This is the minimum recommended number of visits in the first year of
life. If parents or caregivers are worried or concerned about the baby's health or if the baby shows any signs of
illness, parents must be instructed not to wait until the next scheduled visit. They should call and see their provider
right away.
1090 24 · Summary

Summary

24.1 Basic Newborn Care

Basic care of the newborn involves many important topics. Infant safety is essential, both in the hospital and at
home, and nurses must reinforce this topic as often as possible. Nurses teach parents to identify hospital staff by
their picture ID badges and, if badges are not easily visible, to ask to see them. Nurses should check parents' and
infant's ID bands to make sure that the numbers match any time the family has been separated. Parents should not
release their baby to anyone without a hospital ID and should never leave their baby in the room unattended. Safety
discussions should begin with parents immediately upon admission and continue with reinforcement until both
parent and baby are discharged. Safety topics should also include precautions to be taken once the family arrives
home.

Breast-feeding and bottle-feeding issues, including establishing feeding patterns, how to feed, when to feed, and
how much to feed, all need to be addressed. Each baby is different, and even parents who have had previous
children must learn the patterns for the new baby. Stooling needs to be reviewed because this is often a concern of
parents and is quite different for breast- and bottle-fed infants. Growth spurts and cluster feeding are another area
worthy of review.

Immunizations are a necessary area for education because the newborn will likely get their first immunization
shortly after birth. For parents who have chosen to circumcise their newborn son, there is likely much teaching to be
done. For those who have chosen not to circumcise their son, care of the uncircumcised penis should be reviewed.

24.2 Care of Common Problems in the Newborn

This section of the chapter examined the pathophysiology, recognition, and treatment of hyperbilirubinemia,
hypoglycemia, dermatologic issues, as well as common viral and bacterial infections. By understanding these
conditions, nurses can effectively provide optimal care for newborns.

This section reviewed signs of illness in the newborn and when to call the primary health-care provider. This
information needs to be reviewed and reinforced with new parents. Although newborns rarely get ill, when they do,
they can decline very quickly. Table 24.6 is a great tool that parents can use to prepare for the phone call to the
health-care provider. Having this information completed avoids delay in the care and treatment of their ill newborn.

24.3 Newborn Discharge Planning and Parent Education

Hospital stays for childbirth are relatively short, ranging from 2 days or less for a vaginal delivery to 4 days or less for
a cesarean delivery. Nurses must use every opportunity to teach parents about caring for themselves and their baby
postpartum. When parents have the baby at the bedside, it is an ideal time to educate them about their baby. Teach
them about normal behaviors, breathing patterns, and what would be considered abnormal or warning signs, sleep-
wake periods, feeding patterns, crying, and so on. It is much easier for parents to understand when the baby is
demonstrating what you are talking about, and you will have a captive and interested audience.

Crying is a major source of concern for new parents. They need reassurance that all babies cry and that it is the only
way for them to communicate when their needs are not being met. Reassure parents that they will become aware of
their infant's different cries and what they mean, but this may take a little time. When their infant cries, this does not
mean that they are a bad parent or that they are doing something wrong. Reinforce with the parents that infants are
not spoiled by prompt attention to their needs. Attention provides comfort and security to their infant, who will learn
to soothe and settle more quickly. At times a baby will cry for no reason, and then the only thing a parent can do is
ensure that the baby's needs are met and then provide soothing and settling comfort.

Parents are educated regarding infant safe sleep practices, potential risk factors for SIDS, and the recommended
guidelines to keep infants safe while sleeping.

Signs of illness in the newborn and when to call the primary health-care provider are other areas that need to be
reviewed and reinforced with new parents. Although newborns rarely get ill, when they do, they can decline very
quickly.

Provide your patient with as much information as you can about how to safely care for their new baby when they go

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           24 · Key Terms 1091

home. Their job is to ask questions. Provide them with a pen and paper to note questions when you are not available
so that they can ask you when you are. This way their questions can be answered before they are discharged. By
working with your patient as a team, you can send them home feeling confident in the care they are able to give to
their baby.

Key Terms

analgesic drug or medication that reduces pain or discomfort
apnea stopped breathing
axillary temperature temperature taken under the arm (in the armpit)
baby acne common short-term skin condition that causes papules and pustules to break out on a baby's face,

    chest, or scalp
bacterial meningitis bacterial infection in the lining of the brain and spinal column
breast milk jaundice (also: late-onset breast milk jaundice) jaundice occurring in the first 3 to 5 days of life and

    lasting 3 weeks to as long as 3 months for some infants
breast-feeding jaundice (also: early-onset jaundice) type of jaundice in which bilirubin levels of >12 mg/dL

    develop in 13 percent of breast-fed infants by 1 week of life; most commonly caused this early in breast-fed
    infants by insufficient intake
circumcision surgical removal of the foreskin, the layer of skin that covers the glans (head) of the penis
cluster feeding when an infant chooses to space several feedings closely together with little time between the end
    of one feeding and the beginning of another
colostrum first breast milk produced in breast-feeding
concavity curving in of a surface
cord care keeping the cord stump and surrounding skin clean and dry, which prevents infection and helps the
    stump to fall off and the navel to heal more quickly
COVID-19 infectious illness caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 that became a pandemic disease in 2020
cradle cap (also: seborrheic dermatitis) common, harmless skin condition on an infant's scalp that presents as
    yellow, scaly patches with a red rash
crepitus crackling or crunching sound made by the damaged bone
cyanosis blue tint to skin and lips
dermatitis skin inflammation
diaper rash common form of dermatitis (skin irritation) in the diaper area of the buttocks, thighs, and genitals
donor breast milk milk from lactating persons who pump or express breast milk and donate it to a regulated
    breast milk bank, following their policies and procedures
early-onset jaundice (also: breast-feeding jaundice) type of jaundice in which bilirubin levels of >12 mg/dL
    develop in 13 percent of breast-fed infants by 1 week of life; most commonly caused this early in breast-fed
    infants by insufficient intake
eczema common skin condition that causes patches of skin to become dry, itchy, and scaly
erythema toxicum neonatorum (ETN) skin condition in newborns that causes a red rash and small, fluid-filled
    bumps on the face and/or limbs
fissure crack, opening, or split in the skin or tissues of the body, such as the anus from stooling
gastroesophageal reflux (GER) spitting up of liquid or food, when the stomach contents move back up from a
    baby's stomach into the esophagus
grunting while breathing out (expiratory grunting), the infant's way of trying to keep air in the lungs so they will
    stay open
hyperbilirubinemia increase in the concentration of bilirubin in the serum
hypoglycemia blood glucose level below 40 mg/dL in the term infant; a common transient occurrence in the
    immediate postbirth period
immunization process by which someone becomes protected against a disease through injections into the skin,
    nasal spray, or by mouth
influenza viral illness that can cause many of the same symptoms as the common cold but is accompanied by
    severe body aches and higher fever; commonly referred to as the flu
intercostal retraction sucking-in between the ribs when the infant breathes in
jaundice hyperbilirubinemia in which the skin and sclera of the eyes of the newborn may appear noticeably yellow
1092 24 · Assessments

    due to the breakdown of fetal red blood cells
kernicterus type of brain injury that can result from high levels of bilirubin in the baby's blood
lethargy lack of movement and energy, out-of-the-ordinary sleepiness
nasal flaring when the nostrils flare out with each breath
nonphysiologic jaundice (also: pathologic jaundice) jaundice that may appear in the first 24 hours of life
omphalitis life-threatening infection of the umbilical cord
physiologic jaundice (also: developmental jaundice) jaundice not present in the first 24 hours of life in term

    infants
physiologic regurgitation (also: reflux) spitting up of stomach contents in infants, or reflux, that occurs when the

    lower esophageal sphincter muscle lets the stomach contents back into the esophagus because it is not fully
    developed
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) contagious virus causing an illness that is more serious than a cold or upper
    respiratory infection
seborrheic dermatitis (also: cradle cap) common, harmless skin condition on an infant's scalp that presents as
    yellow, scaly patches with a red rash
sepsis bacterial infection in the blood
serum amber-colored, protein-rich liquid that separates out when blood coagulates
sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) unexplained death, usually during sleep, of a seemingly healthy baby that
    is less than a year old
swaddling traditional practice of wrapping up a baby gently in a light, breathable blanket to help them feel calm
    and sleepy, thereby offering comfort
temporal artery thermometry measures the temperature of the blood flowing through the temporal artery on the
    forehead
transcutaneous bilirubin (TCB) monitor painless handheld light meter that is routinely used to scan for bilirubin
    in the skin
transient neonatal pustular melanosis (TNPM) normal and harmless skin condition that affects term newborns
    and presents with skin bumps, pustules, or blisters anywhere on the infant's body
transitional stool stool that follows meconium and is yellowish-green
tympanic thermometer thermometer that uses an infrared ray to measure the temperature inside the ear canal
umbilical cord granuloma small nodule of tissue, which can measure up to 1 cm, that may become evident after
    the separation of the umbilical cord
umbilical hernia hernia caused by a small hole in the muscular part of the abdominal wall that allows the tissue to
    bulge out when there is increased abdominal pressure (e.g., crying)

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. The nurse provides discharge instructions to a parent about umbilical cord care. What statement by the
        parent indicates effective health teaching?
           a. "My child can have a tub bath every day."
           b. "I will clean the stump with antiseptics daily."
           c. "Water and soap can be used if the stump is dirty."
           d. "I need to apply an antibiotic ointment every day."

    2. When teaching umbilical cord care to a new parent, the nurse would include which information?
           a. Apply peroxide to the cord with each diaper change.
           b. Cover the cord with petroleum jelly after bathing.
           c. Keep the cord dry and open to air.
           d. Wash the cord with soap and water each day during a tub bath.

    3. A home health nurse visits a 2-week-old infant and observes the umbilical cord has dried and fallen off. The
        area appears healed with no drainage or erythema present. Given these assessment findings, what
        instruction should the nurse give the parent?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    24 · Assessments 1093

         a. cover the umbilicus with a band-aid
         b. continue to clean the stump with alcohol for 1 week
         c. apply an antibiotic ointment to the stump
         d. give the baby a bath in an infant tub now

 4. A 24-hour-old newborn male was circumcised 20 minutes ago. The nurse is doing 15-minute checks of the
      circumcision site. It appears that the newborn has had a bowel movement as meconium is leaking from the
      diaper leg. He is not crying and has just soothed from the last diaper check. What should the nurse do?
         a. Wait an additional 10 minutes until the next circumcision check is due to change his diaper because he
              is comfortable and not crying. If he starts to fuss, then change him. Keep checks at times scheduled.
         b. Change him immediately, regardless of how long it has been since his last circumcision check and use
              packaged wipes to be sure to get the meconium completely off the circumcision site. Keep checks at
              scheduled times.
         c. Change him now, trying not to disturb him, using only water (and soap as needed) to clean the
              meconium. Change the dressing at the circumcision site and resume checks in 15 minutes.
         d. Change him now, trying not to disturb him, using only water (and soap as needed) to clean the
              meconium. Do not change the dressing at the circumcision site until the next circumcision check, which
              is due in 10 minutes, and then continuing checks at times scheduled.

 5. What directional order best describes the body progression of jaundice in the newborn infant?
         a. feet, legs, body, face, head
         b. abdomen, extremities, face, head
         c. face, chest, abdomen, arms, legs
         d. chest, face, head, abdomen, arms

 6. What newborn blood test determines blood type and testing for Rh incompatibility?
         a. direct bilirubin level
         b. indirect bilirubin level
         c. RBC count with type and cross match
         d. Coombs test

 7. Treatment of neonatal jaundice depends on what factors? Select all that apply.
         a. degree of jaundice
         b. bilirubin level
         c. age and weight of infant
         d. when jaundice began

 8. Transient dermatologic conditions are common in newborns. What is the term for temporary, tiny white
      bumps or cysts on the newborn's skin, usually on the face around the cheek, nose, or chin area?
         a. newborn acne
         b. milia
         c. pustular melanosis
         d. erythema toxicum

 9. What is the term for a common and harmless skin condition on an infant's scalp that presents as yellow scaly
      patches with a red rash?
         a. erythema toxicum
         b. eczema
         c. a skin allergy
         d. cradle cap

10. Parents and caregivers are strongly advised by health-care providers NOT to give their newborns aspirin for
      fever or pain. What is the reason for this advice?
1094 24 · Assessments

           a. Aspirin is too strong and will cause severe stomach upset or damage to their immature digestive
                system.

           b. Aspirin is not made in a liquid form, making it impossible for infants to take.
           c. Aspirin is linked to Reye syndrome, which is a potentially fatal condition for infants.
           d. Aspirin is a blood thinner and may cause intracranial bleeding due to the infant's recent birth.

  11. What is acrocyanosis in the newborn?
           a. a mildly blue or purple color of the hands and feet when the newborn is cold
           b. a common occurrence in the first few weeks of life
           c. a bluish-gray coloring around the nose and mouth in the first few hours of life as the newborn adjusts to
                extrauterine circulation.
           d. a bluish color to the infant's face when the infant is resting quietly, which lasts throughout most of the
                first day after birth

  12. A postpartum nurse is giving guidance to a mother whose breast-fed newborn is experiencing
        hyperbilirubinemia. What are the best instructions for the nurse to give the mother in this case?
           a. It is best for the infant if she stops breast-feeding and switches to bottle-feeding permanently.
           b. The mother should switch to bottle-feeding until the baby's bilirubin returns to normal range.
           c. The mother should alternate breast-feeding and bottle-feeding to ensure adequate fluid intake, until
                the baby's bilirubin returns to normal range.
           d. The mother should continue to breast-feed the infant every 2 to 3 hours or more frequently as tolerated
                (every 2 hours if under phototherapy).

  13. The nurse is aware that a newborn with a mother who has diabetes is at risk for what complication?
           a. anemia
           b. microcephaly
           c. hypoglycemia
           d. SGA

  14. A patient with blood group AB, whose husband has blood group O, has recently given birth. What is the main
        complication or test result to watch for in the newborn concerning ABO incompatibility?
           a. negative Coombs test
           b. bleeding from the nose and ear
           c. jaundice after the first 24 hours of life
           d. jaundice within the first 24 hours of life

  15. A postpartum nurse is teaching umbilical cord care to new parents as part of discharge teaching. The nurse
        would be sure to include which information in her teaching?
           a. Apply rubbing alcohol to the cord with each diaper change to help it dry out.
           b. Cover the cord with bacitracin after bathing to prevent infection.
           c. Keep the cord dry and open to the air.
           d. Wash the cord with soap and water each day during a tub bath.

  16. When educating the parents of a newborn about newborn positions, patterns, and cues, what statement by
        the mother confirms that more teaching is needed?
           a. "When my baby is sleepy, he may yawn or rub his eyes."
           b. "My baby may start looking away or ignoring us when she is overstimulated or sleepy."
           c. "Crying or fussing happens when I don't pick up on her other sleep cues."
           d. "My baby will fuss, get irritable, or cry inconsolably when he is starting to get sleepy."

  17. The average newborn sleeps how many hours in a 24-hour period?
           a. 16-17 hours
           b. 10-15 hours

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       24 · Assessments 1095

           c. 12-13 hours
           d. 8-12 hours

  18. A nurse is providing discharge instructions to a parent on preventing SIDS. What action by the parent signifies
        that they have effectively grasped what has been taught?
           a. The parent wraps the baby in layers of blankets.
           b. The parent puts several stuffed animals in the baby's crib.
           c. The parent places the infant on the infant's back to sleep.
           d. The parent sleeps or shares a bed with the infant.

  19. Which infant is at the greatest risk for SIDS?
           a. an infant between 1 and 4 months of age
           b. a post-date neonate
           c. a baby 6 to 12 months of age
           d. a baby 4 to 6 months of age

  20. When traveling in a car, where are infants the safest?
           a. in an approved safety seat secured properly, either rear or forward facing
           b. in a child safety-approved car seat that they can grow into, with pillow supports for their head
           c. in an infant car seat, safely secured, in the car's front or rear seat
           d. in a rear-facing, safety-approved infant car seat, located in the middle of the back seat of the car

  21. When giving a newborn a bath, what is a concern for the nurse (or caregiver)?
           a. hyperbilirubinemia
           b. hypoglycemia
           c. thermoregulation
           d. contact dermatitis

  22. During discharge teaching, the parents ask the nurse which type of thermometer is the most accurate to take
        their newborn's temperature. What is the nurse's best reply to this question?
           a. a tympanic thermometer
           b. a glass rectal thermometer (mercury)
           c. a digital axillary thermometer
           d. a digital rectal thermometer

  23. What is a routine health provider visiting schedule for a newborn in their first year of life, beginning at 1 month
        of age?
           a. 1 month, 2 months, 4 months, 6 months, 9 months, and 12 months of age
           b. 1 month to 12 months, visiting once each month
           c. 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, 9 months, and 12 months
           d. 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, 12 months

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. When educating the birthing parent on infant feeding, what are some questions that the nurse should ask
        first?

    2. When talking to the birthing parent about their newborn's voiding and stooling patterns, what would be
        important to ask and address?

    3. What effects would the nurse discuss regarding the vaccination given prior to going home?

    4. What are the most common causes of hypoglycemia in newborns?

    5. What is true about newborn bacterial infections?
1096 24 · References

    6. During a neonatal assessment, which finding, other than low body temperature, is the most indicative of
        neonatal hypothermia?

    7. One major differentiating factor among the four kinds of neonatal jaundice is the timing of when the jaundice
        first occurs. Which jaundice occurs in the first 24 hours and may otherwise be known as "pathologic"
        jaundice?

    8. While a newborn nurse is assessing the respirations of a neonate, what findings would cause the nurse
        concern?

    9. What risk factors are concerning for SIDS in a newborn?

What Should the Nurse Do?

James, a 2-day-old male, has been brought to the pediatric clinic for a routine checkup by his parents. James is
exclusively breast-fed, and his parents express concern about his feeding patterns and voiding behavior. James's
mother reports that he has been feeding for shorter durations than expected, and they have noticed a decrease in
the number of wet diapers. Additionally, James underwent circumcision shortly after birth, and his parents are
uncertain about the appropriate care. James has a medical history of uncomplicated full-term birth with no
complications during delivery. Vital signs include a heart rate of 130 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 30 breaths
per minute, and a temperature of 98.6° F (37° C).

    1. Analyze the significance of James being exclusively breast-fed and the reported decrease in wet diapers. How
        might breast-feeding patterns influence the expected voiding patterns, and what factors could contribute to
        the observed changes?

    2. What immediate actions should the nurse take during James's checkup to address the reported feeding
        concerns and the decrease in wet diapers? How would the nurse involve James's parents in the care process?

Laura, a 2-day-old female, has been brought to the pediatric clinic by her parents due to concerns about jaundice.
Laura's parents noticed yellow discoloration of her skin and eyes. Laura was born at full term with an uneventful
vaginal delivery. Her medical history includes ABO incompatibility between the mother and infant, as the mother is
blood type O and the infant is blood type A. Laura is exclusively breast-fed, and her parents report challenges with
breast-feeding initiation. Vital signs include a heart rate of 140 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 38 breaths per
minute, and a temperature of 98.4° F (36.9° C).

    3. Analyze how ABO incompatibility might contribute to the development of hyperbilirubinemia in Laura. How
        would you differentiate between ABO incompatibility-related jaundice and other causes?

    4. Generate solutions to address Laura's breast-feeding challenges and improve milk transfer. How would you
        involve the parents in the care process and support successful breast-feeding while managing
        hyperbilirubinemia?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. In what ways might the expected voiding and stooling patterns differ between a breast-fed and a formula-fed
        newborn, and how would you address parental concerns related to variations in these patterns?

    2. As a nursing student, how would you explain circumcision care to new parents, including proper cleaning and
        signs of potential issues, and when would you advise them to reach out to the health-care provider?

    3. As a clinical nurse, how would you analyze the potential interplay between hyperbilirubinemia and
        hypoglycemia in a newborn? How might the pathophysiology of hyperbilirubinemia impact glucose
        metabolism, and how would you prioritize care for a newborn presenting with both conditions?

    4. Evaluate the implications of common newborn infections for dermatologic health. How might infections
        contribute to skin issues, and what nursing strategies would you employ for the holistic care of a newborn
        presenting with both an infection and dermatologic concerns?

References

Abdulwahab-Ahmed, A., & Mungadi, I. A. (2013). Techniques of male circumcision. Journal of Surgical Technique
   and Case Report, 5(1), 1-7. https://doi.org/10.4103/2006-8808.118588

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          24 · References 1097

Abramowski, A., Ward, R., & Hamdan, A. H. (2023). Neonatal hypoglycemia. StatPearls [Internet].
    http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK537105/

Alter, N., & Ostrower, S. (2023, October 13). Ear infections in children: Information for parents.
    https://www.healthychildren.org/English/health-issues/conditions/ear-nose-throat/Pages/Ear-Infection-
    Information.aspx

American Academy of Pediatrics, Altmann, T. R., & Hill, D. L. (2019). Caring for your baby and young child: Birth to
   age 5 (7th ed.). American Academy of Pediatrics.

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2017). Safety for your child: Birth to 6 months. https://www.healthychildren.org/
    English/ages-stages/baby/Pages/Safety-for-Your-Child-Birth-to-6-Months.aspx

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2021a). 11 common conditions in newborns. https://www.healthychildren.org/
    English/ages-stages/baby/pages/Common-Conditions-in-Newborns.aspx

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2021b). Baby's first days: Bowel movements & urination.
    https://www.healthychildren.org/English/ages-stages/baby/Pages/Babys-First-Days-Bowel-Movements-and-
    Urination.aspx

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2021c). Baby's first month: Feeding and nutrition.
    https://www.healthychildren.org/English/ages-stages/baby/feeding-nutrition/Pages/The-First-Month-Feeding-
    and-Nutrition.aspx

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2022a, June 21). Safe sleep recommendations: Back is best.
    https://www.aap.org/en/news-room/news-releases/aap/2022/american-academy-of-pediatrics-updates-safe-
    sleep-recommendations-back-is-best/

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2022b). Amount and schedule of baby formula feedings.
    https://www.healthychildren.org/English/ages-stages/baby/formula-feeding/Pages/Amount-and-Schedule-of-
    Formula-Feedings.aspx

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2022c). Why babies spit up. https://www.healthychildren.org/English/ages-
    stages/baby/feeding-nutrition/Pages/Why-Babies-Spit-Up.aspx

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2023a, May). Preparing for the 2022-23 influenza season. https://www.aap.org/
    en/pages/2019-novel-coronavirus-covid-19-infections/help-for-pediatricians/preparing-for-flu-season/

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2023b, October 9). RSV: When it's more than just a cold.
    https://www.healthychildren.org/English/health-issues/conditions/chest-lungs/Pages/RSV-When-Its-More-
    Than-Just-a-Cold.aspx

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2023c). All about the recommended immunization schedules.
    https://www.healthychildren.org/English/safety-prevention/immunizations/Pages/Recommended-
    Immunization-Schedules.aspx

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2022, August). Newborn male circumcision.
    https://www.acog.org/en/womens-health/faqs/newborn-male-circumcision

American Heart Association. (2023). Infant CPR Anytime® Training Kits. American Heart Association CPR & First Aid
    Emergency Cardiovascular Care. https://cpr.heart.org/en/courses/infant-cpr-anytime-training-kits

Ansong-Assoku, B., Shah, S. D., Adnan, M., & Ankola, P. A. (2023, February 20). Neonatal jaundice. StatPearls
    [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK532930/

Boston Children's Hospital. (2023). Slow weight gain in infants and children. https://www.childrenshospital.org/
    conditions/slow-weight-gain-infants-and-children

Canadian Paediatric Society. (2020, December 10). Pasteurized and unpasteurized donor human milk.
    https://cps.ca/en/documents/position/pasteurized-and-unpasteurized-donor-human-milk

Cedars Sinai. (2023). Hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn. https://www.cedars-sinai.org/health-library/diseases-and-
1098 24 · References

    conditions---pediatrics/h/hyperbilirubinemia-in-the-newborn.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022a, January 24). Proper storage and preparation of breast milk.
    https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/recommendations/handling_breastmilk.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022b, May 25). How much and how often to feed infant formula.
    https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/infantandtoddlernutrition/formula-feeding/how-much-how-often.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022c, June 28). Rotavirus vaccines. https://www.cdc.gov/rotavirus/
    vaccination.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022d, November 22). Immunization: The basics.
    https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vac-gen/imz-basics.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023a). Breastfeeding your baby. https://www.acog.org/en/womens-
    health/faqs/breastfeeding-your-baby

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023b, February 9). Your child needs vaccines as they grow!
   Recommended immunizations for birth through 6 years old, United States, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/
    schedules/easy-to-read/child-easyread-compliant.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2024). Helping babies sleep safely. https://www.cdc.gov/reproductive-
    health/features/babies-sleep.html

Cleveland Clinic. (2020, April 28). Cradle cap. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/15786-cradle-cap-
    seborrheic-dermatitis-in-infants

Cleveland Clinic. (2022a, May 24). Transient neonatal pustular melanosis (TNPM). https://my.clevelandclinic.org/
    health/diseases/23111-transient-neonatal-pustular-melanosis-tnpm

Cleveland Clinic. (2022b, July 5). Baby eczema. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/23408-baby-eczema

Cleveland Clinic. (2022c, September 20). Bacterial infection. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/
    24189-bacterial-infection

Cleveland Clinic. (2022d, October 28). Erythema toxicum neonatorum. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/
    diseases/24390-erythema-toxicum-neonatorum

Cleveland Clinic. (2022e, December 1). Baby acne. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/17822-baby-
    acne

Colicky crying: When to call the doctor. (n.d.). Happiest Baby. https://www.happiestbaby.com/blogs/baby/baby-
    crying-symptoms-call-doctor

De Oliveira Rocha, B., Machado, M. P., Bastos, L. L., Barbosa Silva, L., Santos, A. P., Santos, L. C., & Ferrarez Bouzada,
    M. C. (2020). Risk factors for delayed onset of lactogenesis II among primiparous mothers from a Brazilian baby-
   friendly hospital. Journal of Human Lactation, 36(1), 146-156. https://doi.org/10.1177/0890334419835174

Deepti, K., Shilpi, K., Prakash Chandra, K., & Pawan Kumar, D. (2024). Feeding habits in cleft lip and palate
   patients--Advantages and disadvantages. Annals of Clinical Case Reports, 9 , 2557. https://doi.org/10.25107/
    2474-1655.2557

Duke Health. (2019, November 21). Is it a bacterial infection or virus? https://www.dukehealth.org/blog/it-bacterial-
    infection-or-virus

Durbin, D., & Hoffman, B. (2018). Child passenger safety. Pediatrics, 142(5), 2460. https://doi.org/10.1542/
    peds.2018-2460

Dysart, K. (2022, September). Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Merck Manual. https://www.merckmanuals.com/
    professional/pediatrics/metabolic,-electrolyte,-and-toxic-disorders-in-neonates/neonatal-hyperbilirubinemia

Expatica. (2023, July 14). Views on breastfeeding around the world. https://www.expatica.com/healthcare/
    womens-health/breastfeeding-around-the-world-732308/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          24 · References 1099

Feigelman, S. (2016). The first year. In Nelson textbook of pediatrics (20th ed, pp. 65-69). Saunders.

Fey, M. (2022, May 12). Breastfeeding norms around the world. Mothers Choice Products.
    https://www.motherschoiceproducts.com/breastfeeding-norms-around-the-world/

Frida.com. (2003). NoseFrida the SNOTSUCKER. https://frida.com/products/nosefrida

Gerharz, E. W., & Haarmann, C. (2000). The first cut is the deepest? Medicolegal aspects of male circumcision. BJU
   International, 86, 332-338. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1464-410x.2000.00103.x

Hamming, K. K. & Walner, D. L. (2012). Breathe easier: Management of neonatal nasal obstruction can range from
   suctioning to surgery. AAP News, 33(4), 10.

Healthline. (2019, April 29). Identifying and treated an infected umbilical cord. https://www.healthline.com/health/
    baby/infected-umbilical-cord

Jacobson, J. D. (2022, November). Timing of breastfeeding. https://medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/
    000636.htm

Jain, S., & Bunik, M. (2022). How often and how much should your baby eat? https://www.healthychildren.org/
    English/ages-stages/baby/feeding-nutrition/Pages/how-often-and-how-much-should-your-baby-eat.aspx

Johns Hopkins Medicine. (2019, November 19). Measuring a baby's temperature.
    https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/measuring-a-babys-temperature

Kellams, A. (2022, July 5). Initiation of breastfeeding. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/initiation-of-
    breastfeeding

Kemper, A. R., Newman, T. B., Slaughter, J. L., Maisels, M. J., Watchko, J. F., Downs, S. M., Grout, R. W., Bundy, D. G.,
    Stark, A. R., Bogen, D. L., Holmes, A. V., Feldman-Winter, L. B., Bhutani, V. K., Brown, S. R., Maradiaga Panayotti,
    G. M., Okechukwu, K., Rappo, P. D., & Russell, T. L. (2022). Clinical practice guideline revision: Management of
   hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics, 150(3), e2022058859.
    https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2022-058859

Kim, J. H., Lee, E., Ha, E. K., Lee, G. C., Shin, J., Baek, H. S., Choi, S. H., Shin, Y. H., & Han, M. Y. (2023). Infant feeding
   pattern clusters are associated with childhood health outcomes. Nutrients, 15(13), 3065. https://doi.org/
    10.3390/nu15133065

Kim, J. S. (2011). Excessive crying: Behavioral and emotional regulation disorder in infancy. Korean Journal of
   Pediatrics, 54(6), 229-233. https://doi.org/10.3345/kjp.2011.54.6.229

Kliegman, R., Stanton, B., St. Geme, J. W., Schor, N. F., Behrman, R. E., & Nelson, W. E. (Eds.). (2020). Nelson
   textbook of pediatrics (21st ed.). Elsevier.

Kotowski, J., Fowler, C., Hourigan, C., & Orr, F. (2020). Bottle-feeding an infant feeding modality: An integrative
   literature review. Maternal & Child Nutrition, 16(2), e12939. https://doi.org/10.1111/mcn.12939

Kulu, S., & Koçak, H. S. (2023). The problems faced by the mothers from two different cultures and cultural
   practices in infant care. Journal of Neonatal Nursing, 29(5), 735-740. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnn.2023.01.005

Kutlubay, Z., Tanakol, A., Engýn, B., Onel, C., Sýmsek, E., Serdaroglu, S., Tuzun, Y., Yilmaz, E., & Eren, B. (2017).
   Newborn skin: Common skin problems. Maedica, 12(1), 42-47.

March of Dimes. (2019). Feeding your baby formula. https://www.marchofdimes.org/find-support/topics/
    parenthood/feeding-your-baby-formula

Mardini, J., Rahme, C., Matar, O., Khalil, S. A., Hallit, S., & Khalife, M.-C. F. (2020). Newborn's first bath: Any preferred
   timing? A pilot study from Lebanon. BMC Research Notes, 13, 430. https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s13104-020-05282-0

Mayo Clinic. (2022a, May). Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) [Health information]. Mayo Clinic: Sudden Infant
    Death Syndrome (SIDS). https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/sudden-infant-death-syndrome/
    symptoms-causes/syc-20352800
1100 24 · References

Mayo Clinic. (2022b, July 1). Diaper rash. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/diaper-rash/symptoms-
    causes/syc-20371636

Mayo Clinic. (2023a, April 18). Recognizing and responding to infant fevers.
    https://www.mayoclinichealthsystem.org/hometown-health/speaking-of-health/dont-ignore-infant-fevers

Mayo Clinic. (2023b, July 8). COVID-19 in babies and children. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/
    coronavirus/in-depth/coronavirus-in-babies-and-children/art-20484405

Medline Plus. (2022, November). Timing of breastfeeding. https://medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/
    000636.htm

Meek, J. Y., Noble, L., & Section on Breastfeeding. (2022). Policy statement: Breastfeeding and the use of Human
   Milk. Pediatrics, 150(1), e2022057988. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2022-057988

Miles, K. (2022, December 28). Formula poop: What's normal, and how often formula-fed babies poop. BabyCenter.
    https://www.babycenter.com/baby/diapering/what-are-normal-bowel-movements-for-formula-fed-
    babies_1334497

Mohr, M. A., Fairchild, K. D., Patel, M., Sinkin, R. A., Clark, M. T., Moorman, J. R., Lake, D. E., Kattwinkel, J., & Delos, J.
   B. (2015). Quantification of periodic breathing in premature infants. Physiological Measurement, 36(7),
    1415-1427. https://doi.org/10.1088/0967-3334/36/7/1415

Moon, R., Darnall, R., Feldman-Winter, L., Goodstein, M., & Hauck, F. (2016). SIDS and other sleep-related infant
   deaths: Updated 2016 recommendations for a safe infant sleeping environment. Pediatrics, 138(5).
    https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-2938

Morris, B. J., Wamai, R. G., Henebeng, E. B., Tobian, A. A., Klausner, J. D., Banerjee, J., & Hankins, C. A. (2016).
   Estimation of country-specific and global prevalence of male circumcision. Population Health Metrics, 14(1),
    Article 1. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12963-016-0073-5

Mount Sinai. (2021, April 14). Milia. https://www.mountsinai.org/health-library/diseases-conditions/milia

Murray, D. (2021, July 15). The 5 Best Breastfeeding Positions for Different Situations. Verywell Family.
    https://www.verywellfamily.com/common-breastfeeding-positions-431648

Napso, T., Yong, H. E. J., Lopez-Tello, J., & Sferruzzi-Perri, A. N. (2018). The role of placental hormones in mediating
   maternal adaptations to support pregnancy and lactation. Frontiers in Physiology, 9. https://www.frontiersin.org/
    articles/10.3389/fphys.2018.01091

National Center on Shaken Baby Syndrome. (n.d.). The period of PURPLE crying. https://dontshake.org/purple-crying

National Childbirth Trust. (2022, August 18). How much crying is normal for a baby? https://www.nct.org.uk/baby-
    toddler/crying/how-much-crying-normal-for-baby

Ndikom, C. M., Fawole, B., & Ilesanmi, R.E. (2014). Extra fluids for breastfeeding mothers for increasing milk
   production. Cochrane Database Systematic Reviews, 11 (6), CD008758. https://doi.org/10.1002/
    14651858.CD008758.pub2

O'Dea, G. A., Youssef, G. J., Hagg, L. J., Francis, L. M., Spry, E. A., Rossen, L., Smith, I., Teague, S. J., Mansour, K.,
    Booth, A., Davies, S., Hutchinson, D., & Macdonald, J. A. (2023). Associations between maternal psychological
   distress and mother-infant bonding: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Archives of Women's Mental Health,
   26(4), 441-452. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00737-023-01332-1

Orovou, E., Tzitiridou-Chatzopoulou, M., Dagla, M., Eskitzis, P., Palaska, E., Iliadou, M., Iatrakis, G., & Antoniou, E.
    (2022). Correlation between pacifier use in preterm neonates and breastfeeding in infancy: A systematic review.
   Children (Basel, Switzerland), 9(10), 1585. https://doi.org/10.3390/children9101585

Poenaru, D. (2001). Disorders of the umbilicus in infants and children: A consensus statement of the Canadian
   Association of Paediatric Surgeons. Paediatrics & Child Health, 6(6), 312-313. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    pmc/articles/PMC2804752/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          24 · References 1101

Pruthi, S. (2023). Umbilical cord care: Do's and don'ts for parents. https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/
    infant-and-toddler-health/in-depth/umbilical-cord/art-20048250

Quigley, M., Embleton, N. D., & McGuire, W. (2019). Formula versus donor breast milk for feeding preterm or low
   birth weight infants. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 7. https://doi.org/10.1002/
    14651858.CD002971.pub5

Raising Children Network. (2023). Newborn sleep: What to expect. https://raisingchildren.net.au/newborns/sleep/
    understanding-sleep/newborn-sleep

Sanford Health. (2022, March 13). Can you spoil a baby, or is that a myth? https://news.sanfordhealth.org/
    parenting/can-you-spoil-a-baby/

Scott, A., & Kirkland, T. (2023). Rethinking breastfeeding management: A patient-centered approach based on new
   guidelines. The Nurse Practitioner, 48(3), 11. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.NPR.0000000000000012

Simpson, K. R., & Rupert, P. A. (2001). AWHONN perinatal nursing (2nd ed.). Lippincott.

Skelly, C. L., Zulfiqar, H., & Sankararaman, S. (2023, July 24). Meconium. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK542240/

Standard-dose oral dextrose gel for neonatal hypoglycemia. (2022). AAP Grand Rounds, 47(5), 51. https://doi.org/
    10.1542/gr.47-5-51

Stanford Medicine. (2023a). Circumcision: Gomco clamp technique. https://med.stanford.edu/newborns/
    professional-education/circumcision/gomco-clamp-technique.html

Stanford Medicine. (2023b). Hypoglycemia in a newborn baby. https://www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/topic/
    default?id=hypoglycemia-in-the-newborn-90-P01961

Stanford Medicine. (2023c). Newborn sleep patterns. https://www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/topic/
    default?id=newborn-sleep-patterns-90-P02632

Stanford Medicine. (n.d.-a). Circumcision. https://www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/topic/
    default?id=circumcision-135-31&sid=26123

Stanford Medicine. (n.d.-b). Circumcision: Mogen technique. https://med.stanford.edu/newborns/professional-
    education/circumcision/mogen-clamp-technique.html

State of Michigan. (2023). Development & milestones for infants (birth-12 months). https://www.michigan.gov/
    mikidsmatter/parents/infant/milestones

Taddio, A. (2001). Pain management for neonatal circumcision. Paediatric Drugs, 3(2), 101-111. https://doi.org/
    10.2165/00128072-200103020-00003

Tesini, B. L. (2022, September). Overview of neonatal infections. MSD Manual Professional Edition.
    https://www.msdmanuals.com/professional/pediatrics/infections-in-neonates/overview-of-neonatal-infections

Texas Health and Human Services. (2017, March). Bottle feeding your breastfed baby: A guide to success.
    https://www.breastmilkcounts.com/docs/bottle-feeding-your-breastfed-baby.pdf

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2021a, February 22). Making the decision to breastfeed.
    https://www.womenshealth.gov/breastfeeding/making-decision-breastfeed#3

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2021b, November 29). Newborn screening portal.
    https://www.cdc.gov/newbornscreening/index.html

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2021c, December 9). Talking to parents about vaccines.
    https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/conversations/conv-materials.html

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2022a, December). Make the most of your baby's visit to the
   doctor (ages 0 to 11 months). Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. https://health.gov/
    myhealthfinder/doctor-visits/regular-checkups/make-most-your-babys-visit-doctor-ages-0-11-months
1102 24 · References

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2022b). Increase the proportion of infants who are breastfed
   exclusively through age 6 months--MICH15. Healthy People 2030. https://health.gov/healthypeople/objectives-
    and-data/browse-objectives/infants/increase-proportion-infants-who-are-breastfed-exclusively-through-
    age-6-months-mich-15

Wang, J., Guo, G., Li, A., Cai, W. Q., & Wang, X. (2021). Challenges of phototherapy for neonatal hyperbilirubinemia
   (review). Experimental and Therapeutic Medicine, 21(3), 231. https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2021.9662

Yale University. (2018, June 7). Does my baby recognize me? https://babyschool.yale.edu/does-my-baby-recognize-
    me/

Zakarija-Grkovic, I., & Stewart, F. (2020). Treatments for breast engorgement during lactation. The Cochrane
   Database of Systematic Reviews, 9(9), CD006946. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD006946.pub4

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 25

Care of the Newborn at Risk

FIGURE 25.1 Preterm Birth Some of the most vulnerable populations nurses care for are newborns. Within this special population, an even
more susceptible patient is the newborn at risk. The goal of the nurse in the nursery, neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), pediatric intensive
care unit (PICU), and cardiothoracic intensive care unit (CTICU) is to identify and be prepared to treat, when necessary, the conditions that
can most harm these small yet resilient infants. (credit: "Against the odds" by Karen Abeyasekere/Royal Air Force Mildenhall, Public
Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
25.1 Birth-Related Complications
25.2 Congenital, Genetic, and Acquired Complications
25.3 Newborn Resuscitation
25.4 Preterm Newborn
25.5 Parent-Newborn Bonding and Attachment
25.6 Discharge Planning
INTRODUCTION Newborn complications include those related to traumatic birth, a result of maternal health, or an
outcome of genetics. The nurse's priority is knowing when and how to intervene to provide the best care for the
newborn and family. Nursing interventions can sometimes include following neonatal resuscitation protocols or
transferring a preterm newborn to the NICU for care. Parent attachment with an at-risk newborn can be altered
because of the need for immediate medical interventions. The nurse encourages parents to engage with their
newborn as much as medically possible to facilitate appropriate bonding and attachment. In addition, the nurse
provides and regularly reinforces discharge teaching so that parents feel confident to care safely for their at-risk
newborn at home.
1104  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      25.1 Birth-Related Complications

      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

          · Describe maternal, newborn, and environmental risks that predispose infants to birth injuries
          · Identify and prioritize birth-related complications in the newborn
          · Compare and contrast the head injuries caput succedaneum, subgaleal hemorrhage, and

              cephalohematoma
          · Compare and contrast the nerve injuries brachial plexus injury, Erb-Duchenne paralysis, facial paralysis,

              and phrenic nerve paralysis

      Any physical injury to a newborn caused by labor and delivery is a birth injury or birth trauma (Collins & Popek,
      2018). Most birth injuries are minor and resolve on their own, others require immediate and possibly long-term
      treatment, and a few can be fatal. The evidence-based practice of limiting the use of forceps or vacuum extraction
      during delivery and the increased use of cesarean surgery for birth have decreased the number of birth injuries
      (Gupta & Cabacungan, 2021). However, in some instances, particularly during long labor or if the fetus is in an
      abnormal presentation for delivery, injury is unavoidable. The nurse's role is to know the signs and symptoms of
      these injuries in the newborn, detect them early, and care for those who need treatment (Table 25.1).

      Type of Injury                                Physical Symptoms

      Caput succedaneum, subgaleal hemorrhage, and  Scalp and underlying tissue
      cephalohematoma                               (Caput succedaneum crosses suture lines; a
                                                    cephalohematoma does not)

      Subdural hematoma and skull fracture          Intracranial and skull damage

      Clavicle fracture                             Clavicle

      Brachial plexus injury                        Brachial plexus (upper extremity) involving nerves C5 to
                                                    T1

      Erb-Duchenne paralysis                        Flaccid arm and adducted shoulder, nerves C5 to C6

      Klumpke palsy                                 Lower arm is flaccid with an absent grasp reflex, nerves
                                                    C8 to T1

      TABLE 25.1 Birth Injuries

      Risk factors for birth injuries include those of the person giving birth and those of the fetus (Table 25.2). Increased
      risk for birth trauma is found in persons giving birth who are over 35 or under 16; are primigravida; or experience
      uterine dysfunction, prolonged or precipitous labor, preterm or postterm labor, and cephalopelvic disproportion
      (Cavazos-Rehg, et al., 2015). Increased risk for birth trauma is also associated with dystocia, a result of anatomic
      conditions of either the birthing person or the fetus.

      Access for free at openstax.org
                              25.1 · Birth-Related Complications                                                      1105

Affected Person Risk Factors

Birth parent  · Birthing parent over 35 years of age or under 16 years of age
              · Preterm or postterm labor
              · Cephalopelvic disproportion
              · Labor dystocia
              · Maternal obesity

Infant        · Macrosomia
              · Multiples (twins, triplets, etc.)
              · Congenital anomalies
              · Large for gestational age (LGA) or macrosomia

                     TABLE 25.2 Risk Factors for Birth Injuries

Head Injury

The three most common extracranial birth injuries of the head are caput succedaneum, subgaleal hemorrhage, and
cephalohematoma. Serious head injuries from birth that lead to intracranial hemorrhage are subdural hematoma
and skull fracture. Though each injury has its own manifestation and pathophysiology, the nursing care for all of
them is similar.

Caput Succedaneum
Caput succedaneum is the most common birth-related trauma (Collins & Popek, 2018). As the fetal head presents
during a vertex delivery, the tissue there becomes swollen, edematous, and full of serous fluid or blood. An
important sign of caput succedaneum is swelling that is beyond or crosses the sutures of the skull. Shortly after
birth, bruising, petechiae, or ecchymosis can be noted at the site. The provider and nurse reassure the parents that
no treatment is needed, and the swelling will go away in a few days. The nurse assesses the area for any changes
and documents during each shift the evolution of the swelling.

Cephalohematoma
Cephalohematoma occurs when fetal blood vessels in the head break during labor or delivery. This injury is most
common for primiparous birthing people, and risk increases with a forceps or vacuum extraction delivery. The most
common area of bleeding is under one or both parietal bones and rarely the occipital or frontal bones. Unlike the
caput succedaneum, the swelling or bruising will not extend beyond the suture line, and it usually shows up 2 to 3
days after birth (Figure 25.2). Treatment is not needed for an uncomplicated cephalohematoma, which will resolve
on its own in 2 to 3 weeks. These neonates, however, are at higher risk for jaundice due to broken red blood cells
spilling bilirubin into the bloodstream and could need phototherapy.
1106  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      FIGURE 25.2 Cephalohematoma in Newborn A newborn's skull will show an area of bruising over the parietal bones that does not extend
      past the suture line. (credit: modification of "Mechanical birth-related trauma to the neonate: An imaging perspective" by Nadezdha D.
      Kiriyak, CC BY 4.0)

      Subgaleal Hemorrhage
      Subgaleal hemorrhage occurs when there is bleeding within the subgaleal space. The subgaleal space is under the
      tendinous sheath that connects the frontal and occipital muscles and is the inner surface of the scalp. Bleeding is
      caused by a shearing injury during the compression and dragging of the fetal head through the pelvis. Delivery with
      forceps or vacuum extraction increases the risk of this injury. The bleeding extends beyond the skull bones and can
      continue after birth. Nursing care includes taking serial head circumference measurements and evaluating for a firm
      mass on an examination of the head and neck. A boggy, fluctuant mass over the scalp that crosses suture lines and
      moves when the newborn is repositioned is an early hallmark sign of the injury. Other symptoms include those
      related to blood loss, e.g., tachycardia and pallor; the effects of the swelling; and the forward lateral position of the
      ears. Possible testing includes computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to confirm
      assessment diagnosis. Obtaining an MRI on a young infant can be challenging. Obtaining a head ultrasound prior to
      an MRI may be beneficial, as ultrasound scans are easily obtained at the bedside. Replacement of blood by
      transfusion or administration of clotting factors may be needed for treatment. Continuing to monitor the infant for
      changes in level of consciousness and anemia is paramount in determining treatment. Ultimately, serum bilirubin
      may increase as the hematoma resolves and the blood collection is absorbed.

      Neuromusculoskeletal Injuries

      A fracture is a break in a bone. Many different types of fractures exist, though in newborns very few occur due to the
      birth process. In this chapter, the focus is on fractures caused by birth trauma. The goal in treatment is to allow the
      bones to heal in a functional position. In the newborn, casting is not the primary treatment modality as it is in older
      patients who have fractures that need time and support to heal.

      Skull Fractures
      The skull of the neonate is flexible and can significantly change shape throughout the process of labor and delivery.
      Two types of fractures are found to occur in the skull bones of the newborn, linear and depressed fractures. Linear
      fractures are most often seen in the parietal bones and are benign, requiring no intervention. The pressure of the
      parietal bone moving through the pelvis or the use of forceps can result in depressed fractures. These require a CT
      scan to both diagnose and evaluate for bone fragments or underlying damage. These fractures heal over time
      without intervention. The most common cause of a skull fracture is forceful assistance during birth.

      Clavicle Fracture
      Clavicle fractures are the most common fracture sustained during labor and delivery (Stanford Medicine Children's
      Health, 2023). These fractures are most often present in the middle third of the bone. Difficult delivery of the
      shoulders during a vaginal birth or extension of the arms in a breech birth can result in a fracture. Infants who are
      born via vacuum or forceps-assisted birth, are macrosomic (weight over 4,000 grams), or have birthing persons with
      a higher weight (BMI 30 or greater) or diabetes have increased risk for clavicle injury (Hashmi et al., 2021). Any

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          25.1 · Birth-Related Complications  1107

large-for-gestational-age infant, particularly those weighing over 4,500 grams and delivered vaginally, is at risk for a
clavicle fracture, and the nurse will evaluate for the injury when completing a head-to-toe assessment (Rehm et al.,
2020). Signs and symptoms include limited movement of the arm, crepitus over the clavicle, and absence of the
Moro reflex on the fractured side. The signs and symptoms and x-ray are diagnostic. Treatment includes gentle
handling of the affected side because it will heal on its own without the need for immobilization.

        LINK TO LEARNING

A helpful resource for purposes of family support, this link explains injuries that most commonly occur from birth
(https://openstax.org/r/77birthinjuries) and differentiates between birth injuries and birth defects.

Nerve Injuries

Nerve injuries caused by birth trauma can be direct damage done during delivery, or they can be a secondary injury
related to swelling or compression of tissue around or near the affected nerve. The nurse assesses the newborn for
intact reflexes (see Chapter 23 Newborn Assessment) and equal bilateral movement with smooth full range of
motion to evaluate for any nerve-related injury. The injured or compressed nerve is identified by the signs and
symptoms. Treatment consists of allowing time (weeks to months) for the injury to heal as the underlying damage is
repaired by the body. Finding an abnormality or unexpected movement in a newborn can be alarming and stress
inducing in the new parent or caregiver. The role of the nurse is to both find the nerve injury early and educate the
family about the treatment and prognosis with empathy.

Brachial Plexus Injury
The most common type of paralysis related to birth is brachial plexus injury (BPI). The paralysis involves muscles
of the upper extremity due to trauma of C5 through T1. Any infant weighing over 4,000 grams is at increased risk for
this injury, as are infants born breech, with a forceps- or vacuum-assisted birth, or after a prolonged second stage of
labor.

Erb-Duchenne paralysis is due to injury of nerves C5 and C6 caused by pulling the head away from the shoulder
during a difficult birth. The signs and symptoms are a limp arm that has an adducted shoulder and is internally
rotated. The elbow is extended, and the forearm is pronated; however, a grasp reflex can still be present, as the
finger and wrist movement is normal (Figure 25.3).
1108  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      FIGURE 25.3 Erb-Duchenne Paralysis in an Infant and Brachial Plexus Injury in an Infant (a) An infant diagnosed with Erb-Duchenne
      paralysis will have a limp arm due to injury or compression of C5 and C6 vertebrae. (b) An infant with brachial plexus injury will show
      brachial paralysis and lack of movement of the upper limbs due to damage of nerves from vertebrae C5 through T1. (attribution: Copyright
      Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

      Klumpke palsy, also called Klumpke palsy, is less common than the other two injuries. It is the result of damage to
      the lower plexus rather than the upper, and it affects the nerves between C8 and T1. The lower arm is flaccid, and
      the grasp reflex is absent. Klumpke palsy can present in combination with the other two nerve injuries. Treatment
      starts with immobilization of the affected upper limb with proper positioning, followed by gentle range of motion
      (ROM) exercises. If hemorrhage or edema is the cause of the nerve damage, full recovery in a few weeks is likely. If a
      laceration has occurred to the nerve itself and movement is not restored in a few months, surgery may be required.
      Return of full function is variable.

      Educating parents on the progression of their newborn if the child is diagnosed with this injury is the role of the
      bedside nurse. During head-to-toe assessment, a finding of lower arm flaccidity and loss of grasp reflex (see
      Chapter 23 Newborn Assessment) could be made by the bedside nurse, leading them to alert the health-care
      provider and move forward with treatment.

      Facial Paralysis
      In a neonate, facial paralysis occurs from birth injury to the facial nerve, which is cranial nerve 7 (Cromeens et al.,
      2020). When under pressure, this nerve may be injured because of its location. Infants who undergo a prolonged
      second stage of labor or a forceps-assisted delivery are at higher risk for this injury. Signs and symptoms are loss of
      movement on that side, such as a droopy eyelid, although the eye remains open on the affected side (Figure 25.4).
      The face is flattened and unresponsive during crying. The forehead will not wrinkle, resulting in a notable
      presentation during crying. This injury does not need treatment, is usually transitory, and improves spontaneously in
      hours to days after birth. Some presentations can take weeks to months to heal. Congenital unilateral facial
      paralysis related to an ipsilateral facial nerve aplasia or hypoplasia is a potential cause that requires surgical
      intervention. These longer-lasting symptomatic findings point toward an underlying developmental or congenital
      defect and underscore the importance of MRI in the diagnostic workup (Decraene et al., 2020). Discussing this
      finding with the parents can relieve unvoiced concerns regarding abnormal facial movement during crying.

      Access for free at openstax.org
25.2 · Congenital, Genetic, and Acquired Complications                                                                                        1109

FIGURE 25.4 Facial Paralysis in an Infant An infant will show facial paralysis, i.e., lack of movement caused by damage to the facial nerve,
particularly during crying. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Phrenic Nerve Paralysis
Paralysis of the diaphragm is called phrenic nerve paralysis. The injury is usually caused by hyperextension of the
neck during delivery. This can occur with breech delivery or a forceps-assisted delivery (Murty & Ram, 2012).
Diaphragmatic paralysis almost always occurs with a brachial plexus injury, though brachial plexus injuries are
generally a lone injury. Paralysis of the diaphragm is usually unilateral, although it can be bilateral. The same pulling
of the shoulder away from the head that causes the brachial plexus injury is the cause of this injury (Rizeq et al.,
2020).

Cyanosis and irregular thoracic respirations with no abdominal movement during breathing are the presenting signs
of paralysis, which can lead to a medical emergency. These infants will require respiratory support, most commonly
mechanical ventilation, for the first few days of life. Due to the lack of diaphragmatic support for their breaths, they
are at increased risk for pneumonia. If respiratory distress, a state when the increased efforts of breathing cannot
meet ventilation and oxygenation demands, is persistent, the infant requires longer support. Diaphragmatic
electrical stimulation, called pacing, or surgical correction may be required for treatment.

25.2 Congenital, Genetic, and Acquired Complications

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Identify and define common congenital and genetic disorders found in the newborn
    · Describe the nursing management of newborns with common congenital and genetic disorders
    · Describe characteristics, common medical conditions associated with, and therapeutic management of

        genetic diseases, including both phenotype and environmental modification
    · Discuss the nurse's role in educating, caring for, and supporting families and newborns with congenital

        and genetic disorders or conditions

A congenital disorder is a disorder or abnormality present at birth, while a genetic disorder is caused by an
abnormality in the genetic material, chromosomes, or the genes within the chromosomes (Udayangani, 2022).

Support of the family during the introduction of the newborn with a congenital or genetic disorder is paramount.
These disorders can be known or unknown at the time of birth and can make attachment and bonding difficult. The
role of the nurse is to support the birth parent and newborn during this time of transition while also facilitating
bonding and attachment.

Cranial and Craniofacial Deformities

A cranial deformity is a congenital or genetic disorder that affects the development of the cranial anatomy resulting
in abnormal form or function. The disorders that fall under this category can be noted in utero or at birth. They are
usually diagnosed very early in life because of visually notable facial features and potentially measurable size
1110  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      differences.

      Microcephaly
      One cranial deformity is microcephaly, which is a head circumference at least two standard deviations below the
      average findings for someone of the same age and gender (The National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental
      Disabilities [NCBDDD], n.d.). Microcephaly can be a finding and diagnosis, or it can be a finding related to an
      underlying disorder or disease pattern. Microcephaly can be connected to comorbid disorders including seizures,
      developmental delay, intellectual disabilities, hearing or vision loss, movement and/or balance problems, and
      feeding difficulties, particularly swallowing (Harris, 2015).

      Craniosynostosis
      Craniosynostosis is defined as two or more prematurely fused skull bones. There is a range of presentations, but the
      most common type presents with the closure of one suture in the skull earlier than expected. The disease can affect
      multiple skull bones or even bones outside the cranium.

      Craniosynostosis can be a cosmetic deformity, but the more concerning result is that it can potentially limit brain
      growth and development. Growth of the brain relies on skull growth to allow for internal expansion. Surgical
      correction is required to allow appropriate brain growth if sutures are not present for movement during growth. The
      potential neurocognitive impact of craniosynostosis is just now being investigated by the research community
      (Proctor & Meara, 2019).

      Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate
      A cleft is a congenital abnormal space or gap in the upper lip, alveolus, or palate. A cleft lip or cleft palate can occur
      alone or can be found together as a cleft lip and palate. A cleft lip is a failure of the tissues to come together at the
      frontonasal and maxillary processes. A complete cleft lip has a gap that extends through the nasal floor; an
      incomplete cleft does not. A cleft palate occurs when the palatal shelves that make up the maxillary processes do
      not come together. The way these defects present is determined by when in embryologic life the interference in
      fusion occurs (Vyas et al., 2020) (Figure 25.5).

      FIGURE 25.5 Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate (a) This is an infant with an unrepaired cleft lip. (b) This is an infant with an unrepaired cleft palate.
      (credit a: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, Public Domain;
      credit b: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, Public Domain)

      Etiology
      Cleft lip and cleft palate can occur as lone congenital defects or with other congenital defects, specifically with
      congenital heart disease. Both are associated with more than 300 diagnosable syndromes (Vyas et al., 2020).
      Cleft lip and cleft palate occur in approximately 1 in 600 to 800 live births (1.42 in 1,000), while the less common
      cleft palate alone occurs in around 1 in 2,000 births. These defects are distributed as follows: 15 percent are cleft
      lip alone, 45 percent are cleft lip and palate, and 40 percent are cleft palate alone (Shankar, 2011).

      Access for free at openstax.org
25.2 · Congenital, Genetic, and Acquired Complications                                                                      1111

Pathophysiology
It is believed that cleft lip and cleft palate occur as result of a combination of genetic and environmental factors.
These conditions can lead to difficulty in feeding by bottle or breast, which increases the risk of developmental
delay and slowed growth. Children with these defects can experience difficulties in speech development, deafness,
malocclusions, notable facial deformation, and potentially severe psychologic issues (Vyas et al., 2020).

Diagnostics
Diagnosis of cleft lip, cleft palate, or cleft lip and palate usually occurs by ultrasound before birth. Early detection
allows for early education for the parents and early intervention to alleviate any difficulties with feeding. Parents
who do not have access to prenatal care learn about their child's cleft only after birth.

        CULTURAL CONTEXT

Cleft Lip and Palate: The View from Those Practicing Hinduism

Beliefs and attitudes of people play a major role in how they perceive and respond to any physical deformity.
Cultural views and opinions based on those cultural beliefs have a role in how the family views their child with the
physical deformity. Families who practice Hinduism, a dominant religion of India that is characterized by a belief in
reincarnation, may believe that cleft lip and/or cleft palate are the result of sins from a past life visiting the newborn
in this life or some other supernatural cause (Weatherly-White et al., 2005).

Nursing Management
It is very important to treat clefts at the right time or right age to get the most effective repair with as little
impairment as possible (Vyas et al., 2020). The long-term management of a cleft lip and cleft palate requires a
multidisciplinary team: plastic surgery, otolaryngology, orthodontics, speech pathology, pediatrics, nursing,
audiology, social work, and psychology. Surgical correction and successful reconstruction typically require multiple
stages or phases of surgery (Vyas et al., 2020).

Nursing management of an infant with cleft lip and palate begins with assessment of the family as a whole. The
nurse explores the family's understanding and acceptance of its new member and asks how feeding is being done.
The nurse determines by physical assessment during feeding if effective nutritional intake is occurring and
evaluates growth over time. The goals of caring for this newborn include maintaining hydration and nutrition and
reducing the parents' potential anxiety and guilt that may occur related to the newborn's physical defects.

Educating the caregiver on how to feed a newborn with cleft palate is a vital role of the nurse. Direct breast-feeding
can be successful, as the breast tissue itself can fill the gap in the lip and/or palate. When using a nipple to feed a
newborn with cleft lip and palate, positioning in a unilateral presentation can improve intake. The person feeding the
infant should aim the nipple at the unaffected side of the palate. An extra-long nipple, such as that used on the
Haberman feeder (Figure 25.6), Lamb's nipples, and/or special cleft palate nipples can be used to close the opening
in the palate. An Asepto syringe with the addition of rubber tubing on the tip, also called a Breck feeder, can be
successful for feedings (National Health Service [NHS], 2023).
1112  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      FIGURE 25.6 The Haberman Feeder The longer nipple of the Haberman feeder can be helpful when bottle-feeding an infant with a cleft lip
      and palate. The Haberman nipple allows the person doing the feeding to control the flow of formula/breast milk into the infant's mouth as
      they are learning to feed. This avoids choking if too much liquid is expressed at any one time. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
      OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

      Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders

      Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD) are the potential outcome of prenatal alcohol exposure (PAE) combined
      with genetic and environmental factors (Kaminen-Ahola, 2020). Effects of the disorder can range from growth
      deficits to physical abnormalities, neurocognitive and behavioral deficits, and an increased vulnerability to mental
      health problems later in life.

      The five major diagnoses of FASD are based on the particular symptoms displayed:

          · Alcohol-related neurodevelopmental disorder--defined as a disorder with intellectual disabilities or behavioral
              and/or learning problems caused by maternal alcohol consumption during pregnancy

          · Alcohol-related birth defects--a range of congenital and genetic birth defects caused by maternal alcohol
              consumption during pregnancy

          · Fetal alcohol syndrome--fetal alcohol spectrum disorder at its most severe presentation, including both
              neurodevelopmental disorders and congenital and genetic birth defects caused by maternal alcohol
              consumption during pregnancy

          · Partial fetal alcohol syndrome--some, but not all, the hallmark signs and symptoms of fetal alcohol syndrome
              caused by maternal alcohol consumption during pregnancy; ultimately the criteria for the diagnosis of FAS are
              not met

          · Neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure--behavioral symptoms of a disorder that
              include neurocognitive impairments such as problems with mental health, long- and short-term memory,
              impulse control, communication, and daily living activities; caused by maternal alcohol consumption during
              pregnancy (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research [MFMER], 2018)

      Fetal alcohol syndrome is the most severe of these disorders. This diagnosis includes characteristic facial
      dysmorphisms and central nervous system deficits.

      Etiology
      Many factors affect the developmental and health status of the infant with FASD: genetic susceptibility, the pregnant
      person's drinking pattern, the timing of drinking in relationship to what fetal development takes place at that time,
      and the amount of alcohol consumed, along with the pregnant person's metabolism and tolerance of alcohol during
      the pregnancy. FASD prevalence ranges from 3 percent to 5 percent in Europe and North America to more than 10

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             25.2 · Congenital, Genetic, and Acquired Complications  1113

percent in South Africa, although this disorder is underdiagnosed (Kaminen-Ahola, 2020).

Pathophysiology
Recent research findings suggest that PAE may affect the regulation of gene expression. Epigenetic regulation and
the variation induced in utero from the teratogen alcohol could be the underlying pathophysiology of FASD. Drinking
alcohol while pregnant allows alcohol to enter the bloodstream and reach the fetus via the placenta. The developing
fetus experiences higher concentrations of alcohol than the pregnant person because the fetus metabolizes alcohol
more slowly than an adult. Alcohol can then affect all developing tissues and interfere with oxygen delivery and
nutritional intake. The more alcohol that is ingested, the greater the risk to the fetus as it develops (MFMER,
1998-2023). The major signs and symptoms of FAS include the following:

    · Three specific facial abnormalities:
          smooth philtrum (the area between nose and upper lip)
          thin upper lip
          small palpebral fissures (the horizontal eye openings)

    · Growth deficit (lower than average height, weight, or both)
    · Central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities (structural, neurologic, functional, or a combination of these)

        (American Academy of Pediatrics [AAP], 2018)

Diagnostics
Diagnosing FAS requires a multidisciplinary team including the primary pediatrician, a geneticist, and a
neuropsychologist. Chromosomal testing can be a piece of diagnostics, but only 9 percent to 14 percent of children
diagnosed with FASD will have chromosomal deletions or duplications directly causative of the child's features.
Currently, research is focused on finding biomarkers that could be used for simple blood tests to diagnose the
disorder (Kaminen-Ahola, 2020).

Nursing Management
No specific treatment for FASD exists, but the earlier it is diagnosed, the sooner supportive services can be added to
the child's life. The physical and mental deficiencies of FASD will be ongoing, requiring a lifetime of coordinated
medical care and support. The nurse assists with contacting social services if the birthing institution allows or
consulting child protective services (CPS) with any newborn diagnosed with FAS. In many states in the United
States, children born with FASD are automatically immediately eligible for intervention services.

The goal of treatment is to reduce the effects of the syndrome and prevent as many disabilities as possible. Early
intervention services--speech therapy, physical therapy, and occupational therapy--can reduce FAS effects and
prevent some long-term disabilities. Developmental services include consultation with an early interventionist and
help with basic gross motor and social skills. Later childhood care can include a psychologist along with supportive
services in school to help with learning and behavioral issues. Every child presenting with FASD has their own
personalized needs. This individualized care may include optometry for vision care or a cardiologist for
cardiovascular health, for example, though other children with FASD may not need these specific medical
specialists.

Nursing management includes assessment for overstimulation because infants with FAS can become agitated easily
and have difficulty self-soothing. Maintaining an environment that is calm and stable by clustering care decreases
physical stimulation. The family and/or pregnant person will need to be assessed for alcohol and other substance-
use problems. The nurse educates the birth parent that no amount of alcohol during pregnancy is safe for a fetus. If
the infant has siblings, they also may need to be evaluated for the disorder. The nurse provides education to the
birth parent along with counseling that includes alcohol cessation programs and support groups. Because FASD is a
lifelong disorder that affects not only the infant but also the whole family, counseling can benefit parents and the
family in dealing with their child's physical and behavioral problems.

Genetic Disorders

Genetic disorders are an inherited medical condition caused by a change in the DNA. The effects of the DNA
abnormality can range from encompassing multisystemic disease states to benign disease states that rarely cause
significant life changes. The most significant genetic disorders are those that cause life-altering medical conditions
that affect the patient from birth throughout their life.
1114  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      Trisomy 21
      Down syndrome (DS), or Trisomy 21, is the most commonly occurring chromosomal anomaly. It is primarily caused
      by trisomy of chromosome 21, which results in the multisystem signs and symptoms of the syndrome. Langdon
      Down first described the condition in 1866 in a paper presented at a lecture conference (Down, 1887). Many care
      providers had come to the conclusion that there was a genetic basis long before testing, developed in 1959, could
      confirm that Down syndrome was caused by a chromosomal anomaly (Antonarakis et al., 2020).

      Etiology
      Down syndrome (DS) is the most common genetic disorder of intellectual disability. The prevalence is increasing as
      the global population grows, while more children with DS survive childhood. Trisomy 21 occurs in about 1 in 700 to
      800 births (6.7 in 10,000) or 1 in 779 infants born in the United States (Antonarakis et al., 2020). Elective
      termination or spontaneous abortion of fetuses with DS results in a reduction of the final number of live infants born
      with the finding.

      Pathophysiology
      Molecular pathophysiology research currently suggests that DS is a disorder of gene expression dysregulation.
      However, further research is needed. The biological mechanism that results in each type of phenotypic presentation
      remains unknown. Different types of meiotic and mitotic errors can all lead to aneuploidy and, ultimately, trisomies.

      Advanced maternal age (AMA) at conception is a major risk factor for DS and is a risk factor for all autosomal
      trisomies. However, most newborns with trisomy 21 are born to those who are not AMA, due to the number of live
      births within that age group. Environmental factors are also influential in this disorder, among them tobacco use,
      lack of folic acid supplementation, and oral contraceptive use (Antonarakis et al., 2020).

      Diagnostics
      Laboratory-based prenatal screening for DS is offered as routine antenatal care in developed countries. The serum
      sample for screening measures maternal levels of beta human chorionic gonadotropin and other gestationally age-
      dependent levels. First trimester ultrasound is used to measure fetal nuchal translucency. No one specific fetal
      anatomic finding is diagnostic of DS; rather, there are so-called soft signs associated with the syndrome. Best
      practice guidelines recommend that if any of these early testing methods is positive, the pregnant person should be
      offered posttest counseling and a diagnostic test: amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling, followed by a genetic
      analysis (Antonarakis et al., 2020).

      Nursing Management
      Every person with DS has their own strengths and challenges related to their health that will vary throughout their
      life. The level of medical care required from birth can be high or low, depending on the comorbidities. This same
      presentation is paralleled as children with DS age. Some may need multiple layers of social care and support while
      others may live independently. Some health problems have a higher incidence in those with DS: congenital heart
      disease, obstructive sleep apnea, thyroid disease, dementia, epilepsy, gastrointestinal disease, hearing and vision
      problems, intellectual and developmental disabilities, mental illness, immunologic dysfunction, hematologic
      disorders, and musculoskeletal issues (Alexander et al., 2015). The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has
      screening guidelines to address these potential areas of care (Bull et al., 2022), including a recommendation to have
      an evaluation by a cardiologist for a cardiac baseline early in the infant period.

      Trisomy 18 and Trisomy 13 Syndromes
      Trisomy 18, or Edwards syndrome, and Trisomy 13 are genetically and phenotypically distinct diseases. However,
      they have very similar characteristics and survival rates, and they rely on much the same treatment and
      management (Carey et al., 2021). Edwards syndrome is named after Professor John Edwards, who originally
      described the syndrome in a 1960 issue of The Lancet, the same edition where Patau described the syndrome of
      trisomy 13 (Edwards et al., 1960; Patau et al., 1960).

      Incidence
      The incidence of trisomy 18 ranges from 1 in 3,600 to 1 in 8,500 live births (Carey et al., 2021). The incidence of
      trisomy 13 is estimated to range from 1 in 5,000 to 1 in 12,000 total births (Carey et al., 2021). These pregnancies
      many times end in spontaneous miscarriage without diagnosis (Carey et al., 2021).

      Access for free at openstax.org
                   25.2 · Congenital, Genetic, and Acquired Complications                                               1115

Etiology and Pathophysiology
Trisomy 18 includes a recognizable constellation of major and minor findings, most notably increased neonatal and
infant mortality and significant developmental and motor disabilities for children who survive past infancy. Most
infants with trisomy 18 have a full three copies of chromosome 18 in all their cells. A small percentage, 3 percent to
6 percent of infants with this disorder, have mosaicism, or partial presentation, of the chromosomal trisomy. The
addition of an extra chromosome in trisomy 18 was found to be maternal nondisjunction in 95 percent of the studied
cases. Nondisjunction occurs when chromosomes fail to segregate during meiosis; when this happens, gametes
with an abnormal number of chromosomes are produced, leading to pregnancy loss or birth defects. As in all
trisomies, the occurrence of nondisjunctional trisomy 18 increases with advanced maternal age (Carey et al., 2021).

Trisomy 13 syndrome presents as a pattern of multiple congenital anomalies including a combination of orofacial
clefts, micro- or anophthalmia, and postaxial polydactyly, which is easily identified and diagnosed on presentation
(Carey et al., 2021). Table 25.3 compares trisomy 18 and 13 features.

Syndrome Features

Trisomy  · Small, abnormally shaped head
18       · Small jaw and mouth
         · Clenched fists with overlapping fingers and/or polydactyly

Trisomy  · Heart defects
13       · Brain or spinal cord abnormalities
         · Very small or poorly developed eyes (microphthalmia), which may include coloboma, an area

            of missing tissue in the eye
         · Polydactyly, cleft lip, and potentially a cleft palate
         · Weak muscle tone, hypotonia

TABLE 25.3 Comparison of Trisomy 18 and Trisomy 13 Features

Diagnostics
Both disorders have a characteristic pattern of prenatal growth deficiency. Trisomy 18 presents with distinctive
craniofacial features, hand posturing with overriding fingers and small nails, and a short sternum. These can be
enough for a clinical diagnosis of the disease in utero, but confirmation of the syndrome requires a standard G-
banded karyotype or, more recently, a cytogenomic single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarray that shows
the extra copy of chromosome 18 (Carey et al., 2021).

Trisomy 13 presents with orofacial clefts, micro- or anophthalmia, and postaxial polydactyly. However, any newborn
with holoprosencephaly and multiple anomalies should be considered for the syndrome. Ear malformations, anterior
frontal upsweep, and capillary malformations of the forehead are common enough in the syndrome to be helpful in
determining a clinical diagnosis. Any clinical diagnosis of trisomy 13 needs to be confirmed with a SNP microarray or
karyotype that shows three full copies of chromosome 13 or most of the long arm of chromosome 13. Maternal
nondisjunction is the most common reason for the trisomy, accounting for approximately 90 percent of cases.
However, mosaicism and translocation can also be the underlying cause for the extra genetic material (Carey et al.,
2021).

Nursing Management
Both trisomy 18 and 13 result in anomalies that, without intervention and sometimes even with it, lead to death in
the first months of life. Both are common disease processes present in miscarried zygotes or fetuses. Around 50
percent of newborns with trisomy 18 or 13 survive for longer than a week after birth, and 6 percent to 12 percent of
those will live beyond a year (Carey et al., 2021).

Recently, the health-care community has changed the management paradigm for infants with trisomy 18 and 13.
When parents choose to proceed with full intervention instead of comfort or palliative care only, pediatric
otolaryngology and pediatric cardiology become involved in a multidisciplinary approach to care. The most likely
driving factors in the interventional care of the patient with either trisomy 18 or 13 are respiratory (airway) and
1116  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      cardiac (congenital cardiac disorder) that will be treated early in life (Carey, 2021; Carey et al., 2021).

      Turner Syndrome
      Turner syndrome (TS) is a genetic disorder where phenotypic females have one X chromosome and complete or
      partial absence of the other sex chromosome. The syndrome is associated with typical clinical signs and/or
      symptoms that can include short stature, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, infertility, middle ear infection, and
      other congenital malformations. In the newborn, the classic assessment findings are webbed neck, low birth weight,
      and congenital cardiac disease, most likely aortic arch related. The syndrome was first described by Henry H. Turner
      in a journal publication in 1938, but the disease pattern was previously described by Giovanni Battista Morgagni in
      1768 and N. A. Shereshevski in 1930 (Gravholt et al., 2022).

      Etiology
      Understanding of the genetics and genomics of TS is currently evolving as new information emerges from active
      research. New studies show "pervasive changes in methylation pattern and RNA expression" (Gravholt et al., 2022).
      New candidate genes for phenotypic expression and genotypic traits have emerged, although more research is
      needed in this area. The estimated prevalence of TS in newborns is approximately 64 per 100,000 (Gravholt et al.,
      2022); however, the number in the general population of adult women is significantly lower due to missed diagnosis
      and mortality. The average age of diagnosis is 15 years, but with newborn screening and cord blood testing,
      neonatal diagnosis is increasing (Gravholt et al., 2022).

      Pathophysiology
      Infants with TS will have some, though likely not all, features noted at birth. Other general features will emerge
      throughout their lifetime, some found in more cases than others. Table 25.4 lists the features of Turner syndrome.

      Type of Features Features

      At birth                          · Thick neck tissue
                                        · Swelling of the neck (cystic hygroma)
                                        · Small for gestational age
                                        · Heart conditions
                                        · Kidney abnormalities
                                        · Swollen hands from lymphedema

      General                           · A particularly short, wide neck (webbed neck)
                                        · A broad chest and widely spaced nipples
                                        · Arms that turn out slightly at the elbows
                                        · A low hairline
                                        · Teeth problems
                                        · A large number of moles
                                        · Small, spoon-shaped nails
                                        · A short fourth finger or toe
                                        · Frequent acute otitis media or ear infections
                                        · Infertility
                                        · Short stature

                                       TABLE 25.4 Turner Syndrome Features (National Health Service, 2023)

      Most instances of TS are not inherited (Gravholt et al., 2022). Monosomy X is a random formation of reproductive
      cells in the parent of the person with TS. An error in cell division can result in reproductive cells with an abnormal
      number of chromosomes, in this case one less. If an atypical reproductive cell is a part of the genetic makeup of a
      zygote, each cell will possess a single X chromosome. The other sex chromosome will be missing, as it was missing
      in the original atypical cell. Mosaic Turner syndrome is also not an inherited condition. It occurs because of a
      random event during cell division in early fetal development. Mosaic TS results in some cells having the usual
      number of chromosomes and some cells having only one sex chromosome. In rare instances, TS can be from a
      partial deletion of the X chromosome, and this can pass from one generation to the next, the only inheritable form of

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             25.2 · Congenital, Genetic, and Acquired Complications  1117

the syndrome (Kikkeri & Nagalli, 2022).

Diagnostics
The diagnosis of TS relies on both the clinical phenotype and a standard chromosomal analysis. A peripheral blood
sample from the delivered cord or from the infant shows a partial or complete loss of the second sex chromosome in
phenotypic females (Gravholt et al., 2017). It is recommended that all infants diagnosed prenatally have a postnatal
karyotype to confirm the diagnosis (Gravholt et al., 2017). The most common karyotype of TS is 45, X (40 percent to
50 percent). The mosaic karyotype 45, X/46, XX is found in 15 percent to 25 percent of cases (Gravholt et al., 2017;
Gravholt et al., 2022).

Nursing Management
Care of a newborn with TS will require an interdisciplinary team. Fifty percent of children with TS will have
congenital heart disease, and almost all will have an underlying endocrinologic disease, with decreased growth and
a high incidence of diabetes (Gravholt et al., 2017). After diagnosis of TS, an infant will need the care of a general
pediatrician as well as a pediatric endocrinologist who may start therapy as early as 1 year of age to increase linear
growth. A pediatric cardiologist should be consulted to monitor for aortic changes and to evaluate for prolonged QT
intervals and the presentation of hypertension. A geneticist may be needed to counsel the family and delineate the
specific genotype (Gravholt et al., 2017).

All newborns with suspected genetic disorders benefit from early diagnosis together with a team or developmental
home where their care is coordinated by many different professionals and services, such as neonatologists, clinical
geneticists, social workers, and developmental specialists along with needed therapies.

        LINK TO LEARNING

The National Institutes of Health provides extensive information on genetic and rare diseases (https://openstax.org/
r/77diseases) at the Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center.

Congenital Heart Disease in the Newborn
Congenital heart disease (CHD) affects 0.6 percent to 1.9 percent of live births every year in the United States (Desai
et al., 2023). Congenital cardiac defects can be divided into cyanotic lesions, those defects that shunt right to left
(patients who have oxygen saturations less than 90 percent), and acyanotic lesions, defects that shunt left to right
(expected oxygen saturations, 90 percent and above). Both cyanotic and acyanotic congenital cardiac defects can
be divided again into increased pulmonary blood flow, decreased pulmonary blood flow, obstructed blood flow, and
mixed lesions. Cyanotic heart defects are those that provide less than normal oxygenated blood to systemic
circulation, resulting in a lowered oxygen saturation at baseline. These defects have an incidence of approximately
57 in 100,000 births (Sadowski, 2009). Congenital heart disease is one of the most common birth anomalies
affecting neonates and one of the most survivable because palliative surgical options and medical management
have improved significantly over the past few decades.

Ductal-dependent lesions depend on a patent ductus arteriosus to provide systemic blood flow. Examples of ductal-
dependent defects are hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), coarctation of the aorta, interrupted aortic arch,
critical aortic stenosis (AS), pulmonary stenosis (PS), pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum (PAIVS),
tricuspid atresia (TA), and transposition of the great vessels (TGV).

Figure 25.7 illustrates congenital heart disease types grouped by category (Sadowski, 2009).
1118  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      FIGURE 25.7 Congenital Heart Defects Congenital heart defects (CHD) occur in one in four live births and are among the most common
      congenital defects. Red blood denotes oxygenated blood, while blue blood shows venous return blood that has become deoxygenated.
      Purple blood shows mixing of both red and blue blood or mixing from the right and left sides of the heart. (attribution: Copyright Rice
      University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

      Risk Factors
      Risk factors for CHD can be broken down into six categories. Prematurity increases the incidence to 2 to 3 times that
      of a term newborn. Family history of a first-degree relative having a CHD is 3 to 4 times that of the general
      population. Left-sided obstructive lesions have a much higher recurrence risk in families. Genetic syndromes and

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             25.2 · Congenital, Genetic, and Acquired Complications  1119

other extracardiac congenital defects are commonly found in the CHD population. Chromosomal defects were found
in 7 percent of patients who had CHD. Certain maternal conditions increase the risk of CHD in the fetus: obesity,
type 1 or 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, phenylketonuria (PKU), thyroid disorders (hypothyroidism or
hyperthyroidism), systemic connective tissue disorders (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis or lupus), and epilepsy (due to the
anti-seizure medications used for seizure suppression). Maternal exposure to alcohol, smoking, phenytoin, and
retinoic acid also increases the risk to the fetus. Assisted reproductive technology has also been linked to an
increased risk of CHD, specifically septal defects (Altman, 2022). Congenital infections including maternal influenza
and congenital rubella are also risk factors (Oster et al., 2011).

The most common congenital cardiac defect is the ventricular septal defect (VSD). One out of every four cardiac
defects is a VSD or includes a VSD in its defects. A murmur is the most likely finding at the first pediatrician visit
within the first few weeks of life that leads to a diagnosis of VSD. Not all VSDs require surgical repair, and not all
VSDs present in the same way. Some are multiple holes between the ventricular septal wall, while others are a
single large opening in the ventricular septal wall (Figure 25.8). Note that the murmur (the sound that is heard
where turbulent blood flow occurs through the defect) will be louder, the smaller the opening.

FIGURE 25.8 Ventricular Septal Defects A ventricular septal defect (VSD) is the most common congenital cardiac defect. In this image, it
presents as multiple holes in the ventricular septal wall. (credit: modification of work "Heart right vsd" by Patrick J. Lynch/Wikimedia
Commons, CC BY 2.5)

Pathophysiology
Congenital heart defects (CHD) occur in one in four live births and are among the most common congenital defects
(see Figure 25.7). The structure and function of the heart and blood vessels are affected to varying degrees. Some
conditions require very mild management and treatment. Others are life threatening and require staged palliative
surgeries or a heart transplant (NCBDDD, 2022; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], n.d.).

Diagnostics
Prenatal screening with fetal ultrasound has increased the prenatal diagnosis of CHD to 50 percent to 60 percent.
With the addition of initial screening for CHD done in the newborn nursery with a pulse oximetry test, most infants
with a CHD are diagnosed prior to release from in-hospital care, or discharge. However, some diagnoses, due to their
PDA dependence and timing of screening, are not found prior to discharge (Altman, 2022). Increased pulmonary
blood flow leads to the signs and symptoms of tachypnea, retractions, nasal flaring, and tachycardia, with the
ultimate concerns for respiratory distress or failure.

Nursing Management
The type of defect determines what constitutes appropriate management. Most CHDs require palliative surgery.
Surgical repair does not occur because the heart itself is never repaired but can only be palliated for the best
outcome. For example, the size or placement of a VSD can allow for monitoring to see if the hole closes over time
1120  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      rather than surgically closing the hole during the neonatal period. Some critical congenital heart defects require
      multiple staged surgeries throughout the patient's first years of life. Postoperative care is managed in an intensive
      care unit, either a neonatal intensive care unit or a cardiothoracic intensive care unit.

      Congenital Defects of the Gastrointestinal and Genitourinary Systems
      An esophageal atresia (EA), also called a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), is a fetal development anomaly in
      which the esophagus connects to the trachea (Figure 25.9). It is relatively common, occurring in 1 in 3,000 births.
      EA can be found as a solitary defect or can be associated with other midline defects such as congenital cardiac
      defects. It is also found in syndromes, most notably VACTERL syndrome, each letter of the anachronym standing for
      vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiac defects, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal anomalies. and limb abnormalities
      (Oermann, 2022; Slater & Rothenberg, 2016).

      FIGURE 25.9 Esophageal Fistula in an Infant An esophageal fistula is depicted in the image where the esophagus connects to the trachea
      rather than to the stomach. There are multiple types of esophageal fistula configurations that all ultimately lead to a risk of aspiration from
      the esophagus communicating with the airway. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

      Etiology
      A TEF or an EA is caused by an error in fetal development of the lateral septation in the foregut that becomes the
      esophagus and trachea. The fistula tract that connects the esophagus and the trachea is thought to form a branch of
      the embryonic lung that does not continue to develop because of defective epithelial-mesenchymal interactions
      (Oermann, 2022).

      Pathophysiology
      The connection between the trachea and esophagus can lead to an excessive amount of air in the stomach,
      depending on where the connection arises and where the fistula occurs between the two organs, esophagus and
      trachea. The infant is unable to feed without aspirating oral liquids crossing from the esophagus to the trachea and
      subsequently into the lungs.

      Diagnostics
      The most common signs and symptoms of this disorder are the three C's--coughing, choking, and
      cyanosis--particularly exhibited during feeding. Esophageal atresia, in which the esophagus ends before reaching
      the stomach, can be diagnosed by attempting to pass an oral or nasal catheter into the stomach and not being able
      to reach the gut. With the catheter in, chest and abdominal x-ray images confirm the shortened esophagus. A distal
      TEF is diagnostically confirmed with both an anterior-posterior and lateral chest x-ray showing a fully gas-filled
      stomach and intestines. A proximal TEF can be diagnostically confirmed with a fluoroscopic study using a small
      amount of water-soluble contrast. Barium should not be used because of the risk for aspiration and subsequent
      pneumonitis (Oermann, 2022). For more difficult TEF positioning, diagnosis includes an upper gastrointestinal

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             25.2 · Congenital, Genetic, and Acquired Complications  1121

series with water-soluble contrast. If the diagnosis is still unclear, a CT scan with airway reconstruction can clarify
the anatomy of the airway (Oermann, 2022).

Nursing Management
Surgery to disconnect the trachea and esophagus or to connect the atretic esophagus to the stomach is the
treatment. Preoperatively, the neonate would be NPO with no oral or gastric feeds or medications. Their nutrition
would be provided by intravenous methods with partial or total parenteral nutrition (PPN or TPN). Postoperative
management includes ventilatory weaning and extubation as soon as possible. An esophagram is obtained on
approximately postoperative day 5 to evaluate for a leak. If there is no leak after surgical intervention, feeds can be
started. Antireflux medication is usually recommended postoperatively (Slater & Rothenberg, 2016).

Gastroschisis and Omphalocele
Gastroschisis and omphalocele are the two most common congenital abdominal wall defects. Both have an
incidence of around 1 in 4,000 live births, though omphalocele is found 1 in 1,100 during second trimester
ultrasound scans. The frequency of fetal demise for omphalocele is almost 3 in 4. The incidence of gastroschisis has
been increasing over the past few decades without any known cause, though socioeconomic status and
environmental factors have been linked to the rise (Bence & Wenger, 2021).

Etiology
One common abdominal wall defect is gastroschisis, which is found to the right side of the umbilicus where the
protective covering over the herniated abdominal contents is missing. The fetal development defect is not fully
understood, but it may be from disruption of movement of the lateral ventral body folds early in embryonal
development (Bence & Wenger, 2021).

The other common abdominal wall defect is omphalocele, which occurs at the abdominal midline and is thought to
be due to a folding defect that happens as the bowel returns to the abdominal cavity during expected development.
The defect involves the umbilical ring and is encased by a three-layer sac--peritoneum, Wharton's jelly, and amnion
(Figure 25.10).

FIGURE 25.10 Gastroschisis and Omphalocele (a) An omphalocele occurs when the abdominal contents are outside the abdomen but
within a peritoneal sac. (b) Gastroschisis occurs when the abdominal contents slip outside the abdomen without a sac. (credit: Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, Public Domain)

Diagnostics
Over 90 percent of fetuses with gastroschisis are diagnosed in utero by ultrasound showing free-floating intestines.
Most are found in the second trimester, as the full rotation and completion of gut development does not occur until
the end of the first trimester (Bence & Wenger, 2021).

Omphalocele defects can range widely in size and severity and are more often found with concurrent congenital
anomalies or comorbidities--chromosomal, cardiac, genitourinary, musculoskeletal, gastrointestinal, and/or
neurologic (Bence & Wenger, 2021). Similarly, omphalocele defects are also found on ultrasound, though diagnosis
occurs at the end of the first trimester, around half the time with the ultrasound finding herniated abdominal
contents midline (Slater & Pimpalwar, 2020).

Nursing Management
Current practice is mixed for gastroschisis, with some providers initiating early delivery (prior to 37 weeks'
1122  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      gestational age) and others waiting until the fetus is full term for delivery. Delivery vaginally or via cesarean section
      has not been found to have a significant effect on the newborn. Practice for omphalocele is less mixed. Because of
      the higher risk for sac rupture during vaginal delivery, term delivery via cesarean section is more common (Bence &
      Wenger, 2021). Preparing the birthing parent for frequent testing, nonstress test (NST), biophysical profile (BPP),
      and sonographic amniotic fluid index weekly to monitor for fetal distress or demise is a part of the nursing role,
      along with preparation for either an induced or a cesarean delivery.

      In the past couple of decades, novel approaches to the treatment of gastroschisis before surgery as a newborn have
      been added to the potential treatment list. One is amnioexchange, where the amniotic fluid is removed and normal
      saline is used to replace it because amniotic fluid is inflammatory to the bowels that are exposed in utero. Another
      potential prenatal treatment could be a fetoscopic intervention, where the intestines are covered in utero or they are
      placed into the abdominal space and the defect is surgically closed (Bence & Wenger, 2021).

      Small omphalocele defects are surgically closed in the newborn with one surgery. Staged surgeries may be required
      if the amount of the bowel content within the sac is large (Bence & Wenger, 2021). MRI while in utero may be helpful
      in determining the size of the defect and what to expect for the newborn surgically after birth.

      The neonate with gastroschisis or omphalocele is cared for in a NICU both before and after surgery. Frequent
      monitoring of intake and output, temperature, and signs and symptoms of infection is required. Educating the family
      about prenatal treatment options and the likely need for surgery to close the defect after birth is the nursing role.

      Clubfoot
      One common congenital limb deformity is congenital talipes equinovarus (CTEV), or clubfoot. It has a range of
      presentations with different degrees of involvement and severity (Canavese & Dimeglio, 2021).

      Etiology
      Approximately 1 to 3 in 1,000 live white infant births are affected with clubfoot. Prevalence is variable between
      ethnic groups, with people of Polynesian ancestry having the highest prevalence at 7 in 1,000 live births. Males are
      affected twice as often as females (Magriples, 2021). A genetic origin has been determined by clinical studies over
      the past century, but the gene responsible has not yet been identified (Ippolito & Gorgolini, 2021).

      Pathophysiology
      Clubfoot is an isolated idiopathic congenital disorder in which 80 percent of cases are not associated with any
      chromosomal or genetic anomalies or underlying disease process. Clubfoot is an intrinsic outcome of some
      neurologic, muscular, skeletal, or connective tissue diseases and is found to be included in over 50 identifiable
      syndromes, spina bifida being the most common (Magriples, 2021). External environmental factors affecting the
      fetus can also cause clubfoot. Instances of growth impedance in multiple gestation, malpresentation, uterine cavity
      abnormalities like fibroids or amniotic bands, breech position, or oligohydramnios can all cause clubfoot (Magriples,
      2021).

      Risk factors for clubfoot include family history of relatives with the congenital defect, extrinsic conditions that
      restrict fetal foot growth and movement, a fetal neuromuscular disorder, maternal or paternal tobacco use, maternal
      obesity, early amniocentesis (done before 15 weeks' gestation), maternal use of selective serotonin reuptake
      inhibitors (SSRIs), and male sex (Chen et al., 2018).

      Nursing Management
      Nursing management for the newborn with clubfoot includes direct assessment of the lower limbs, their range of
      motion, and presentation. The nurse's role is primarily to give information to the birth parent or family of the
      newborn, educating them on the future plan of care and the ultimate goals of mobility, and alleviating any underlying
      concerns or fears they may have about clubfoot.

      The gold standard treatment for clubfoot is the Ponseti method, serial manipulation of the foot and ankle with
      casting and percutaneous Achilles tenotomy followed by long-term use of a foot abduction brace (Figure 25.11)

      Access for free at openstax.org
25.2 · Congenital, Genetic, and Acquired Complications                                                                                            1123

FIGURE 25.11 Treatment of Congenital Talipes Equinovarus in Infants (a) The newborn foot is only 30 percent ossified and has much
more mobility than a child's foot. (b) Serial casting is the gold standard treatment for clubfoot in infants. (credit a: James W. Hanson; credit
b: attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

While the limb or limbs are cast, the nurse assesses for adequate perfusion distal to the cast and identifies any skin
breakdown or area that is at risk for skin breakdown. As casting occurs, the calf muscles may become atrophied, or
smaller than expected, resulting in pain or soreness with activity. Nonpharmacologic interventions such as heat or
cold packs and massage can be provided and encouraged at home.

If treatment for clubfoot is not provided, lifelong disability, deformity, and pain result. Surgical treatment may be
required. There are a variety of surgical procedures (Gelfer et al., 2022; Magriples, 2021).

Infants of Pregnant People with Diabetes
Neonates born to a person with diabetes--gestational, type 1, or type 2--are more likely to have adverse outcomes.
High blood glucose at time of conception can even affect the outcome of the pregnancy, with a greater risk of
stillbirth, preterm birth, and congenital birth defects (CDC, 2018). Congenital anomalies are 3 times more likely in
infants of people with diabetes than in infants who do not experience the uterine environment of diabetes. Central
nervous system defects such as anencephaly and spina bifida occur 16 times more often, and cardiac anomalies
occur in 30 percent of infants born to people with diabetes (Carlo & Ambalavanan, 2016). In addition, newborns
born to pregnant persons with diabetes are at risk for birth injury due to increased neonatal size (CDC, 2018).

Signs and Symptoms
The infant born to a person with diabetes will be at risk for hypoglycemia after birth. Classic presentations of an
infant born to a diabetic birthing person include macrosomia, or a size larger than expected for gestational age in a
neonate, and being heavily coated with vernix. The hypoglycemic infant can be asymptomatic, though tremors or
jitteriness is the most common sign and symptom, if one is seen. The infant can also have a large placenta to go
along with their large size. Infants born to people with advanced diabetes may be the opposite: small for gestational
age or having intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). All infants with a maternal history of DM will have an increased
occurrence of hypocalcemia, hyperbilirubinemia, hypomagnesemia, and respiratory distress syndrome (Shah et al.,
2022) in the neonatal period.

Nursing Management
Managing these infants requires close monitoring of serum glucose levels and frequent assessment to evaluate for
respiratory distress and hypothermia. If the infant is stable, feeding by mouth within the first hour of life is the best
nutritional plan (Shah et al., 2022). The newborn may respond robustly to dextrose-containing fluids because of
their sensitivity to insulin release. Due to the increased size of some of these infants, delivery injuries can be
common. Early identification leads to early treatment and best outcomes.

Drug-Exposed Infant
Infants born to persons who have used drugs during pregnancy will have a variety of symptoms related to the agent
or agents they are withdrawing from. This substance use can result in neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS), which
1124  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      occurs when the newborn has been exposed to drugs, legal or illegal, that are no longer available, resulting in
      withdrawal. These signs can potentially include tremors, irritability, disorganized feeding, and an inability to be
      consoled. Newborns will usually begin exhibiting withdrawal symptoms within 24 to 36 hours after birth, but the
      onset of symptoms may be delayed up to 7 days. Newborns exposed to alcohol while in utero exhibit withdrawal
      symptoms at only 3 to 12 hours after birth (Schaff et al., 2019).

      Signs and Symptoms
      Newborns in withdrawal have been connected to their birthing parent's bloodstream. Whatever substances the
      birthing parent ingests, the fetus is exposed to. When the fetus is delivered, their supply has been abruptly stopped.
      The most common symptoms seen in newborns withdrawing from any kind of addictive substances--opioids,
      narcotics, benzodiazepines, nicotine, or alcohol--are excessive high-pitched crying, hyperactive Moro reflexes, mild
      to moderate tremors in one or both hands or feet, increased muscle tone, myoclonic jerks (twitching/jerking) of their
      limbs or face, hyperthermia, frequent yawning, sneezing, and respiratory distress. Additionally, the nurse will notice
      that the infant has gastrointestinal symptoms. These include disorganized feeding that appears as excessive
      sucking, uncoordinated sucking leading to frustration, projectile vomiting, and loose and watery stool (Chin Foo et
      al., 2021). Table 25.5 lists the neurologic signs of drug withdrawal in the newborn.

      Maternal or Medical              Neurologic Symptoms in Newborn
      Substance

      Nicotine                         Increased Moro reflex, excessive high-pitched cry, tremors, sleep problems,
                                       hypertonia, seizures, fever, inconsolability

      Alcohol                          High-pitched cry, sleep problems, decreased suck reflex, poor coordination with
                                       feeding, hyperreflexia, inconsolability

      Marijuana                        Jitteriness and irritability (Hale & Phillips, 2022)

      Opioids (maternal                Tremors, hyperreflexia, hypertonia, inconsolability, high-pitched cry, poor coordination
      exposure or medical              with feeds, respiratory distress, sleep problems, diarrhea, sneezing, jaundice, seizures,
      treatment)                       death

      Cocaine                          Tremors, hyperreflexia, hypertonia, inconsolability, high-pitched cry, poor coordination
                                       with feeds, respiratory distress, sleep problems, diarrhea, sneezing, jaundice, seizures,
                                       death

      Benzodiazepines                  Tremors, hyperreflexia, hypertonia, inconsolability, high-pitched cry, poor coordination
                                       with feeds, respiratory distress, sleep problems, diarrhea, sneezing, jaundice, seizures,
                                       death

      TABLE 25.5 Neurologic Signs Seen in Drug-Positive Newborns

      Diagnostics
      If the newborn is exhibiting any withdrawal symptoms, the nurse can use the Finnegan Neonatal Abstinence Scoring
      Tool (FNAST) (Bagley et al., 2014) to determine how to manage care. Serial scores are used to measure the infant's
      progress.

              LINK TO LEARNING

      The Finnegan Neonatal Abstinence Scoring Tool (FNAST) (https://openstax.org/r/77finneganTool) is one way to
      evaluate and monitor neonates who are experiencing substance withdrawal.

      Management
      Different facilities will have slightly different protocols for managing infants with NAS. The Finnegan Management

      Access for free at openstax.org
25.3 · Newborn Resuscitation                                                                                             1125

Algorithm is one example. The use of FNAST scoring helps the nurse monitor the newborn's need for more intense
intervention, such as being transferred to the NICU. Specialists in the NICU can then manage the newborn's
medication to help with withdrawal symptoms and prevent the newborn from becoming overwhelmed. The
treatment can include benzodiazepines, alpha adrenergics, or weaning off the opioid over time. Newborns who
experience withdrawal symptoms are at risk for seizures, respiratory failure, and failure to thrive.

        LINK TO LEARNING

This site shows one example of a protocol for managing infants with NAS (https://openstax.org/r/77infantsNAS)
using the Finnegan Management Algorithm.

25.3 Newborn Resuscitation

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Discuss the indications for oxygen and assisted ventilation in a newborn
    · Identify the importance of temperature monitoring and maintenance
    · Describe how to safely administer surfactant to a newborn

The goal of neonatal care at birth is to support the transition from the womb to extrauterine life. "The most
important priority for newborn survival is the establishment of adequate lung inflation and ventilation after birth"
(American Heart Association [AHA], 2020). Newborns who cannot breathe on their own need timely interventions
from the administration of oxygen to full resuscitation.

Temperature

A newborn's temperature is monitored frequently after birth to maintain a temperature between 36.5° C and 37.5°
C (97.7° F and 99.5° F) through admission and stabilization (Department of Reproductive Health and Research
[RHR], World Health Organization [WHO], 1997). A measured axillary temperature below 36.5° C is considered
hypothermia and is associated with increased neonatal mortality and morbidity (AHA, 2020; Laptook et al., 2018)
and can easily be prevented with the use of warmers, drying the newborn, swaddling, or skin-to-skin contact if
further resuscitation is not needed. A hypothermic newborn is at risk of hypoglycemia, respiratory distress,
metabolic acidosis, and jaundice (Weiner, 2021).

Oxygen and Ventilation Therapy

Most newborns will spontaneously breathe within 30 to 60 seconds after birth. Simple drying and tactile stimulation
may encourage ventilation, or effective breaths that result in chest rise with air entry to the lungs (AHA, 2020) (see
Figure 22.4). If the newborn does not start breathing within that first minute, bradycardia, a heart rate under 100
beats per minute in a neonate, will be ongoing. The nurse should clear the airway, mouth, and nose, if needed.
Providing positive pressure ventilation (PPV), with breaths at a rate of 40 to 60 per minute, is the treatment to
both improve heart rate and facilitate ventilation for the newborn. As appropriate ventilation occurs, the heart rate
will increase. This increasing heart rate is the first reassuring sign during resuscitation measures. A three-lead
cardiac monitor or electrocardiogram is the recommended tool for assessment rather than direct auscultation or
readings from pulse oximetry (AHA, 2020; Balest, 2022). For neonates, respiratory failure occurs first, followed by
cardiac arrest, while in adults this is reversed. This physiologic response of the newborn requires that resuscitation
prioritize PPV (Ersdal et al., 2012; Pallapothu, et al., 2023). "Delays in initiating ventilatory support in newly born
infants increase the risk of death" (AHA, 2020).

Continued increased respiratory effort, tachycardia or bradycardia, and central cyanosis all indicate a need for
supplemental oxygen. An oxygen saturation under 92 percent or an arterial oxygen pressure (PaO2) under 60
substantiates the necessity of oxygen administration (Vento & Saugstad, 2019). Supplemental oxygen is
administered via nasal cannula with humidified and warmed air to prevent drying of the nares and cold stress to the
neonate (Figure 25.12).
1126  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      FIGURE 25.12 Oxygen-Delivering Devices (a) The CPAP and (b) ventilator provide both ventilation and oxygen to the patient. (credit a:
      modification of "Premature in CPAP" by Glow~commonswiki/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain; credit b: modification of "A Respiratory
      Therapist treating a newborn child Pulaski County Technical College Respiratory Therapist Program" by Staff Sgt. Matthew Rosine/
      Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

      Supportive ventilation for the newborn may continue beyond the delivery and move from PPV to noninvasive nasal
      continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). If the newborn is unable to protect or maintain their own airway,
      intubation and a ventilator are required to both ventilate and oxygenate. Ventilation is the physical delivery of breath
      to the lungs, while oxygenation is the exchange of gases at the cellular level. Continuous pulse oximetry and
      frequent monitoring of the patient are required when using respiratory supportive devices. Too much oxygen can be
      dangerous to the neonate. Careful titration of oxygen and monitoring of saturation reduce the risk of complications
      of oxygen therapy such as retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) and bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) (Bancalari &
      Schade, 2022; Sahni & Mowes, 2022).

      Mechanical ventilation, the use of a ventilator, is necessary any time hypoxemia or hypercapnia cannot be corrected
      with other interventions. Mechanical ventilation may be necessary for infants who have apnea with bradycardia,
      ineffective respiratory effort, shock, asphyxia, infection, meconium aspiration syndrome, or respiratory distress
      syndrome (RDS). High-frequency ventilation (HFV) provided with jet ventilators, oscillators, or high-frequency flow
      interrupters, gives very frequent small breaths at low pressures to the neonate compared to traditional mechanical
      ventilators. HFV decreases the risk of barotrauma to the infant lungs and the risk of BPD (Ethawi et al., 2016).

        UNFOLDING CASE STUDY

        Newborn Care: Part 3

        See Newborn Care: Part 2 for a review of the patient data.

      Access for free at openstax.org
                   25.3 · Newborn Resuscitation                                                              1127

Flow Chart         Newborn assessment data at 30 minutes of age
                   Temp: 97.8º F (ax)
                   Heart rate: 160 bpm
                   Respiration rate: 66 breaths/min
                   Pulse oximetry: 92%
                   Color: pink with acrocyanosis
                   Respirations: shallow, irregular
                   Nasal flaring
                   Marcus has not been interested in nursing.
                   Capillary glucose: 42

                   Data obtained after transfer to transitional nursery
                   Temp: 97.4º F (ax)
                   Heart rate: 172 bpm
                   Respiration rate: 72 breaths/min
                   Breath sounds: crackles
                   Color: pink with acrocyanosis
                   Nasal flaring: present
                   Retractions: present

                   Data obtained 60 minutes after nursing actions
                   Temp: 97.6º F (ax)
                   Heart rate: 156 bpm
                   Respiration rate: 60 breaths/min
                   Breath sounds: crackles
                   Color: pink with acrocyanosis
                   Nasal flaring: absent
                   Retractions: absent

Provider's Orders  Transfer to transitional (intermediate care) nursery
                   VS every 30 minutes
                   Observe respiratory status closely
                   Place under radiant warmer
                   Continuous pulse oximetry
                   Continuous oxygen per oxygen hood
                   NPO
                   Monitor intake and output until discharge
                   Chest x-ray

1. Marcus is transferred to the transitional (intermediate care) nursery. Place the nurse's next actions in
    order of priority.

       1. continuous oxygen per oxygen hood
       2. place infant under radiant warmer
       3. NPO
       4. continuous pulse oximetry
       5. respiratory assessment
       6. chest x-ray

       a. 3, 2, 1, 5, 4, 6
       b. 2, 1, 5, 4, 3, 6
       c. 5, 3, 2, 1, 4, 6
1128  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      d. 1, 5, 3, 2, 6, 4

      2. The nurse obtains data on Marcus one hour after implementing the orders for the HCP. Indicate if the data
          demonstrates Marcus has improved, is unchanged, or is worsening when compared to the data obtained
          when Marcus was first transferred to the transitional (intermediate care) nursery.

      Patient     Data Obtained after Transfer  Patient Data 60 Minutes  Improved,
      Data        to Transitional Nursing       after Nursing Actions    Unchanged,
                                                                         Worsening

      Temperature 97.4 (ax)                     97.6 (ax)                a. improved
                                                                         b. unchanged
                                                                         c. worsening

                                                                         a. improved

      Heart rate  172                           156                      b. unchanged

                                                                         c. worsening

      Respiration 72                                                     a. improved
      rate
                                                60                       b. unchanged

                                                                         c. worsening

      Breath      Crackles                      Crackles                 a. improved
      sounds                                                             b. unchanged
                                                                         c. worsening

      Color       Pink with acrocyanosis        Pink with acrocyanosis   a. improved
                                                                         b. unchanged
                                                                         c. worsening

      Nasal flaring Present                     Absent                   a. improved
                                                                         b. unchanged
                                                                         c. worsening

      Retractions Present                       Absent                   a. improved
                                                                         b. unchanged
                                                                         c. worsening

      Escalated Therapies
      Nitric oxide (NO) is a strong direct pulmonary dilator when delivered as a gas via inhalation. It is used to decrease
      pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary vasoconstriction, acidosis, and hypoxemia and also to treat meconium
      aspiration syndrome, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, persistent pulmonary hypertension, and sepsis (Barrington
      et al., 2017; Vento & Saugstad, 2019).

      Another extreme, complex, and expensive life-support method, called extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
      (ECMO), involves a modified form of heart-lung bypass. ECMO allows for treatment of any disease or trauma that
      has resulted in intractable hypoxemia due to severe cardiac and/or respiratory failure (Figure 25.13). ECMO
      essentially provides oxygen to the lungs and body while the lungs are treated for any underlying disease process or
      insult. ECMO does require anticoagulation that can escalate the risk of intraventricular hemorrhage and is
      contraindicated in very small or preterm infants under 34 weeks' gestation (Amodeo et al., 2021).

      Access for free at openstax.org
25.3 · Newborn Resuscitation                                                                                                         1129

FIGURE 25.13 Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation (ECMO) ECMO is a life-support method involving a modified form of heart-lung
bypass. (credit: "ECMO still saving lives of infants, children at San Antonio Military Medical Center 120211-F-UR000-865" by Elaine
Sanchez/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

        LINK TO LEARNING

The Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center provides updates on neonatal resuscitation and describes the
function of ECMO (https://openstax.org/r/77resuscitation) for neonates.

Neonatal Resuscitation

A quick visual assessment allows the nurse to identify newborns who need resuscitation at birth or soon after.
Newborns who are breathing and/or crying are best cared for skin-to-skin with their parent. These infants do not
need routine tactile stimulation or suctioning, even if the amniotic fluid was notable for meconium. Suctioning the
airway should be done only as necessary because doing it routinely can cause bradycardia (Wyckoff et al., 2020).
This is an evidence-based approach. Previously, newborns were intubated and suctioned for meconium. Studies
within the published literature identified that the risks did not outweigh the benefits, and this practice was changed.
Is the newborn breathing and crying? Do they have good muscle tone? If not, the newborn needs assistance. The
nurse clears the airway with suction, keeps the infant warm, dries them, and attempts to reposition the airway so
that the infant can breathe on their own. If breathing is not spontaneous, the next step is to start external
ventilation. If that is unsuccessful, the nurse calls for assistance and begins resuscitation (American Heart
Association [AHA], 2020).

        LINK TO LEARNING

The American Heart Association (AHA) has a "Top 10" list of priorities for health-care professionals during
resuscitation (https://openstax.org/r/77AHATop10) of neonates. Guidelines from the AHA are evidence based and
peer reviewed and are updated regularly to give the most accurate resuscitation information.

Risk factors associated with neonates requiring resuscitation include

    · no, or limited, prenatal care;
    · gestational age < 36 weeks or  41 weeks;
    · multiple gestation;
    · forceps- or vacuum-assisted delivery;
    · emergency cesarean delivery;
1130  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

          · meconium-stained amniotic fluid;
          · shoulder dystocia, breech, or other abnormal presentation;
          · abnormal heart rate in the fetus;
          · infection in the infant or birthing person (Balest, 2022); and
          · maternal drug consumption, chronic or acute use.

      Surfactant Administration

      A surfactant is any agent that decreases surface tension between two surfaces, thereby improving the exchange of
      oxygen and carbon dioxide. Pulmonary surfactant decreases the surface tension between the gaseous-aqueous
      interface in the lungs. Pulmonary surfactant is a surface-active phospholipid secreted by the alveolar epithelium and
      produced by the alveolar type-II (AT-II) cells of the lungs (Moraes et al., 2022).

      Sterile surfactant is collected from animals and administered to newborns at risk of not having, or not having enough
      of, their own surfactant. Sterile surfactant is delivered via an endotracheal tube. Lung-surfactant development starts
      at 24 weeks' gestation, but not until at least 32 weeks does the fetus make adequate amounts of it (Sarfaroj, 2021).

      Surfactant can be used with oxygen and/or ventilation. Several doses are given in series via the endotracheal tube.
      After administration, the infant is monitored for side effects, the most severe being patent ductus arteriosus and
      pulmonary hemorrhage.

              PHARMACOLOGY CONNECTIONS

      Surfactant

      Many clinical trials over the past decades have shown that surfactant replacement therapy is a safe and an effective
      treatment that significantly decreases the occurrence of air leaks and pulmonary interstitial emphysema along with
      ventilatory requirements.

      Generic Name: beractant

      Trade Name: Survanta

      Action: provides exogenous surfactant to promote lung maturity

          · Route/Dosage: airway, 4 mL/kg, variable frequency
                Premature neonates: Endotracheal: 4 mL/kg (100 mg phospholipids/kg) as soon as possible after birth,
                    preferably within 15 minutes; as many as four doses may be administered during the first 48 hours of life,
                    no more frequently than every 6 hours; usually requires no more frequent dosing than every 12 hours
                    unless surfactant is being inactivated by an infectious process (Sanchez Luna, et al., 2022).

          · Administration: through an endotracheal tube using a 5 French end-hole catheter: The infant should be
              stable before proceeding with administration. Insert a 5 French end-hole catheter into the infant's
              endotracheal tube. Administer the dose in four 1 mL/kg aliquots. Each quarter-dose is instilled over 2 to 3
              seconds followed by at least 30 seconds of manual ventilation or until stable; each quarter-dose is
              administered with the infant in a different position; slightly downward inclination with head turned to the right,
              then repeat with head turned to the left; then slightly upward inclination with head turned to the right; then
              repeat with head turned to the left. Following administration of one full dose, withhold suctioning for 1 hour
              unless signs of significant airway obstruction occur.

          · Indications: lung immaturity; reduce the severity of RDS in premature infants
          · Adverse Reactions/Side Effects: oxygen desaturation, transient bradycardia, alterations in blood pressure
          · Nursing Implications: Frequent monitoring of the patient. Diuresis may occur with improvement. Newborn

              may be weaned off ventilation and oxygenation support as oxygenation improves (Vallerand & Sanoski, 2019;
              Vento & Saugstad, 2019).
          · Parent/Family Education: Provide information about the underlying reason for administration. The newborn
              does not have their own supply and are being given an outside source of surfactant.

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     25.4 · Preterm Newborn                             1131

25.4 Preterm Newborn

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Define preterm, extremely preterm, and late preterm, their incidence and the maternal risk factors that
        increase the likelihood of premature delivery

    · Identify common conditions in the preterm infant
    · Identify necessary nursing interventions and apply them to the care of the preterm infant

A newborn born before the start of the 37th week of gestation is preterm and is at risk for significant morbidity. As
medical care has advanced, the survival of preterm infants has increased, and the age at which preterm infants can
survive birth has decreased.

Preterm Birth and Maternal Risk Factors

Not all infants born prematurely face equal risks. The subcategories of prematurity are

    · late preterm, born between 34 and 36 completed weeks of pregnancy;
    · moderately preterm, born between 32 and 34 weeks of pregnancy;
    · very preterm, born at less than 32 weeks of pregnancy; and
    · extremely preterm, born at or before 28 weeks of pregnancy (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and

        Research [MFMER], 2021).

All premature infants (sometimes called preemies) are at risk for respiratory difficulties called respiratory distress
syndrome (RDS) due to immature lungs. In addition, thermoregulation in the newborn relies on brown fat and
glycogen availability in the liver, and these are not fully developed until the end of the third trimester. All major
health problems in the preterm infant relate to immature body systems.

The birthing parent can have risk factors, modifiable and nonmodifiable, that increase the chances of premature
delivery. These factors are summarized in (Table 25.6).

Types of Risk        Risk Factors
Factors

Demographic risk     · Ethnicity, especially non-Hispanic Black infants, Alaskan native and American
factors                 Indian infants

                     · Under 18 or over 35 years of age

Social risk factors  · Late or no prenatal care
                     · Tobacco use
                     · Alcohol use
                     · Illegal drug use
                     · Domestic violence, including physical, sexual, or emotional abuse
                     · Lack of social support
                     · Stress
                     · Long working hours with long periods of standing
                     · Poor nutritional intake
                     · Exposure to pollution in the environment

TABLE 25.6 Maternal Risk Factors for Premature Delivery (CDC, 2018)
1132  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      Types of Risk          Risk Factors
      Factors

      Maternal medical risk             · Being of a lower weight or of a higher weight
      factors                           · Diabetes, type 1, type 2, or gestational
                                        · History of blood clotting problems
                                        · High blood pressure
                                        · Uterine abnormalities, e.g., separate uterus
                                        · Abnormal anatomy of the reproductive organs, e.g., prematurely shortened cervix
                                        · Urinary tract infections
                                        · Sexually transmitted infections, e.g., chlamydia, gonorrhea, syphilis
                                        · Certain vaginal infections, e.g., bacterial vaginosis and trichomoniasis

      Maternal obstetric                · Pregnancy resulting from in vitro fertilization or the use of assisted reproductive
      risk factors                         technology

                                        · Short interval between pregnancies (less than 6 months between a birth and the
                                           beginning of the next pregnancy)

                                        · Pregnant with twins, triplets, or more (multiple gestations)
                                        · Bleeding from the vagina
                                        · Placenta previa
                                        · History of rupture of the uterus, more likely with prior cesarean delivery or

                                           removal of a uterine fibroid

      TABLE 25.6 Maternal Risk Factors for Premature Delivery (CDC, 2018)

      Prematurity and Its Risks to the Infant

      Characteristics of prematurity relate directly to the gestational age of the infant and their health, and nutritional
      status in the womb. Some broadly noted characteristics include

          · large head with a disproportionately small body;
          · less full or rounded face than a full-term newborn's features due to decreased fat stores;
          · lanugo (Figure 25.14);
          · inability to thermoregulate due to decreased fat stores, resulting in a low body temperature especially

              immediately after birth in the delivery room;
          · difficult self-management of respirations, resulting in increased work of breathing or respiratory distress; and
          · absent reflexes for sucking and swallowing, directly affecting feeding (MFMER, 2021).

      FIGURE 25.14 Lanugo on a Preterm Infant Unborn infants develop lanugo between 16- and 20-weeks' gestation. These fine hairs cover
      their entire body except for places without hair follicles. (credit: modification of work "Laguno" by Raumka/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)

      In 2022, 1 in 10 births in the United States were premature (Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for
      Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2023). The cause of preterm labor and birth is unknown, but risk

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         25.4 · Preterm Newborn  1133

factors have been identified that relate to a higher chance of preterm birth. Maternal and pregnancy-related
complications increase the risk of preterm delivery. These risk factors include history of premature delivery,
multiples, tobacco use and substance misuse, and pregnancies that are less than 18 months apart (see Table 25.6).

Apnea of Prematurity
Immature breathing control in premature infants can result in apnea of prematurity (AOP), a condition in which
breathing stops for 15 to 20 seconds or more, shorter if associated with bradycardia or desaturation (Figure 25.15).
Almost all neonates born before 28 weeks' gestation have AOP. In contrast, less than 10 percent of preterm infants
born after 34 weeks experience this condition (Erickson et al., 2021).

FIGURE 25.15 Apnea of Prematurity: Pathophysiology The premature infant's immature neuromuscular, respiratory, and neurologic
systems all affect the action of breathing. The immature control of breathing stems from three areas: neuromuscular, brainstem centers,
and peripheral chemoreceptors. These three areas, when ineffective, can result in apnea and periodic breathing that ultimately leads to
bradycardia, desaturation, and hypoxia. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Respiratory Distress Syndrome
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), once known as hyaline membrane disease, is a common breathing disorder in
preterm infants and newborns. When born before the lungs are fully mature, infants are deficient in pulmonary
surfactant, in both the quantity and the quality of the surfactant that is in the lungs (Martin, 2023). The lower the
gestational age, the higher the incidence of RDS in the neonatal population. White males in the late preterm and
term age groups also are at increased risk for RDS.

Signs and Symptoms
The signs and symptoms of RDS all relate to abnormal pulmonary function and hypoxia. The newborn will have
tachypnea, nasal flaring, expiratory grunting, and multilevel retractions, as the rib cage is primarily cartilaginous at
this age. Cyanosis from right-to-left shunting from both intra- and extrapulmonary shunting may be noted (Martin,
2023).

Diagnostics
A chest x-ray is likely to be ordered for any neonate with symptoms of respiratory distress. The x-ray of RDS shows
low lung volumes and classic diffuse reticulogranular ("ground glass") appearance with air bronchograms (Figure
25.16). The symptoms of RDS and the classic image findings on chest x-ray are diagnostic for the syndrome.
1134  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      FIGURE 25.16 Respiratory Distress Syndrome (RDS) This is a chest x-ray of an infant with classic ground glass or hazy appearance of
      lungs affected by RDS. The lungs should be black rather than light gray. (credit: "X-ray of infant respiratory distress syndrome (IRDS)" by
      Mikael Häggström, M.D./Wikimedia Commons, CC0)

      Nursing Management
      RDS usually worsens over the first 2 to 3 days of life, with increased respiratory distress, and then typically with
      medical intervention gets better as the newborn moves past day 3. The improvement is due to increased production
      of endogenous surfactant, allowing the immature lungs to better exchange gases. Symptoms are usually gone by 1
      week of life. Treatment with antenatal steroids, exogenous surfactant, caffeine, and/or continuous positive airway
      pressure improves lung function and decreases the clinical course for the patient (Martin, 2023).

      The nurse's role is supportive throughout the treatment: administration of medications, frequent laboratory studies
      focused on oxygenation and ventilation, and frequent and ongoing assessment of the respiratory system to know if
      therapies are having the desired effect. Much of the treatment and many of the interventions only shorten the
      course rather than cure any underlying disease process. Educating the parents at the bedside and assisting them in
      finding ways to be a parent in a hospital setting are nursing interventions.

      Meconium Aspiration Syndrome
      Respiratory distress in a newborn delivered with meconium-stained amniotic fluid (MSAF) with no other underlying
      reason for respiratory distress is called meconium aspiration syndrome (MAS). The incidence of MAS in the United
      States is variable, affecting from 0.1 to 0.4 percent of births (Garcia-Prats, 2019).

      Signs and Symptoms
      Meconium-stained amniotic fluid can be visible at delivery or cause staining to the newborn's vernix, umbilical cord,
      and nails. The newborn can present with perinatal asphyxia, in which the infant has neurologic and/or respiratory
      depression at birth. These newborns are frequently both postterm, born after 42 weeks, and small for gestational
      age.

      Respiratory symptoms include respiratory distress with tachypnea and cyanosis. The newborn will have a barrel-
      shaped chest with increased anterior-posterior diameter as the lungs are hyperinflated. In severe cases, this
      condition can lead to pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum, where air moves into the thoracic space or within the
      mediastinum. Ultimately, this can all lead to respiratory failure.

      Diagnostics
      Chest radiography initially shows streaky, linear densities much like those found in transient tachypnea of the
      newborn. Over time, hyperinflation of the lungs with a flattened diaphragm becomes evident. An echocardiogram is
      done to rule out congenital cardiac disease and persistent pulmonary hypertension. To rule out pneumonia, which
      can present much like MAS, blood cultures and sputum or tracheal cultures are collected. Diagnosis of MAS is made
      if a newborn has respiratory distress at birth with no underlying reason other than evidence of meconium-stained
      amniotic fluid or a chest x-ray with all the classic features of MAS (Garcia-Prats, 2019).

      Nursing Management
      Prevention is the best management for this syndrome; but when prevention fails, treatment includes caring for the

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         25.4 · Preterm Newborn  1135

infant with the same algorithm used for any newborn with respiratory distress. Inadequate respiratory effort
resulting in gasping, increased work of breathing, and decreased oxygenation is treated with respiratory support,
which includes tracheal intubation. If obstruction is suspected, tracheal suction may be beneficial. Airway
obstruction is an increased risk for neonates who have been delivered through MSAF (Garcia-Prats, 2023).

Guidelines from the American Heart Association (AHA), the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommend against routine intrapartum
nasopharyngeal suctioning when meconium is suspected (Garcia-Prats, 2023; Vain et al., 2004). Around 30 percent
of newborns with MAS require mechanical ventilation because of respiratory failure (Singh et al., 2009). Surfactant
is not routinely administered to newborns with MAS. However, if the patient is mechanically ventilated and requires
greater than 50 percent concentration of oxygen in the gas mixture, or fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) along with
elevated ventilator settings, surfactant potentially decreases poor oxygen absorption and pulmonary vascular
resistance. Ultimately, that may decrease the need for treatment with inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) or ECMO (El Shahed
et al., 2014).

Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension of the Newborn
If the pulmonary vascular resistance stays high after birth, the newborn is diagnosed with persistent pulmonary
hypertension of the newborn (PPHN). The high right-sided pressures lead to right-to-left shunting of unoxygenated
blood through residual fetal circulatory pathways, such as the patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) or patent foramen
ovale (PFO). This results in low oxygen saturations that do not respond to treatment with oxygen or respiratory
support (Stark & Eichenwald, 2022).

There are a few potential causes of PPHN. The highest mortality risk arises from underdevelopment of the
pulmonary vasculature. This occurs with congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), congenital pulmonary
malformation, renal agenesis, or obstructive uropathy leading to oligohydramnios and fetal growth restriction
(Mandell et al., 2020). Maldevelopment of the pulmonary vasculature is when the anatomy is structurally normal in
the newborn, but the pulmonary vascular bed needs 1 to 2 weeks to allow for remodeling in the extrauterine
environment. After remodeling occurs, the pulmonary vascular resistance drops as expected after birth (Murphy et
al., 1981). The most common findings concurrent with maldevelopment of the pulmonary vasculature are MAS,
meconium staining, and postterm gestational age. Maladaptation of the pulmonary vasculature also has normal
anatomy, but active vasoconstriction starts during the prenatal period, related to perinatal depressions or
pulmonary parenchymal diseases or bacterial infections, particularly group B streptococcus. Vasoconstriction
continues after birth (Murphy et al., 1981). Risk factors for PPHN, both maternal and prenatal, include

    · maternal diabetes, gestational or preexisting;
    · maternal obesity;
    · advanced maternal age;
    · in utero exposure to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs);
    · Black race;
    · meconium-stained amniotic fluid;
    · large or small for gestational age; and
    · prolonged premature rupture of the membranes (Stark & Eichenwald, 2022).

Treating the underlying reason for PPHN is the goal. Immediate resuscitation for respiratory failure, hypoxemia, and
cardiovascular instability is the first step of immediate care, followed by determining the underlying cause.

Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia
One common preterm respiratory disease with significant mortality and morbidity is bronchopulmonary dysplasia
(BPD), also known as neonatal chronic lung disease (CLD) (Eichenwald & Stark, 2023). BPD has a multifactorial
etiology that is caused by underdeveloped lungs and injury from antenatal and/or postnatal events. Maternal
smoking or intrauterine growth restriction affects lung development, as does postnatal mechanical ventilation,
oxygen toxicity, or infection causing lung damage (Jensen & Schmidt, 2014).

Signs and Symptoms
BPD can present with variable signs and symptoms, although most affected infants are tachypneic and have some
degree of pulmonary edema and/or atelectasis resulting in baseline retractions and rales on auscultation. An
expiratory wheeze can be heard due to the classic airway narrowing (Jensen & Schmidt, 2014). On chest x-ray, the
1136  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      lung fields will have diffuse haziness and coarse interstitial patterns. Over time, severe BPD will result in
      hyperinflation of the lungs. BPD ranges in severity: Mild presentations require only oxygen; severe symptoms such
      as hypoxemia and hypercapnia require ventilation. Mobile cartilage in the airways, called bronchomalacia, can
      cause airway collapse during exhalation and is commonly found as a comorbidity with BPD (Jensen & Schmidt,
      2014). Bronchomalacia can significantly worsen the course of the disease and the outcome (Hysinger et al., 2017).

      Diagnostics
      A clinical diagnosis of BPD is made based on the premature infant, at 36 weeks' gestation, requiring oxygen. An
      oxygen reduction test is performed to define the need for oxygen supplementation to confirm the diagnosis. A
      positive test for the diagnosis of BPD is an oxygen saturation below 90 percent within 60 minutes of removing
      oxygen from the neonate (Jensen & Schmidt, 2014).

      Nursing Management
      Management of the neonate with BPD is focused on respiratory support. As the infant grows, their airways become
      less mobile, and collapse is less likely. Most will have gradual improvement over the first 2 to 4 months of life.
      Infants with more severe presentations of BPD may require inhaled corticosteroids and beta agonists through
      infancy. They may also require a prolonged course of mechanical ventilation, which can require a tracheostomy, and
      are at risk of developing pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale (Jensen & Schmidt, 2014).

      Neonatal Sepsis
      Neonatal sepsis results from a bacterial, fungal, or viral infection that affects the whole body rather than one area or
      system. In the neonatal period, sepsis can cause severe morbidity and mortality. The underlying infection can come
      from the intrauterine environment or the NICU environment. Early-onset neonatal sepsis is when the infection
      occurs within 3 to 7 days of birth. Late-onset neonatal sepsis occurs either from day 4 through day 30 of life or after
      the first week of life up to the first month of life. Very late-onset sepsis occurs only in infants who have been in the
      NICU beyond the first month of life.

      Multiple factors of both the newborn and the birthing parent put the newborn at higher risk of neonatal sepsis.
      These factors are summarized in (Table 25.7).

      Category of Risk Risk Factors

      Newborn                           Premature birth
                                        Low birth weight
                                        Fetal distress
                                        Low Apgar score

      Birthing parent                   Chorioamnionitis
                                        Premature rupture of membranes
                                        Intrapartum maternal fever
                                        Positive GBS

      Medical treatment                 Requiring resuscitation
                                        Frequent blood draws in NICU
                                        Requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation
                                        Long-term parenteral nutrition
                                        Surgical interventions

      TABLE 25.7 Risk Factors for Acquiring Neonatal Sepsis

      Signs and Symptoms
      The presentation of the infection can be subclinical without notable symptoms or be severe, affecting either one
      body system or the body as a whole. Signs of infection can present with the respiratory system and include
      increased work of breathing, apnea, cyanosis, and tachypnea. Other symptoms can be cardiovascular with heart
      rate changes, tachycardia or bradycardia, poor peripheral circulation, hypotension, and extended capillary refill.
      Generalized gastrointestinal symptoms may also present, including feeding intolerance, vomiting, diarrhea,

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         25.4 · Preterm Newborn  1137

abdominal distention along with jaundice, petechiae, or purpura. The newborn may also be inactive, irritable, and
have poor thermoregulation (Odabasi & Bulbul, 2020). Neonates are more likely to have hypothermia rather than
fevers, given their lack of ability to shiver.

Diagnosis
A positive culture, whether blood, urine, or cerebrospinal, pleural, peritoneal, or synovial fluid, is the gold standard
for diagnosing neonatal sepsis. The minimum amount of blood that allows a culture to grow is 0.5 to 1 mL of fluid.
For blood cultures to determine sepsis, blood is collected prior to antibiotic administration, and two samples from
two different sites are sent for laboratory evaluation. Cerebrospinal fluid culture is recommended in newborns or
infants under 21 days of age who have had a positive blood culture and are suspected to have meningitis. Urine
culture is not necessary, but neonates who require intubation should have a tracheal aspirate sent to culture. The
complete blood count (CBC) gives measurements for the number of white blood cells (WBC), red blood cells (RBC)
to hematocrit (HCT) ratio, and the number of platelets (Plt). This information, with a peripheral smear, which results
in the number of neutrophils or immature WBCs, can give some indication of the newborn's infectious status. CBCs
collected within 72 hours of birth reflect more of the birthing parent's system rather than serving as a biomarker in
neonatal sepsis (Odabasi & Bulbul, 2020).

Nursing Management
Antibiotics are started as soon as sepsis is suspected in an infant. These drugs are a high priority and are ordered
stat with an expectation of having them given as soon as possible, administered intravenously. Ampicillin and an
aminoglycoside are typically given to cover the most common causative bacteria in newborns, Group B
streptococcus, Escherichia coli (E. coli), and Listeria monocytogenes (L. monocytogenes) (Polin, 2012; Singh et al.,
2022). If the neonate is at risk of having acquired a nosocomial infection, they are treated with vancomycin and an
aminoglycoside. Aminoglycosides have poor central nervous system (CNS) penetration, and a third-generation
cephalosporin would need to be added for CNS treatment if meningitis is suspected or confirmed (Singh et al.,
2022). Listeria monocytogenes, commonly called listeria, is a gram-positive bacterium that can infect newborn
infants from maternal contamination. Penicillin is included in antibiotic treatment specifically for this bacterium,
which, though no longer common, is still deadly.

Nurses are relied on to collect and support collection of culture fluids and to administer the antibiotic regimen while
monitoring vital signs and intravenous access for safe administration and tolerance of treatment. Neonates treated
with antibiotics show improvement within the first day or two and are usually culture negative by day 3. Intravenous
antibiotic therapy correlates to the infectious agent and usually is ongoing for 7 to 10 days. Central nervous system
involvement can add to the length of antibiotic treatment. The more preterm the neonate, the higher the mortality
rate from sepsis (Singh et al., 2022).

Perinatal Hypoxic-Ischemic Brain Injury
Death of tissue due to lack of oxygen over a period of time, called hypoxic ischemia (HI), is a brain injury that
results in varying presentations of brain damage. Immature brain tissue is at higher risk for HI and responds to the
injury with greater sensitivity than mature brain tissue. Hypoxic-ischemic brain damage (HIBD) is a common
nervous system disease in neonates whether they are full-term or premature. HIBD is one of the primary causes of
neonatal death. Infants with HIBD may later have cerebral palsy, intellectual disabilities, developmental delays, and
learning difficulties, along with other life-altering sequelae. When HI occurs in a term infant, the damage occurs in
the brain's gray matter; in a preterm infant, the white matter is affected (Yang et al., 2020).

Signs and Symptoms
Signs of hypoxic-ischemic injury can include decreased activity, but some infants may react more to stimulation
than an infant without hypoxic injury. Newborn reflexes may be absent, with abnormal movements indicating
seizure. The infant may demonstrate abnormal muscle tone (increased or decreased) and respiratory difficulties. In
hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, or HIE--the result of brain tissue not receiving enough oxygenated blood over a
period of time--signs and symptoms may not present immediately after labor and delivery but rather show up later,
in the first days, weeks, or months of life (The General Hospital Corporation, 2022).

Diagnostics
A newborn suspected of having a hypoxic-ischemic injury from birth is assessed using a modified Sarnat
examination. The Sarnat tool has six categories, each scored as mild, moderate, or severe. A newborn is diagnosed
1138  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      with HIBD if three of the six categories are scored as moderate. Seizure in the first few hours after birth is unlikely
      but becomes more common over time. An electroencephalogram (EEG) to monitor for subclinical seizures is
      necessary for a newborn being treated for HI injury.

              LINK TO LEARNING

      The Sarnat tool (https://openstax.org/r/77SarnatTool) is used to assess newborns suspected of hypoxic-ischemic
      injury. It has six categories, each scored as mild, moderate, or severe.

      Nursing Management
      Therapeutic hypothermia (also known as cooling) is the only therapy shown to reduce the risk of death or disability
      in newborns with moderate to severe hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) (Bonifacio & Hutson, 2021).
      Treatment is started within the first 6 hours from birth. Therapeutic hypothermia reduces the risk of death and
      moderate to severe neurologic impairment at 2 years of age and by school age (Bonifacio & Hutson, 2021). Current
      research suggests that alternative or adjunct therapies could improve outcomes for neonates with HIE. These
      potential therapies include stem cell transplantation, erythropoietin administration, and magnesium sulfate
      administration (Yang et al., 2020).

      Intraventricular Hemorrhage
      Bleeding in the spaces (ventricles) and fluid-filled areas of the brain, called intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH), is a
      serious complication of very preterm and extremely preterm infants. Immature brain blood vessels are fragile and
      easily break, bleeding into the cavities nearby (Gilard et al., 2020; The Johns Hopkins University, 2023). Risk factors
      beyond prematurity include multiples, difficult delivery, inflammation, and respiratory or cardiopulmonary instability
      (Gilard et al., 2020).

      Signs and Symptoms
      No signs and symptoms of IVH may be present. Symptoms that may be present are apnea, decreased muscle tone
      and reflexes, excessive sleep, lethargy, and a weak suck.

      Diagnostics
      Head ultrasound (HUS) is recommended for any premature infant born before 30 weeks of gestation. The imaging is
      done once in the first 2 weeks of life and again close to the corrected gestational age of 40 weeks. A HUS is
      diagnostic for IVH. A head CT is the diagnostic imaging recommendation for newborns who are term but have
      symptoms or risk factors that point to IVH having occurred. These factors include a difficult birth followed by low
      blood count or signs and symptoms of increased intracranial pressure (The Johns Hopkins University, 2023).

      Nursing Management
      No treatment exists to stop intraventricular bleeding. The degree of bleeding determines the amount and type of
      support needed for the newborn with IVH. If blood loss results in anemia, a transfusion is given to support the
      neonate. If hydrocephalus, enlargement of the skull as a result of increased intercranial pressure, develops, surgical
      placement of a shunt or drain to relieve pressure in the brain may be needed (The John Hopkins University, 2022).
      The amount of damage and support required determines the ultimate prognosis for the neonate with IVH.

      Intracranial Hemorrhage
      Intracranial hemorrhage is bleeding inside the brain labeled by where it is found. One type is subdural hemorrhage,
      bleeding within the subdural space. Tearing of the blood vessels between the cerebrum and cerebellum is the most
      common cause. This type of hemorrhage has become rare as obstetric medicine has advanced. Bleeding within the
      subarachnoid space, called subarachnoid hemorrhage, occurs in full-term infants as a result of trauma and is the
      most common type of intracranial hemorrhage. Bleeding in the cerebellar region, called intracerebellar
      hemorrhage, is usually diagnosed postmortem in a preterm infant who sustained significant skull compression
      during an abrupt precipitous delivery. It may also be found in full-term infants with a difficult delivery (Tan et al.,
      2018).

      All these hemorrhages are diagnosed with the same imaging tools used for IVH, along with a head MRI. They are all
      treated with the same supportive management. The severity of the bleed determines the infant's prognosis.

      Access for free at openstax.org
25.4 · Preterm Newborn                                                                                                  1139

Neonatal Seizures
Seizures are the most frequent symptoms of an abnormality of central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction in the
neonate. The immature newborn brain is more susceptible to seizures than a brain in any other period of
development (Spoto et al., 2021). The cause for seizures can be connected to an acute event like hypoxic-ischemic
encephalopathy or intracranial hemorrhage, stroke, or infection. Alternatively, seizures may result from an
underlying disease process such as a genetic, metabolic, or structural condition; but many times, direct causation is
difficult to determine.

Signs and Symptoms
Obvious signs of seizure in the neonate include clonic movements, or hypertonia, or fine movements of the tongue
or eyes, but these are not always present. Subtle signs and symptoms would include lip smacking and twitching of
one area such as an eye or a hand. Many seizure events in neonates are clinically silent, without any outward
symptoms. This makes the use of the EEG very important in finding these asymptomatic seizures (Spoto et al.,
2021).

Diagnostics
The gold standard for diagnosing seizures in a neonate is video-electroencephalogram (EEG) recording. Seizures in
the neonatal period have a focal onset, but they can be associated with nonmotor or motor symptoms. Motor
symptoms may look like epileptic spasms or myoclonic movement. Nonmotor symptoms include autonomic or
behavioral responses such as apnea or sleepiness (Spoto et al., 2021).

Nursing Management
Early identification of seizures followed by early treatment offers the best chance of avoiding long-term
consequences like neurodevelopmental delays. Antiepileptic drugs (AED) are the first line of treatment for neonatal
seizures; however, none currently has a perfect response rate, and some drugs have potentially serious side effects.

Levetiracetam (Keppra) has increased in popularity as a first-line choice in treating neonatal seizures. This
antiepileptic drug has been available on the market since 2000. It has few side effects, does not require frequent
lab draws for drug levels, and does not interact unfavorably with many other medications. When a neonate has a
drug-resistant seizure, no AED is effective in stopping the recurrence of seizures. In such cases, corticosteroid
therapy has been used (Spoto et al., 2021).

        CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

Prevention of Nosocomial Infections in the NICU

Nosocomial infections (NI) in infants are associated with long stays in the hospital, resulting in increased incidence
of delayed neurodevelopmental outcome and increased rates of mortality. In the past 10 years, NICUs have
increased prevention strategies, ultimately decreasing NI rates overall (Jansen et al., 2021).

The best outcomes--zero NIs--have been accomplished with the use of quality improvement collaboratives and
benchmarking while relying on prevention rather than treatment (Jansen et al., 2021).

General Prevention Strategies

  1. Hand hygiene. Use the nudge to encourage handwashing. An example of the nudge would be a sign above the
        sink as a reminder to wash your hands.

  2. Human milk feeding. Offer donor milk, and encourage pumping with the use of lactation consultants.
  3. Antibiotic stewardship programs. Include pharmacists on the interdisciplinary team.
  4. Single-room care. Focus on the physical layout and functionality of the patient's environment. Hospital

        designs are shifting away from open-bay models to single-room units.
  5. Probiotics. Administer enteral probiotic supplementation (Jansen et al., 2021).

Necrotizing Enterocolitis
Neonates are at risk for necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), an ischemic necrosis of the intestinal mucosa. It is
associated with inflammation, bacteria that create enteric gas, and dissection of the bowel wall, along with portal
venous system free air. An exact cause is unknown when there are no other underlying comorbidities. Diagnosed
1140  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      early and treated quickly, the condition can have a positive clinical outcome; but overall, it is a high mortality and
      morbidity disease of the neonate (Kim, 2020). NEC occurs in almost 10 percent of premature infants but is rare in
      full-term neonates (Children's Hospital of Los Angeles, 2023).

      Signs and Symptoms
      Most preterm infants who develop NEC have no preceding symptoms and are feeding well and growing. The most
      frequent sign of NEC is an abrupt change in feeding tolerance with abdominal distention, abdominal tenderness,
      vomiting (particularly bilious vomiting, which is dark green), diarrhea, and rectal bleeding. Nonspecific symptoms of
      NEC are apnea, respiratory failure, lethargy, and temperature instability. The most common symptoms of infection in
      infants are apnea, respiratory failure, and temperature instability. The commonality of these symptoms is reflected
      with the 20 percent to 30 percent of infants having bacteremia concurrently with NEC (Kim, 2020).

      Diagnostics
      NEC is clinically diagnosed from the symptoms presented by the infant--abdominal distention, bilious vomiting, and
      rectal bleeding with bloody stool--along with an x-ray of the abdomen showing pneumatosis intestinalis, intramural
      gas in the intestines (Figure 25.17). The only definitive diagnosis is made with a surgical sample or a postmortem
      assessment with tissue that shows histologic findings of intestinal inflammation, infarction, and necrosis.

      FIGURE 25.17 x-ray of an Infant with NEC This photo shows an abdominal film with pneumatosis intestinalis, a radiologic sign seen in
      patients with necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). The abdominal x-ray shows the intramural air bubbles that occur in the bowel wall from gas
      produced by bacteria in the intestinal wall lining. Note the bubbly lucencies filling the abdominal cavity. (credit: "Pneumoperitoneum and
      Pneumatosis Intestinalis" by Sheng Q, Lv Z, Xu W, Liu J, Wu Y, Shi J, Xi Z. /Wolters Kluwer Health, CC BY 4.0)

      Nursing Management
      When NEC is suspected, immediate supportive care is initiated. The infant is made NPO, and supportive parenteral
      nutrition such as TPN is started. Empiric antibiotic therapy is begun. Frequent serial examinations and serial
      abdominal x-rays are used to monitor the evolution of NEC. The antibiotics are intended to limit the progression of
      the disease, while close monitoring follows the severity of the disease (Kim, 2020). If severe, surgical intervention
      may be required.

              LINK TO LEARNING

      The WHO and the CDC monitor and share updated statistics regarding premature births (https://openstax.org/r/
      77statistics) around the world.

      25.5 Parent-Newborn Bonding and Attachment

      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

          · Identify behaviors that show emotional attachment between the newborn and family
          · Describe nursing interventions that support attachment and bonding
          · Describe sibling adjustment and grandparent adaptation to the newborn

      Assessing attachment behaviors in parents or caregivers and their newborn requires skills beyond those required for
      a physical assessment. Nurses rely on their interviewing skills and keen observation of the interactions between the

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       25.5 · Parent-Newborn Bonding and Attachment       1141

caregivers and their newborn. Bowlby introduced attachment theory in the 1950s and over the following decades
worked with Ainsworth to further flesh out the theory over many different disciplines (Bowlby, 1979). Bowlby wrote,
"The propensity to make strong emotional bonds to particular individuals is a basic component of human nature."

Attachment or the lack of it has serious long-lasting effects on the child's development and relationships throughout
life, particularly with their significant other and with their own children. Having a caregiver who is responsive and
present for the infant gives the infant a foundation to make good relationships in the future, to have confidence to
explore their environment, and to have strong self-esteem (Cornell & Drew, 2022).

A positive, robust primary caregiver and infant relationship is paramount to healthy growth and development. For
example, bonding results from the infant and caregiver having experiences they enjoy together. Also important for
the relationship is attachment, the more integral provision of a secure environment for the infant throughout their
progression and exploration (Winston & Chicot, 2016). A number of factors can affect bonding and attachment
postdelivery. For example, the high-risk infant admitted to an ICU, NICU, PICU, or CICU may have anomalies to the
face or body. The child and caregiver may be unable to bond during direct breast-feeding or direct skin-to-skin
contact because of the infant's acute instability (Kim et al., 2020). Advances in medical technology allow special
needs infants to survive more often than they did in the past. However, impaired attachment in the hospital related
to the alteration of the parental role, posttraumatic shock of families, and potentially neurodevelopmental
disabilities of the infant continue to be an issue in their care (Kim et al., 2020).

Behaviors That Show Attachment

Attachment is assessed by the nurse as they assess the family and the newborn. Confirmation of strong attachment
between the birthing person and infant includes multiple cues:

    · A visually alert infant makes eye contact with their birthing person, tracking and following the parent with their
        eyes.

    · The parent-infant dyad smile at one another.
    · The infant cries only when hungry or wet.
    · The parent anticipates feedings by reading the infant's feeding cues.
    · The infant enjoys being cuddled, clings to the parent, and is easily consolable. (Wittkowski et al., 2020)

Concerning actions or behaviors from the infant include crying for hours, appearing inconsolable or colicky, engaging
in unpredictable feeding or sleeping patterns, showing no preference for parents over others, infrequently smiling or
having a bland facial expression, and resisting being held or cuddled.

Four Stages of Attachment
The four stages of attachment derive from a psychologic study by Schaffer and Emerson in the 1960s. Sixty infant
subjects, all living in Glasgow, Scotland, were visited for developmental assessment at monthly intervals for the first
18 months of life (Schaffer & Emerson, 1964). The study found that the caregiver who had the infant's attachment
was the one who was the most sensitive and responsive to the infant's signals. The development of attachment
begins with the asocial stage. This stage lasts from 0 to 6 weeks, and infants in it display a general lack of
attachment. In the indiscriminate stage, the 6-week-old to 6-month-old infant is interested in others but
consolable by all. Between 6 and 10 months is the specific stage, in which usually only one person is able to
console the infant. The infant older than 10 months has many attachments and people who can console them; they
are in the multiple stage. This mirrors the stages Bowlby found in the late 1950s. Table 25.8 provides more
information about the stages of attachment (Tutor2U, 2021).

Name of Stage         Timeframe Description

Asocial or            0-6 weeks     Similar responses to objects and people
preattachment                       Preference for faces/eyes

Indiscriminate or     6 weeks to 6  Preference for human company
attachment in making  months        Ability to distinguish between people but comforted indiscriminately

TABLE 25.8 Stages of Attachment (Tutor2U, 2021; Cornell & Drew, 2022)
1142  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      Name of Stage          Timeframe Description

      Specific or clear-cut  6-8 months  Infants show a preference for one caregiver, displaying separation and
      attachment             to 18-24    stranger anxiety
                             months      The infant looks to particular people for security, comfort, and
                                         protection

      Multiple or formation  18-24       Attachment behaviors displayed toward several different people, such
      of reciprocal          months +    as siblings, grandparents, or other close family members or caregivers
      relationship

      TABLE 25.8 Stages of Attachment (Tutor2U, 2021; Cornell & Drew, 2022)

      Factors Affecting Attachment
      A parent or a caregiver who is undergoing their own illness related to labor and delivery or who is experiencing
      postpartum depression is unable to move toward attachment until first conquering these health-related issues.
      Unplanned pregnancy, a pregnancy that is a product of sexual assault, or general lack of social support can
      significantly affect bonding. A drug-exposed infant with a birthing parent who has a history of drug use and may be
      under other social and economic stressors may have more difficulty making appropriate attachment.

      Nursing Interventions That Support Attachment and Bonding

      The nurse uses their skills of assessing to determine what attachment behaviors in parents or caregivers and their
      newborn have occurred. This requires skills beyond those needed for a physical assessment. Nurses rely on their
      interviewing skills and keen observation of the interactions between the caregivers and their newborn to determine
      how well attachment and bonding are occurring.

      Unexpected findings at birth, such as a genetic or congenital disorder along with subsequent hospitalization of the
      newborn, can interrupt and hinder attachment between the infant and their caregiver. Nursing interventions to
      support the attachment process are encouraging skin-to-skin contact when able and advocating for the caregiver to
      fulfill their role as much as possible in the inpatient setting. Emphasizing common characteristics or individualizing
      the actions of the newborn helps normalize the child's behavior for the stressed parent of an inpatient infant. The
      nurse arranging or encouraging frequent parental visits to the NICU can significantly improve bonding and
      attachment.

      Attachment and the Rest of the Family

      In addition to parents, a newborn's family may consist of siblings, aunts, uncles, cousins, and grandparents. Some of
      them may welcome their new family member wholeheartedly. Others may be more ambivalent.

      Sibling Adjustment
      A family is an open system where members can leave or be added at any time. The addition of a new sibling makes
      for change within the family and a new order for the siblings. The caregiver bringing home a high-risk infant may be
      caring not only for a fragile newborn but for other children as well. In that case, the caregiver must juggle the many
      needs of the infant with the needs of their siblings (Volling, 2017).

      Temporary separation from the birthing parent or both parents, changes in parental behavior, and the arrival of the
      new sibling all affect the infant's siblings. These responses can be positive or negative. Positive responses are more
      likely when the parents promote sibling acceptance of a new member into the family by including the siblings in
      preparing for the newborn and continuing to include them in care after the infant arrives home. Positive responses
      include interest in and concern for the new family member. Negative responses include regression in toileting and
      sleep. Jealousy of a sibling, sibling rivalry, is common as the new high-risk infant takes up more parental time and
      energy.

      Grandparent Adaptation
      Taking on the role of grandparent or even great-grandparent is often anticipated with excitement and happiness.
      The role of the grandparent is to support their child in becoming a parent. Grandparents can have mixed emotions

      Access for free at openstax.org
25.6 · Discharge Planning                                                                                                  1143

about accepting a high-risk infant into the family. They may not understand the different responsibilities of their
child or healthcare needs of their grandchild. Fear of hurting the infant or uncertainty about the potential outcomes
can be scary for new grandparents of a high-risk infant. Including grandparents to the extent that they want to be
included is the goal. It is important to acknowledge that parenting and caring for a medically fragile infant is
different from the parenting they did in the past.

Increasingly, grandparents are taking on parental roles in providing permanent care for their grandchildren.
Including these grandparents early in the care of the high-risk neonate will improve the process of attachment and
ease when going home.

        LINK TO LEARNING

Verywell Family provides information for families and has a resource to support new grandparents of premature
grandchildren (https://openstax.org/r/77verywellfam) for bonding with the newborn and supporting the baby's
parents.

25.6 Discharge Planning

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Describe the process of discharge preparation for an infant at high risk
    · Discuss education provided to caregivers preparing for discharge with a newborn at high risk
    · Delineate the differences and additional needs of the high-risk infant who is discharged under hospice

        care

All new parents have concerns and anxieties as they prepare to take their newborn home. But these concerns are
multiplied when the newborn is at high risk. All families caring for infants who are born premature or with a
congenital and/or genetic disorder have an increased risk for family dysfunction. These families require education
and training to care for their child at home (Puls et al., 2019). They may also require psychosocial and financial
support to function at their best.

Discharge Planning

A high-risk infant is determined to be ready for discharge on the basis of their medical status. Considerations
include the readiness of the family to take the infant home, what care the infant needs, and what can be logistically
provided at home. In addition, the ongoing cost of the infant's hospital stay must be considered (American Academy
of Pediatrics Committee on Fetus and Newborn, 2008).

Medical readiness for discharge means that the infant is physiologically stable. This consists of the following:

    · The infant demonstrates that they can maintain an axillary temperature between 36.5° C and 37.5° C without
        external warming.

    · The infant maintains a mature respiratory pattern without episodes of apnea or bradycardia.
    · The infant demonstrates mature oral feeding skills, allowing enough caloric intake for appropriate growth,

        with weight gain paralleling a normal growth curve.
    · The infant has the ability to sleep in a flat, supine position.

Multiple routine screenings are completed before discharge. Some, like the newborn screen, are completed for
every newborn within the first couple days of life; others are more specific to the high-risk infant. A hearing screen is
performed using auditory brainstem responses for all discharging newborns. However, a follow-up hearing
evaluation is scheduled between 1 and 3 months of age after discharge for the high-risk infant because of the
increased risk for hearing loss (Smith & Stewart, 2021). A head ultrasound (HUS) or magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) of the head for follow-up from earlier findings may be required. Infants born at less than 30 weeks'
gestational age are at risk for developing retinopathy of prematurity (ROP). They will require routine ophthalmologic
screening serially until their retinal vessels are mature and a pediatric ophthalmologic exam by 1 year of age (Smith
& Stewart, 2021). Vaccinations are given prior to discharge, according to the Centers for Disease Control and
1144  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      Prevention's (CDC) vaccination schedule.

              LINK TO LEARNING

      The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) provides vaccination schedules (https://openstax.org/r/
      77vaccination) for all ages.

      All infants require a car seat for safe travel. For infants at risk for cardiorespiratory compromise, defined as apnea,
      bradycardia, or oxygen desaturation (Smith & Stewart, 2021), the nurse will observe the infant in their car seat prior
      to discharge. The observation lasts for 90 to 120 minutes or the length of their travel time home, whichever is
      longer. A failure of the car seat screening occurs if the infant drops their saturations for more than 10 seconds, has
      apnea greater than 20 seconds, or experiences bradycardia less than or equal to 80 beats per minute (Smith &
      Stewart, 2021).

      Infants with Dependence on Technology
      Some high-risk infants discharged to home will require gavage feedings, supplemental oxygen, mechanical
      ventilation, and continuous or nighttime cardiorespiratory monitoring. In gavage, medications and/or liquids,
      including formula or breast milk, are administered through a small tube placed through the nose or mouth to the
      stomach or small intestine. Parents and other caregivers require education about each piece of equipment, how to
      determine if it is working correctly, and what to do if it is not. It is recommended that two home caregivers receive
      all discharge education so that one person is not tackling this challenge alone. A case manager will connect a
      durable medical equipment (DME) company to the family early on to deliver necessary equipment to their home.
      Further, the home environment must be able to safely house the at-risk infant and should meet the following
      criteria:

          · Working electricity that is compatible with the equipment needed for care
          · Entryways wide enough to allow equipment, including the patient's bed, to be delivered and moved if needed
          · Local EMS informed of patient's requirements and care needs (Smith & Stewart, 2021)

      A high-risk infant who relies on gavage feedings requires a tube. A nasogastric (NG) tube or an orogastric (OG)
      tube is a feeding tube placed in the infant's nostril or mouth down to their stomach. This is not a permanent device.
      When an infant is discharged home with gavage feeding, the NG or OG tube is cared for and replaced by the parent.
      Feeds--breast milk or formula--are then delivered directly to the stomach as bolus gavaged feeds 7 to 8 times a day.
      Even though this tube was placed by the nurse in the hospital, the care provider will be the person to determine if
      the tube is placed correctly, if the infant is receiving their feeds, and if the tube needs to be replaced. A gastric tube
      (G-tube) is a more stable tube for feedings and is placed surgically or via interventional radiology. The G-tube is
      used when the infant is likely to require gavage feeding for a lengthy period of time or the NG or OG tubes are not
      considered safe for home nutritional support (Figure 25.18). Some feeding tubes, such as a J-tube or NJ-tube,
      reach beyond the gastric sphincter to the duodenum or jejunum of the small intestine to provide continuous feeds
      when the infant cannot tolerate gastric feedings. These small-intestinal tubes are threaded through the G-tube and
      if dislodged require replacement in the hospital with imaging to confirm correct placement.

      Access for free at openstax.org
25.6 · Discharge Planning                                                                                                             1145

FIGURE 25.18 Infant with G-tube A surgically placed G-tube allows for gastric gavage feedings when oral feeding is not possible.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

A high-risk infant may be discharged home with a tracheostomy in place and/or a ventilator to support their
oxygenation and ventilation (Figure 25.19). Discharge parameters at each medical facility may differ slightly, but a
minimum oxygen requirement is the goal. Typically, 40 percent FiO2 is the maximum for home-going purposes. The
family will need to have a tracheostomy tube (trach) of the same size the infant has in place and one a size smaller
available at the bedside. This is for replacement if the trach becomes dislodged or clogged.

FIGURE 25.19 Infant with Tracheostomy An infant who has not been successful in stabilizing their own airway may require support of a
tracheostomy. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Respiratory care equipment requires an inspection of the infant's home prior to discharge. A respiratory therapist
will evaluate the electrical outlets in the home, door opening size, and electrical panel location and capacity to
ensure that the home is safe with the addition of oxygen and/or a ventilator (Smith & Stewart, 2021).

Parent Education

Before the high-risk infant can be discharged home, the home caregivers must demonstrate competency in all the
care their newborn requires. Each task the home caregiver must complete before discharge is a point of education
for the nurse. All home-going medications are listed and described, and administration is shown by the nurse prior
to the caregiver completing the medication administration. The home feeding pump is set up by the nurse first, and
then the caregiver does the same preparation under the watchful eyes of the nurse. Placement of the feeding tube, if
1146  25 · Care of the Newborn at Risk

      required for feeding, is first done by the nurse, and then the caregiver is asked to demonstrate their comfort in
      placing the gavage tube, administering the feeding on a pump, and identifying if the tube has been dislodged. The
      care provider must be able to administer and store the infant's medications safely. They must verbalize that they can
      identify signs and symptoms of illness, that they know when to contact the primary care provider, and that they can
      recognize when urgent care is needed. Infant cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) training instruction is provided to
      most caregivers of premature infants prior to discharge. Education surrounding all the infant's care begins early
      during the admission and continues throughout the hospital stay with consistent and realistic, but hopeful,
      information. Tools to prepare the home caregiver may include checklists showing care successfully demonstrated,
      pictographs, visual aids, or recorded information. Inviting the family to participate in rounds, particularly prior to
      discharge, allows them to direct questions to the primary care team.

      Families with limited English proficiency or immigrant families are at increased risk for difficulties in understanding
      discharge and home care instructions. Discharge instructions in their primary language are essential. Appropriately
      trained medical interpreters are utilized throughout the parent education and training process to decrease the risk
      of misunderstanding. Allowing home caregivers to practice care with direct supervision and return demonstration
      decreases chances for error at home (Smith & Stewart, 2021). This practice is particularly well done with rooming-in
      practices where the caregivers stay with the newborn for one or two nights prior to discharge, providing the
      maximum amount of care that they can as a practice run for home. This is not always an option at all facilities,
      depending on space and room availability, but it can be a helpful practice for new parents and an efficient way to
      complete and evaluate discharge teaching.

              CULTURAL CONTEXT

      Immigrant Families of High-Risk Newborns

      Families who are immigrants to the United States, whether proficient in English or not, require culturally competent
      care along with discharge planning specific to their home life. "Cultural values, historical trends, parents' level of
      education, and the process of immigration blend in intricate ways to determine how immigrant parents in the United
      States enact the role of parenting" (Bradley et al., 2014). How the family tackles their child's health-care needs and
      what materials they need to assist their children in growing and developing is different for each family (McGowan et
      al., 2019).

      A psychosocial assessment, an assessment to determine a family's mental health and social well-being, is
      performed by a social worker prior to discharge to identify and support any social or financial needs for the family.
      Families with high-risk infants are at higher risk for child abuse or neglect (Puls et al., 2019). Both preterm birth and
      prolonged hospitalization are known family stressors and risk factors for family dysfunction and child abuse
      (American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Fetus and Newborn, 2008). Family risk factors identified at
      discharge require close follow-up and support. Risk factors for families that lead to closer follow-up are financial
      difficulties, history of or current substance use disorder, inadequate prenatal care, domestic violence, marital
      instability, and parental mental health diagnosis of anxiety or depression.

              LINK TO LEARNING

      The Center for Healthy Families provides support to teen, foster, and adoptive parents (https://openstax.org/r/
      77healthyfamily) through community- and school-based services.

      Discharge to home may not be possible if the infant is medically unready or the home environment is inadequate for
      the needs of the infant. In these instances, transfer to a less acute hospital for care or to a foster care placement
      that can provide adequate care may be an appropriate interim home until is it determined that the family can safely
      care for and house the infant (Smith & Stewart, 2021).

      Access for free at openstax.org
25.6 · Discharge Planning                                                                                                1147

        LINK TO LEARNING

WIC provides financial support for supplemental food and nutritional education for low-income families
(https://openstax.org/r/77WIC) with infants and children.

Infant Hospice Care

When an infant is nearing the end of life, they may need specialized medical care, called hospice care. It includes
multidisciplinary care as a consulted service for high-risk infants who have an incurable terminal disorder. Any infant
who has been found to have a disorder or disease state that has made it so that surgical and medical interventions
will not significantly improve their health or well-being and who will experience a shortened lifespan because of
those diagnosed disorders or diseases qualifies for hospice care. The hospice organization provides medical home
visits, home nursing visits, respite care for the care providers, pain and comfort measures, and bereavement support
for the whole family (Smith & Stewart, 2021). Part of the hospice team's work is to provide a letter stating the
infant's do not resuscitate status and to share that information with local emergency medical services.
1148 25 · Summary

Summary

25.1 Birth-Related Complications

Nurses performing initial and ongoing early assessments on newborns need to be aware of and question signs and
symptoms of birth trauma. Edema, bruising, immobility, or abnormal movement can be related to both common and
life-threatening birth injuries. The neonate can have pain, impaired mobility, or respiratory distress because of these
injuries. The more serious consequences of birth trauma can lead to seizures and coma. Treatment is determined by
the underlying injury. Parents may find these injuries scary and react with concern and anxiety. Nurses can educate
and support the family as they learn to care for their newborn with an injury. Education emphasizes the need to see
the primary care provider at all well-child checkups. Closely monitoring child development is vital, as nerve injuries
will have the greatest impact on gross and fine motor skills.

25.2 Congenital, Genetic, and Acquired Complications

Congenital malformations, deformations, and chromosomal abnormalities are important causes of newborn
mortality in the United States. Congenital anomalies are also the top cause of death during infancy. Early recognition
and treatment can decrease the mortality and morbidity for newborns affected with these disorders. Compassionate
nursing care and education can best support families taking on a lifetime of caring and advocating for a child with a
global disorder affecting multiple body systems, their ultimate development, and their experience of life.

25.3 Newborn Resuscitation

Effective ventilation is the highest priority for the newborn needing resuscitation. Starting PPV when needed without
delay gives the best outcome for the newborn. Monitoring the heart rate and oxygen saturation of the newborn
provides the best indication of improved ventilation and oxygenation. The newborn's inability to maintain and
respond to temperature change makes hypothermia a potential need for resuscitation. Multiple treatment
modalities are available to support the newborn who has difficulties transitioning to extrauterine life. More than 90
percent of newborns need no medical intervention to successfully transition (AHA, 2020).

25.4 Preterm Newborn

Care of the preterm infant is a subspecialty within nursing. Nurses in this subspecialty require both the resolution to
care for these very resilient and high-risk patients as well as the critical judgment to quickly identify deadly disease
conditions specific to this population and those with potentially few signs and symptoms. Over the past century, the
care of high-risk premature infants has improved exponentially, although many continue to have serious health risks
through their progression.

25.5 Parent-Newborn Bonding and Attachment

Attachment is an important developmental process for the infant. It is affected by hospitalization, acute and critical
illness, and the state of the caregiver and their ability to attach with the infant. The family is a changing unit, with
new members joining and changing roles. Being open to that change, promoting acceptance, and acknowledging the
differences and similarities in parenting experiences make the transition easier for everyone.

25.6 Discharge Planning

Transition to home for the high-risk infant is more complicated than a direct discharge of a healthy newborn. It
requires attuned discharge planning and education related to the needs of each individual family and their infant.
Multidisciplinary teams must communicate not only with each other but also with the family and the primary care
pediatrician who will care for the infant outside the hospital setting. Many support services are available for both the
families and the infants to promote functional families and healthy, appropriately developing infants. The family of a
terminally ill infant may benefit from hospice care at home.

Key Terms

acyanotic cardiac defects that result in oxygen saturations of 90 percent or greater, with a left-to-right shunt
apnea of prematurity (AOP) condition in which breathing stops for 15 to 20 seconds or more, shorter if associated

    with bradycardia or desaturation
asocial stage general lack of attachment

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           25 · Key Terms 1149

attachment more integral provision of a secure environment for the infant throughout their progression and
    exploration

birth injury (also, birth trauma) any physical injury to a newborn caused by labor and delivery
birth trauma (also, birth injury) any physical injury to a newborn caused by labor and delivery
bonding infant and caregiver having experiences they enjoy together
brachial plexus injury (BPI) injury resulting in paralysis involving muscles of the upper extremity due to trauma of

    C5 through T1
bronchomalacia mobile cartilage in the airways; can cause airway collapse during exhalation
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) preterm respiratory disease with significant mortality and morbidity
cardiorespiratory compromise apnea, bradycardia, or oxygen desaturation
cleft lip and cleft palate a failure of the tissues to come together at the frontonasal and maxillary processes
congenital disorder any disorder or abnormality present at birth
congenital talipes equinovarus (CTEV) (also, clubfoot) common congenital lower limb deformity
cranial deformities congenital or genetic disorders that affect the development of the cranial anatomy resulting in

    abnormal form or function
cyanotic cardiac defects that result in oxygen saturations less than 90 percent due to a right-to-left cardiac shunt
drug-resistant seizure occurs when no AED is effective in stopping the recurrence of seizures
dystocia slow, greater than 12 to 24 hours, or difficult labor or delivery
Erb-Duchenne paralysis paralysis due to injury of the nerves C5 and C6 from pulling the head away from the

    shoulder during a difficult birth
esophageal atresia (EA) (also, tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)) fetal development anomaly where the

    esophagus connects to the trachea
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) a life-support method involving a modified form of heart-lung

    bypass
extremely preterm born at or before 25 weeks of pregnancy
facial paralysis paralysis of cranial nerve 7, the facial nerve, from birth injury
G-tube invasive tube placed directly into the stomach via interventional radiology or surgery
gastroschisis common congenital abdominal wall defect where the abdominal contents are outside the abdomen
gavage route for administering medications and/or liquids, including formula or breast milk, through a small tube

    placed through the nose or mouth to the stomach or small intestine
genetic disorder any disorder caused by an abnormality in the genetic material, chromosomes, or the genes

    within the chromosomes
hospice care specialized medical care for an infant nearing the end of life
hypothermia measured auxiliary temperature below 36.5° C
hypoxic ischemia (HI) death of tissue due to lack of oxygen to that area over a period of time
indiscriminate stage where the 6-week-old to 6-month-old infant is interested in others but consolable by all
intracerebellar hemorrhage bleeding in the cerebellar region
intraventricular hemorrhage bleeding in the spaces (ventricles) and fluid-filled areas of the brain
J-tube nasally placed tube that reaches beyond the gastric sphincter to the duodenum or jejunum of the small

    intestine to provide continuous feeds
Klumpke palsy paralysis defined by the lower portion of the arm being flaccid with an absent grasp reflex,

    affecting nerves C8 to T1
late preterm born between 34 and 36 completed weeks of pregnancy
macrosomia size larger than expected for gestational age in a neonate
meconium aspiration syndrome (MAS) respiratory distress in a newborn delivered with meconium-stained

    amniotic fluid with no other underlying reason for respiratory distress
microcephaly head circumference at least two standard deviations below the average findings for someone of the

    same age and gender
moderately preterm born between 32 and 34 weeks of pregnancy
multiple stage infant 10 or more months old who has many attachments and persons who can console them
murmur sound that is heard where turbulent blood flow occurs through a heart defect
necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) ischemic necrosis of the intestinal mucosa
neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) occurs when the newborn has been exposed to drugs, legal or illegal, that
1150 25 · Assessments

    are no longer available, resulting in withdrawal
NG tube feeding tube placed in the infant's nostril down to their stomach
OG tube feeding tube placed in the infant's mouth down to their stomach
omphalocele common congenital abdominal wall defect where abdominal contents are held within a sac outside

    the abdomen
persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN) elevated pulmonary pressures beyond that time

    period that the pulmonary vascular resistance is expected to decrease
phrenic nerve paralysis paralysis of the diaphragm
Ponseti method gold standard treatment for clubfoot serial manipulation of the foot and ankle with casting and

    percutaneous Achilles tenotomy followed by long-term use of a foot abduction brace
positive pressure ventilation (PPV) positive pressure breaths given mechanically to improve ventilation
postterm born after 42 weeks of gestation
psychosocial assessment assessment to determine a family's mental health and social well-being; is performed

    by a social worker prior to discharge to identify and support any social or financial needs for the family
respiratory distress a state when the increased efforts of breathing cannot meet ventilation and oxygenation

    demands
respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) once known as hyaline membrane disease, is a common breathing disorder

    in preterm infants and newborns
resuscitation external ventilation along with chest compressions
sibling rivalry jealousy of the sibling
specific stage usually only one person is able to console the infant
subarachnoid hemorrhage bleeding within the subarachnoid space; occurs in full-term infants as a result of

    trauma and is the most common
subdural hemorrhage bleeding within the subdural space
Trisomy 13 three copies of the chromosome 13
Trisomy 18 (also, Edwards syndrome) three copies of the chromosome 18
Trisomy 21 (also, Down syndrome (DS)) primarily caused by trisomy of chromosome 21, which results in multiple

    systemic complications that make up the signs and symptoms of the syndrome
Turner syndrome (TS) monosomy X is a random formation of reproductive cells in the parent giving birth to the

    person with the syndrome
ventilation effective breaths that result in chest rise with air entry to the lungs
very preterm born at less than 32 weeks of pregnancy

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. Edward, a newborn delivered at 41 weeks' gestation, weighs 10 lb 4 oz. Vaginal delivery for this G1P1 mother
        was assisted with forceps. The nurse is completing her assessment and notes a sharply demarcated swelling
        over the parietal bones. The occipital and frontal skull bones are not affected. The neck does not appear
        edematous and is soft to the touch with full mobility. The infant is awake and active and has been breast-
        feeding well. What is the most probable cause of the swelling?
           a. cephalohematoma
           b. subgaleal hemorrhage
           c. caput succedaneum
           d. skull fracture

    2. The nurse is caring for an infant with FAS. What symptoms would the nurse expect to see when assessing the
        infant?
           a. widely spaced nipples and a webbed neck
           b. flattened bridge of the nose, a short neck, small ears, a large tongue that may protrude
           c. small eyes, thin upper lip, and smooth skin between the nose and upper lip
           d. acyanotic with a murmur a few weeks after birth

    3. The nurse has access to the results of a karyotype sent out for their patient via an electronic medical record.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                  25 · Assessments 1151

    The parents have accessed the results on their MyChart phone application and have asked the nurse what the
    results 45, X mean. What is the best response from the nurse?

       a. The results indicate your child may have Turner syndrome.
       b. Your results are 45, X; you will have to wait to talk with the geneticist.
       c. Your results indicate that your daughter has a serious lifelong disease.
       d. I'm not sure; I'll call the provider.

4. The family with a newborn diagnosed with cleft lip and palate is concerned about what will happen in the
    future. The birthing parent asks if they will be able to breast-feed the infant. What is the best response from
    the nurse?
       a. Newborns with cleft lip and palate require a special nipple and setup to receive full nutrition.
       b. Newborns with cleft lip and palate are unable to breast-feed but can have breast milk.
       c. Newborns with a cleft lip and palate may be able to breast-feed because latching may fill the gap.
       d. Newborns with cleft lip and palate are able to breast-feed only after surgical repair of their cleft.

5. A premature infant with respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) receives artificial surfactant. How does the
    nurse explain surfactant therapy to the parents?
       a. "The drug keeps your infant from requiring too much sedation."
       b. "Surfactant improves the ability of your infant's lungs to exchange oxygen and carbon dioxide."
       c. "Surfactant is used to reduce episodes of periodic tachycardia."
       d. "Your infant needs this medication to fight a possible respiratory tract infection."

6. A premature newborn requires assistance with ventilation and oxygenation. What method of respiratory
    support is most likely to be utilized if the newborn requires PPV at birth and continues to need assistance?
       a. bag mask positive pressure ventilation (PPV)
       b. extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO)
       c. continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
       d. nasal cannula at 1 L

7. The newborn is having occasional gasping respirations with a heart rate of 90 beats per minute. Skin color is
    cyanotic with poor muscle tone. Interpreting relevant clinical data in this scenario, what problems are
    possible? Select all that apply.

       a. The newborn is hypothermic.
       b. The newborn is full term.
       c. The newborn is experiencing respiratory distress.
       d. The newborn is anemic.
       e. The newborn is sleepy.
        f. The newborn is ready to direct breast-feed.

8. The birthing parent has been watched closely by their health-care team because of their risk factors for
    delivering prematurely. What items in this patient's medical history and current diagnosis increase their risk
    for delivering prematurely? Select all that apply.
       a. hypertension
       b. obesity
       c. 27 years of age
       d. history of premature delivery
       e. history of fibroid removal
        f. history of seizures
       g. current use of tobacco and alcohol

9. A premature infant has been admitted to the NICU for both respiratory and nutritional support. When should
    the nurse begin discharge teaching to the family?
1152 25 · Assessments

           a. after the infant has met goals of a mature breathing pattern and their percentile on the growth chart
           b. as the infant is extubated and transitioned to nasal cannula
           c. when the family shows interest in caring for their neonate independently
           d. as early as possible and throughout the admission

  10. A newborn was prenatally diagnosed with trisomy 13 along with an unrepairable cardiac anomaly. Genetic
        testing and cardiac imaging after birth have confirmed both findings. What discharge planning should be
        included for this infant?
           a. cardiology follow-up
           b. genetic testing for the family
           c. home hospice care
           d. lactation consultant

  11. A 3-month-old has pulled out their NG tube at home, and the mother is now speaking with the on-call nurse.
        What recommendation should the nurse provide her?
           a. drive the infant to the nearest ER
           b. Call 911 and wait for EMS to arrive
           c. attempt to replace the NG tube yourself following discharge training
           d. feed the infant by mouth as there is not an NG tube to use

  12. An infant with a congenital cardiac disorder is receiving postsurgical palliation and nearing time for discharge.
        What findings would be indicators that the infant is ready for discharge?
           a. The infant is medically ready, has had all routine discharge screenings, and is up to date on their
                vaccinations.
           b. The home caregiver has not been able to come to the hospital and has not received either CPR or
                needed NG tube training.
           c. The respiratory therapist has done a home evaluation, which showed the home environment was
                appropriate, but the DME has not shipped the ventilator or oxygen delivery equipment.
           d. The infant is escalating on oxygen requirements and unable to maintain their temperature between
                36.6° C and 38° C.

  13. A family who immigrated to the United States in the past year is preparing to take their infant home with both
        oxygen and G-tube feeds. How does the nurse know discharge education has prepared them for success?
           a. The caregiver has been able to demonstrate a G-tube feed successfully at the correct feeding times
                throughout the day.
           b. The caregiver was unable to safely administer all medications at the prescribed times during the day
                and night.
           c. The family has cultural concerns that have not been addressed at this time regarding home-going care
                for the infant, but a social worker has been consulted.
           d. Oral feeding is important to the caregiver for the infant, and they continue to attempt PO feedings after
                both the nurse and attending physician have explained the infant's need for G-tube feedings.

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. What maternal factors increase a newborn's risk of injury during labor and delivery?

    2. Describe the most common birth-related fractures and nerve injuries in the newborn.

    3. Different forms of palsy or paralysis can occur from birth injury. Which paralysis can result in respiratory
        distress and why?

    4. A couple has their newborn infant in their arms. They were not alerted to any abnormalities during prenatal
        care, and at birth the neonate has significant congenital anomalies. What is the nurse's priority?

    5. A mother is concerned about her risk of having a second child with trisomy 21. What would the nurse tell her
        regarding the genetics behind this syndrome?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       25 · Assessments 1153

    6. Turner syndrome affects only phenotypically female individuals. Why? What is notable about this
        chromosomal disorder that makes it one of the only syndromes with this kind of karyotype?

    7. Attachment between the newborn and their caregiver can be affected by many factors. What common factors
        affecting the high-risk newborn hinder attachment?

    8. What can the nurse do to encourage and support attachment and bonding?

    9. What can the parent do to decrease negative sibling responses to a newborn?

  10. What common indicators, when noted, allow a high-risk infant to be discharged home?

  11. When preparing an infant to be discharged home under hospice care, what additional factors (beyond those
        of any other high-risk infant) should be considered?

  12. Parental education prior to discharge is a large part of the nursing role. What education do parents of high-risk
        infants require? Who should receive this education?

Reflection Questions

    1. What signs and symptoms would alert the nurse to an infant potentially presenting with NEC?

    2. Premature infants in the NICU are at risk for multiple comorbidities. What are some of them?

    3. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia is a common respiratory problem for preterm infants who are in the NICU. How
        does the nurse know an infant has BPD, and what types of support would the nurse anticipate providing for
        the disorder?

Critical-Thinking Questions about Case Studies

    1. Refer to Newborn Care: Part 3.
        When assessing Marcus, a heart rate of 145 is noted on auscultation. What is the priority action by the nurse?
           a. Chart the heart rate as a part of their assessment.
           b. Call and inform the provider.
           c. Assess the heart rate a second time by listening for a full minute with the stethoscope.
           d. Provide stimulation to the newborn and reassess in 3 to 5 minutes.

    2. Refer to Newborn Care: Part 3.
        When describing Marcus's breathing pattern, what would be the most accurate description?
           a. A newborn requires oxygen after birth until they are at least 24 hours old.
           b. A newborn has periods of true apnea, greater than 20 seconds, until they are a month old.
           c. A newborn uses accessory muscles regularly during breathing, with retractions at the subcostal and
                supracostal areas.
           d. A newborn has periodic breathing with short pauses and periods in which they breathe faster.

    3. Refer to Newborn Care: Part 3.
        When assessing Marcus, what is the nurse's priority?
           a. Complete the most invasive items first.
           b. Complete the least invasive items first.
           c. Complete a head-to-toe exam in the order of top to bottom.
           d. Complete the assessment of the newborn's skin followed by the reflexes.

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. You are a nurse attending to a delivery, and the newborn is not responding well, requiring resuscitation.
        Identify the critical signs that indicate neonatal resuscitation is required and discuss the immediate steps you
        would take.

    2. As a clinical nurse, you encounter a newborn who exhibits signs of nerve injury. Discuss the unique clinical
        features of brachial plexus injury, Erb-Duchenne paralysis, facial paralysis, and phrenic nerve paralysis. How
1154 25 · References

        might these injuries impact the newborn's functional abilities?

    3. A newborn is diagnosed with respiratory distress syndrome, and surfactant administration is indicated.
        Describe the safe and effective administration of surfactant to a newborn

    4. A pregnant woman is diagnosed with gestational diabetes. Explain the relationship between gestational
        diabetes and preterm birth.

    5. During a prenatal education session, a pregnant woman asks about the maternal risk factors associated with
        preterm birth. Provide examples of maternal risk factors discussed during prenatal education and explain
        how addressing these factors can contribute to a reduction in preterm birth rates. How might early
        identification and intervention impact both maternal and neonatal outcomes?

References

Alexander, M., Petri, H., Ding, Y., Wondel, C., Kwaja, O., & Foskett, N. (2015, August 18). Morbidity and medication in
   a large population of individuals with Down syndrome compared to the general population. Developmental
   Medicine and Child Neurology, 58(3), 246-254.

Altman, C. (2022, August 1). Identifying newborns with critical congenital heart disease. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/identifying-newborns-with-critical-congenital-heart-disease

American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Fetus and Newborn. (2008, November). Hospital discharge of the
   high-risk neonate. Pediatrics, 122(5), 1119-1126.

American Academy of Pediatrics. (2018). Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders program.
    https://www.healthychildren.org/English/health-issues/conditions/chronic/Pages/Fetal-Alcohol-Spectrum-
    Disorders.aspx

American Heart Association (AHA). (2020). Part 5: Neonatal resuscitation. American Heart Association CPR & First
    Aid. https://cpr.heart.org/en/resuscitation-science/cpr-and-ecc-guidelines/neonatal-resuscitation

Amodeo, I., Nardo, M., Raffaeli, M., Raffaeli, G., Kamel, S., Macchini, F., Amodeo, A., Mosca, F., & Cavallaro, G.
   (2021). Neonatal respiratory and cardiac ECMO in Europe. European Journal of Pediatrics, 180(6), 1675-1692.

Antonarakis, S. E., Skotko, B. G., & Rafii, B. G. (2020, February 6). Down syndrome. Nature Reviews Disease Primers,
   6(9). https://www.nature.com/articles/s41572-019-0143-7#citeas

Bagley, S. M., Wachman, E. M., Holland, E., & Brogley, S. B. (2014). Review of the assessment and management of
   neonatal abstinence syndrome. Addiction Science & Clinical Practice, 9(19).

Balest, A. L. (2022, October). Neonatal resuscitation: Pediatrics. Merck Manuals. https://www.merckmanuals.com/
    professional/pediatrics/perinatal-problems/neonatal-resuscitation#v13953890

Bancalari, A., & Schade, R. (2022). Update in the treatment of retinopathy of prematurity. American Journal of
   Perinatology, 39(1), 22-30.

Barrington, K. J., Finer, N., Pennaforte, T., & Altit, G. (2017). Nitric oxide for respiratory failure in infants born at or
   near term. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 1(1).

Bence, C. M., & Wenger, A. J. (2021). Abdominal wall defects. Translational Pediatrics, 10(5).
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8193006/pdf/tp-10-05-1461.pdf

Bonifacio, S. L., & Hutson, S. (2021). The term newborn: Evaluation for hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. Clinics in
   Perinatology, 48(3), 681-695.

Bowlby, J. (1979). The Bowlby-Ainsworth attachment theory. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 2(4), 637-638.

Bradley, R. H., Pennar, A., & Glick, J. (2014). Home environments of infants from immigrant families in the United
   States: Findings from the new immigrant survey. Infant Mental Health Journal, 35(6), 565-579. https://doi.org/
    10.1002/imhj.21477

Bull, M. J., Trotter, T., Santoro, S. L., Christensen, C., & Grout, R. W. (2022, April 18). Health supervision for children

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          25 · References 1155

   and adolescents with Down syndrome. Pediatrics, 149(5). https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/149/5/
    e2022057010/186778/Health-Supervision-for-Children-and-Adolescents

Canavese, F., & Dimeglio, A. (2021, July 13). Clinical examination and classification systems of congenital clubfoot:
   A narrative review. Annals of Translational Medicine, 9(13), 1-8.

Carey, J. C. (2021). Management of children with the trisomy 18 and trisomy 13 syndromes: Is there a shift in the
   paradigm of care? American Journal of Perinatology, 38(11), 1122-1125.

Carey, J. C., Cassidy, S. B., Viskochil, D., & Battaglia, A. (Eds.). (2021). Cassidy and Allanson's management of
   genetic syndromes (4th ed.). Wiley.

Carlo, W. A., & Ambalavanan, N. (2016). Nelson textbook of pediatrics (20th ed.). Elsevier.

Cavazos-Rehg, P. A., Krauss, M. J., Spitznagel, E. L., Bommarito, K., Madden, T., Olsen, M. A., Subramaniam, H.,
   Peipert, J. F., & Bierut, L. J. (2015). Maternal age and risk of labor and delivery complications. Maternal and Child
   Health Journal, 19(6), 1202-1211. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10995-014-1624-7

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018). Births: Final data for 2016. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/
    nvsr/nvsr67/nvsr67_01.pdf

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (n.d.). Facts about microcephaly. https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/
    birthdefects/microcephaly.html

Chen, C., Kaushal, N., Scher, D. M., Doyle, S. M., Blanco, J. S., & Dodwell, E. R. (2018). Clubfoot etiology: A meta-
   analysis and systematic review of observational and randomized trials. Journal of Pediatric Orthopedics, 38(8),
    e462-e469. https://doi.org/10.1097/BPO.0000000000001191

Chin Foo, C. A., Danseareau, L. M., Hawes, K., Oliveira, E. L., & Lester, B. M. (2021, August 9). Improving the
   assessment of neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS). Children, 8(685).

Chung, D., Haynes, K., & Haynes, R. (2016, December 25). Surviving with trisomy 13: Provider and parent
   perspectives and the role of the pediatric palliative care program. American Journal of Medical Genetics, Part
   A(173A). https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ajmg.a.37984

Collins, K. A., & Popek, E. (2018). Birth injury: Birth asphyxia and birth trauma. Academic Forensic Pathology, 8(4),
    788-864. https://doi.org/10.1177/1925362118821468

Cornell, D., & Drew, C. (2023, August 30). 4 Stages of Attachment, Explained! (Bowlby's Theory). Helpful Professor.
    https://helpfulprofessor.com/stages-of-attachment/

Cromeens, B. P., Abubakar, A. M., & Kenney, B. D. (2020). Birth injuries. In E. A. Ameh, S. W. Bickler, K. Lakhoo, B. C.
   Nwomeh, & D. Poenaru (Eds.), Pediatric surgery. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    978-3-030-41724-6_35

Decraene, L., Boudewyns, A., Venstermans, C., & Ceulemans, B. (2020). Developmental unilateral facial palsy in a
   newborn: Six cases and literature review. European Journal of Pediatrics, 179(3), 367-375. https://doi.org/
    10.1007/s00431-019-03484-8

Desai, K. D., Yuan, I., Padiyath, A., Goldsmith, M. P., Tsui, F., Pratap, J. N., Nelson, O., & Simpao, A. F. (2023). A
    narrative review of multiinstitutional data registries of pediatric congenital heart disease in pediatric cardiac
   anesthesia and critical care medicine. Journal of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia, 37(3), 461-470.
    https://doi.org/10.1053/j.jvca.2022.11.034

Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2023,
   October 24). Preterm birth. CDC. https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/
    pretermbirth.htm

Down, J. L. (1887). Lettsomian lectures--On some of the mental affections of childhood and youth. Paper presented
    at the Medical Society of London, London, England, January 1887. Accessed from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
    pmc/articles/PMC2534114/
1156 25 · References

Edwards, J. U., Harnden, D. G., Cameron, A. H., Crosse, V. M., & Wolff, O. H. (1960). A new trisomic syndrome.
   Lancet, 1(7128), 787-789.

Eichenwald, E. C., & Stark, A. R. (2023, September 30). Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD): Clinical features and
   diagnosis. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/bronchopulmonary-dysplasia-bpd-clinical-features-
    and-diagnosis

El Shahed, A. I., Dargaville, P. A., Ohlsson, A., & Soll, R. (2014). Surfactant for meconium aspiration syndrome in
   term and late preterm infants. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. https://doi.org/10.1002/
    14651858.CD002054.pub3

Erickson, G., Dobson, N. R., & Hunt, C. E. (2021). Immature control of breathing and apnea of prematurity: The
   known and unknown. Journal of Perinatology, 41, 2111-2123. https://www.nature.com/articles/
    s41372-021-01010-z

Ersdal, H. L., Mduma, E., Svensen, E., & Perlman, J. M. (2012). Early initiation of basic resuscitation interventions
    including face mask ventilation may reduce birth asphyxia related mortality in low-income countries: A
   prospective descriptive observational study. Resuscitation, 83, 869-873.

Ethawi, Y. W., Mehrem, A. A., Minski, A., Ruth, C. A., & Davis, P. G. (2016). High frequency jet ventilation versus high
   frequency oscillatory ventilation for pulmonary dysfunction in preterm infants. The Cochrane Database of
   Systematic Reviews, 5. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD010548.pub2

Garcia-Prats, J. A. (2019, September 26). Meconium aspiration syndrome: Pathophysiology, clinical manifestations,
   and diagnosis. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/meconium-aspiration-syndrome-
    pathophysiology-clinical-manifestations-and-diagnosis

Garcia-Prats, J. A. (2023, June 27). Meconium aspiration syndrome: Prevention and management. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/meconium-aspiration-syndrome-management-and-outcome

Gelfer, Y., Leo, D. G., Russell, A., Bridgens, A., Perry, D. C., & Eastwood, D. M. (2022). The outcomes of idiopathic
   congenital talipes equinovarus. Bone Joint Open, 3(1), 98-106.

General Hospital Corporation. (2022, March 1). Hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy: Causes and symptoms.
    Massachusetts General Hospital. https://www.massgeneral.org/children/hypoxic-ischemic-encephalopathy

Gilard, V., Tebani, A., Marret, S., & Bekri, S. (2020, July 31). Intraventricular hemorrhage in very preterm infants: A
   comprehensive review. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 9(8), 2447.

Gravholt, C. H., Anderson, N. H., & Conway, G. S. (2017, September). International Turner Syndrome Consensus
    Group. Clinical practice guidelines for the care of girls and women with Turner syndrome: Proceedings from the
   2016 Cincinnati International Turner Syndrome Meeting. European Journal of Endocrinology, 177(3), G1-G70.
    https://eje.bioscientifica.com/view/journals/eje/177/3/EJE-17-0430.xml

Gravholt, C. H., Viuff, M., Just, J., Sandahl, K., Brun, S., Van der Velden, J., Anderson, N. H., and Skakkebaek, A.
   (2022, June 13). The changing face of Turner syndrome. Endocrine Reviews, 44(1), 33-69. https://doi.org/
    10.1210/endrev/bnac016

Gupta, R., & Cabacungan, E. T. (2021). Neonatal birth trauma: Analysis of yearly trends, risk factors, and outcomes.
   The Journal of Pediatrics, 238, 174-180.e3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2021.06.080

Hale, D., and Phillips, W. (2022). Cannabis withdrawal in two newborns. Journal of Hospital Medicine. SHM Converge
    2022, Abstract G24. https://shmabstracts.org/abstract/cannabis-withdrawal-in-two-newborns/

Harris, S. R. (2015). Measuring head circumference: Update on infant microcephaly. Canadian Family Physician
   Medecin de Famille Canadien, 61(8), 680-684.

Hashmi, H. M., Shamim, N., Kumar, V., Anjum, N., & Ahmad, K. (2021, September 29). Clavicular fractures in
   newborns: What happens to one of the commonly injured bones at birth? Cureus 13(9): e18372. https://doi.org/
    10.7759/cureus.18372

Hysinger, E. B., Friedman, N. L., Padula, M. A., Shinohara, R. T., Zhang, H., Panitch, H. B., Kawut, S. M., & Children's

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          25 · References 1157

    Hospitals Neonatal Consortium. (2017). Tracheobronchomalacia is associated with increased morbidity in
   bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Annals of the American Thoracic Society, 14(9), 1428-1435. https://doi.org/
    10.1513/AnnalsATS.201702-178OC

Ippolito, E., & Gorgolini, G. (2021). Clubfoot pathology in fetus and pathogenesis: A new pathogenetic theory based
   on pathology, imaging findings and biomechanics: A narrative review. Annals of Translational Medicine, 9(13),
    1095. https://doi.org/10.21037/atm-20-7236

Jansen, S. J., Lopriore, E., van der Beek, M. T., Veldkamp, K. E., Steggerda, S. J., & Bekker, V. (2021). The road to zero
   nosocomial infections in neonates: A narrative review. Acta Paediatrica, 110, 2326-2335. https://doi.org/
    10.1111/apa.15886

Jensen, E. A., & Schmidt, B. (2014, March). Epidemiology of bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Birth Defects Research.
   Part A, Clinical and Molecular Teratology, 100(3), 145-157.

Johns Hopkins University Medical Center. (2023). Fractures. Health. https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/
    conditions-and-diseases/fractures

Jones, T. (2019, March 4). What to do when the heat is on! Tremendous Leadership.
    https://tremendousleadership.com/blogs/tremendous-tracey/what-to-do-when-the-heat-is-on

Kaminen-Ahola, N. (2020). Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders: Genetic and epigenetic mechanisms. Prenatal
   Diagnosis, 40: 1185-1192.

Kikkeri, N. S., & Nagalli, S. (2022). Turner syndrome. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
    NBK554621/

Kim, A. R., Kim, S., & Yun, J. E. (2020). Attachment and relationship-based interventions for families during neonatal
   intensive care hospitalization: A study protocol for a systematic review and meta-analysis. Systematic Review,
   9(61).

Kim, J. (2020, June 18). Neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis: Clinical features and diagnosis. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/neonatal-necrotizing-enterocolitis-clinical-features-and-diagnosis

Laptook, A. R., Bell, E. F., Shankaran, S., Boghossian, N. S., Boghossian, N. S., Wyckoff, M. H., Kandefer, S., Walsh, M.,
    Saha, S., & Higgins, R. (2018). Admission temperature and associated mortality and morbidity among moderately
   and extremely preterm infants. Journal of Pediatrics, 192, 53-59.

LexiComp. (2020). Survanta (beractant) [prescribing information]. North Chicago, IL; AbbVie Inc.

Magriples, U. (2021, September 28). Prenatal diagnosis of talipes equinovarus (clubfoot). UpToDate.
    https://medilib.ir/uptodate/show/6782

Mandell, E., Kinsella, J. P., & Abman, S. H. (2020, September 15). Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the
   newborn. Pediatric Pulmonology, 56(3), 661-669.

Marriage and Family Encyclopedia. (2022). Sibling relationships: Siblings in non-western cultures. Marriage and
    Family Encyclopedia. https://family.jrank.org/pages/1563/Sibling-Relationships-Siblings-in-Non-Western-
    Cultures.html

Martin, R. (2023, January 6). Clinical features and diagnosis of respiratory distress syndrome in the newborn.
    UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/respiratory-distress-syndrome-rds-in-the-newborn-clinical-
    features-and-diagnosis

Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). (2021, April 14). Premature birth: Symptoms and
   causes. Mayo Clinic. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/premature-birth/symptoms-causes/
    syc-20376730

Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. (2018). Fetal alcohol syndrome. https://www.mayoclinic.org/
    diseases-conditions/fetal-alcohol-syndrome/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20352907

McGowan, E. C., Abdulla, L. S., Hawes, K. K., Tucker, R., & Vohr, B. R. (2019). Maternal immigrant status and
1158 25 · References

   readiness to transition to home from the NICU. Pediatrics, 143(5), e20182657. https://doi.org/10.1542/
    peds.2018-2657

Merriam-Webster. (n.d.). Dystocia. Merriam-Webster.com dictionary. https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/
    dystocia

Moraes, L. H., Coelho, R. M., Neves Dos Santos Beozzo, G. P., Yoshida, R. A., de Albuquerque Diniz, E. M., & de
    Carvalho, W. B. (2022). Use of budesonide associated with a pulmonary surfactant to prevent bronchopulmonary
   dysplasia in premature newborns: A systematic review. Jornal de Pediatria, S0021-7557(22), 000124-3.

Murphy, J. D., Rabinovitch, M., Goldstein, J. D., & Reid, L. M. (1981). The structural basis of persistent pulmonary
   hypertension of the newborn infant. Journal of Pediatrics, 98(6), 962.

Murty, V. S., & Ram, D. K. (2012). Phrenic nerve palsy: A rare cause of respiratory distress in newborn. Journal of
   Pediatric Neuroscience, 7(3), 225-227. https://doi.org/10.4103/1817-1745.106487

National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities. (n.d.). Facts about microcephaly.
    https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/microcephaly.html

National Health Service. (2023). Treatment: Cleft lip and palate. https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/cleft-lip-and-
    palate/treatment/

Necrotizing enterocolitis. (n.d.). Children's Hospital of Los Angeles. https://www.chla.org/necrotizing-enterocolitis

North Carolina Pregnancy and Opioid Exposure Project (NCPOEP). (2018). Neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS).
    North Carolina Pregnancy & Opioid Exposure Project. https://ncpoep.org/guidance-document/neonatal-
    abstinence-syndrome-overview/neonatal-abstinence-syndrome-nas/

Odabasi, I. O., & Bulbul, A. (2020). Neonatal sepsis. Sisli Etfal Hastanesi tip bulteni, 54(2), 142-158. https://doi.org/
    10.14744/SEMB.2020.00236

Oermann, C. M. (2022, October 25). Congenital anomalies of the intrathoracic airways and tracheoesophageal
   fistula. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/congenital-anomalies-of-the-intrathoracic-airways-and-
    tracheoesophageal-fistula

Oppenheim, W. L., Davis, A., Growdon, W. A., Dorey, F. J., & Davlin, L. B. (1990). Clavicle fractures in the newborn.
   Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research, Jan;(250), 176-180.

Oster, M. E., Riehle-Colarusso, T., Alverson, C. J., & Correa, A. (2011). Associations between maternal fever and
   influenza and congenital heart defects. The Journal of Pediatrics, 158(6), 990-995.

Pallapothu, B., Priyadarshi, M., Singh, P., Kumar, S., Chaurasia, S., & Basu, S. (2023). T-Piece resuscitator versus
   self-inflating bag for delivery room resuscitation in preterm neonates: A randomized controlled trial. European
   Journal of Pediatrics, 10.1007/s00431-023-05230-7. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s00431-023-05230-7

Patau, K., Wagner, H. P., Inhorn, S. L., Therman, E., & Smith, D. W. (1960). Multiple congenital anomaly caused by an
   extra autosome. Lancet, 1(7128), 790-793.

Polin, R.A. (2012). Committee on fetus and newborn. Management of neonates with suspected or proven early-
   onset bacterial sepsis. Pediatrics,129(5),1006-1015.

Proctor, M. R., & Meara, J. G. (2019, December 1). A review of the management of single-suture craniosynostosis,
   past, present and future. Journal of Neurosurgery, 24(6), 622-631.

Puls, H. T., Anderst, J. D., Bettenhausen, J. L., Hall, M., Markham, L. J., Krager, M., & Clark, N. (2019). Newborn risk
   factors for subsequent physical abuse hospitalizations. Pediatrics, 143(2).

Rehm, A., Promod, P. & Ogilvy-Stuart, A. (2020). Neonatal birth fractures: A retrospective tertiary maternity hospital
   review. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 40(4), 485-490. https://doi.org/10.1080/
    01443615.2019.1631770

Rizeq, Y. K., Many, B. T., Vacek, J. C., Reiter, A. J., Raval, M. V., Abdullah, F., & Goldstein, S. D. (2020). Diaphragmatic

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          25 · References 1159

   paralysis after phrenic nerve injury in newborns. Journal of Pediatric Surgery, 55(2), 240-244. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2019.10.038.

Sadowski, S. L. (2009). Congenital cardiac disease in the newborn infant: Past, present and future. Critical Care
   Nursing, 21, 1-13.

Sahni, M., & Mowes, A. K. (2022). Bronchopulmonary dysplasia. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30969701/

Sanchez Luna, M., Unnebrink, K., Martinez-Tristani, M., & Ramos Navarro, C. (2022). Less invasive surfactant
   administration: A review of current evidence of clinical outcomes with beractant. Cureus, 14(10), e30223.
    https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.30223

Sarfaroj, K. (2021, Oct 5). Lung surfactants: Generic, uses, side effects, drug names. RxList. https://www.rxlist.com/
    how_do_lung_surfactants_work/drug-class.htm

Schaff, E., Moreno, M., Foster, K., Klug, M. G., & Burd, L. (2019). What do we know about prevalence and
   management of intoxicated women during labor and delivery? Global Pediatric Health, 6. https://doi.org/
    10.1177/2333794X19894799

Schaffer, H. R., & Emerson, E. P. (1964). The development of social attachments in infancy. Monographs of the
   Society for Research in Child Development, 29(3), 1-77.

Shah, M. K., Shah, M. A., Shah, S. D., Shah, P. K., Patel, K., & Gupta, M. (2022). Comparison of neonatal and maternal
    outcomes of anti-diabetic drugs in the treatment of gestational diabetes mellitus: Findings from Bayesian
   network meta-analysis. Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care, 11(5), 1610-1618. https://doi.org/
    10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_1319_21

Shankar, S. G. (2011). Textbook of orthodontics. Professional Book House.

Singh, B. S., Clark, R. H., Powers, R. J., & Spitzer, A. R. (2009). Meconium aspiration syndrome remains a significant
    problem in the NICU: Outcomes and treatment patterns in term neonates admitted for intensive care during a
   ten-year period. Journal of Perinatology: Official Journal of the California Perinatal Association, 29(7), 497-503.

Singh, M., Alsaleem, M., & Gray, C. P. (Updated 2022, September 29). Neonatal sepsis. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK531478/

Slater, B. J., & Pimpalwar, A. (2020). Abdominal wall defects. NeoReviews,21(6), e383-e391. https://doi.org/
    10.1542/neo.21-6-e383

Slater, B. J., & Rothenberg, S. S. (2016). Tracheoesophageal fistula. Seminars in Pediatric Surgery, 25(3), 176-178.

Smith, V. C., & Stewart, J. (2021, July 20). Discharge planning for high-risk newborns. UpToDate.
    https://www.uptodate.com/contents/discharge-planning-for-high-risk-newborns

Spoto, G., Saia, M. C., Amore, G., Gitto, E., Loddo, G., Mainieri, G., Nicotera, A. G., & Di Rosa, G. (2021, Sept 29).
   Neonatal seizures: An overview of genetic causes and treatment options. Brain Sciences, 11(1295).
    https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci11101295

Stages of attachment identified by Schaffer. (2021, March 22). Tutor2u. Retrieved September 28, 2023, from
    https://www.tutor2u.net/psychology/reference/stages-of-attachment-identified-by-schaffer

Stanford Medicine Children's Health. (2023). Birth injuries. https://www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/topic/
    default?id=birth-injuries-90-P02687

Stark, A. R., & Eichenwald, E. C. (2022, September 20). Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN):
   Clinical features and diagnosis. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/persistent-pulmonary-
    hypertension-of-the-newborn-pphn-clinical-features-and-diagnosis

Tan, A. P., Svrckova, P., Cowan, F., Chong, W. K., & Mankad, K. (2018). Intracranial hemorrhage in neonates: A review
   of etiologies, patterns and predicted clinical outcomes. European Journal of Paediatric Neurology: EJPN: Official
   Journal of the European Paediatric Neurology Society, 22(4), 690-717. https://doi.org/10.1016/
1160 25 · References

    j.ejpn.2018.04.008
The Johns Hopkins University. (2023). Intraventricular hemorrhage. Johns Hopkins Medicine.

    https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/intraventricular-hemorrhage
Turner, H. H. (1938). A syndrome of infantilism, congenital webbed neck, and cubitus valgus. Endocrinology, 23(5),

    566-574.
Udayangani, S. (2022). What is the difference between genetic and congenital disorders?

    https://www.differencebetween.com/what-is-the-difference-between-genetic-and-congenital-disorders/
Vain, N. E., Szyld, E. G., Prudent, L. M., Wiswell, L. M., Aguilar, T. E., & Vivas, N. I. (2004). Oropharyngeal and

    nasopharyngeal suctioning of meconium-stained neonates before delivery of their shoulders: Multicentre,
   randomised controlled trial. Lancet, 364(9434), 597-602.
Vallerand, A. H., & Sanoski, C. A. (2019). Beractant. Davis's drug guide (16th ed.) (Version 1.31) [Mobile app]. F. A.
    Davis Company.
Vento, M., & Saugstad, O. D. (2019). Targeting oxygen in term and preterm infants starting at birth. Clinics in
   Perinatology, 46(3), 459-473. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clp.2019.05.013
Volling B. L. (2017). XI. General discussion: Children's adjustment and adaptation following the birth of a sibling.
   Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 82(3), 142-158. https://doi.org/10.1111/
    mono.12317
Vyas, T., Gupta, P., Kumar, S., Gupta, R., Gupta, T., & Singh, H. P. (2020, June 30). Cleft of lip and palate: A review.
   Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care, 9, 2621-2625.
Weatherly-White, R., Eiserman, W., Beddoe, M., & Vanderberg, R. (2005, October 1). Perceptions, expectations and
   reactions to cleft lip and palate and palate surgery in native populations: A pilot study in rural India. The Cleft
   Palate Craniofacial Journal, 42, 560-564.
Weiner, G. M. (Ed.). (2021). Textbook of neonatal resuscitation (8th ed.). American Academy of Pediatrics.
Winston, R., & Chicot, R. (2016). The importance of early bonding on the long-term mental health and resilience of
   children. London Journal of Primary Care, 8(1), 12-14. https://doi.org/10.1080/17571472.2015.1133012
Wittkowski, A., Vatter, S., Muhinyi, A., Garrett, C., & Henderson, M. (2020, December), Measuring bonding or
    attachment in the parent-infant-relationship: A systematic review of parent-report assessment measures, their
   psychometric properties and clinical utility. Clinical Psychology Review, 82, 101906. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.cpr.2020.101906
World Health Organization, Division of Reproductive Health and Research. (1997). Thermal protection of the
   newborn: A practical guide. https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/63986/
    WHO_RHT_MSM_97.2.pdf;jsessionid=9CF1FA
Wyckoff, M. H., Wyllie, J., Aziz, K., de Almeida, M. F., Fabres, J., Fawke, J., Guinsburg, R., Shigeharu Hosono, T.,
    Kapadia, V. S., Kim, H., Liley, H. G., McKinlay, C. J. D., Mildenhall, L., Perlman, J. M., Rabi, Y., Roehr, C. C.,
    Schmölzer, G. M., Szyld, E., Trevisanuto, D., Velaphi, S., . . . Weiner, G. M. (2020). Neonatal life support: 2020
    International Consensus on Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care Science with
   Treatment Recommendations. Circulation, 142(suppl 1), S185-S221.
Yang, L., Zhao, H., & Cui, H. (2020). Treatment and new progress of neonatal hypoxic-ischemic brain damage.
   Histology and Histopathology, 35(9). https://www.hh.um.es/pdf/Vol_35/35_9/Yang-35-929-936-2020.pdf

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 26

Perinatal Bereavement

FIGURE 26.1 Perinatal Loss Loss affects parents individually and as a couple. (credit: "Grieving Stillbirth Together" by Heidi/Flickr, CC BY
2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
26.1 Pregnancy Loss
26.2 Intrapartum Fetal Death
26.3 Newborn Loss

INTRODUCTION Planning a pregnancy and growing a family is typically a joyful, exciting time. Unfortunately,
pregnancy can also be a time of sadness, anxiety, and grief. When a loss occurs during the pregnancy, labor, birth, or
newborn period, families often deal with feelings of anger, guilt, distress, and emptiness. Families want answers to
how and why this could happen. Obstetric and newborn nurses can help by providing emotional and physical
support, referrals to counseling and support groups, and assistance with contacting funeral homes. The nurse plays
a vital role in helping families to cope and heal during this time of loss. This chapter will cover perinatal loss and
bereavement.

26.1 Pregnancy Loss

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Define the difference between early and late pregnancy loss
    · Identify ways to help a person, their partner, support persons, and family cope with pregnancy loss
    · Identify the nurse's role when caring for a person experiencing a pregnancy loss
Several terms describe the nature and timing of a loss. A perinatal loss is the involuntary end of a pregnancy after
implantation or death of a newborn within 28 days after birth (Qian et al., 2021). Perinatal loss occurs within the
obstetric period. An early pregnancy loss occurs after implantation and before 20 weeks' gestation and is most
often the result of spontaneous abortion (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists [ACOG], 2018). A
1162  26 · Perinatal Bereavement

      late pregnancy loss occurs after 20 weeks' gestation and is commonly defined as intrauterine fetal demise. A
      neonatal loss is when a newborn dies before 28 days of life.

      The experience of perinatal persons, their partners, support persons, and family members during and after a
      perinatal loss is called perinatal bereavement (Zhuang et al., 2022). It is a devastating event with substantial
      physical, psychologic, emotional, social, and economic consequences. Nurses can refer parents, partners, support
      persons, and family to social services for perinatal bereavement care to help cope and manage the impact of this
      traumatic event (Metz et al., 2020).

      Causes of Pregnancy Loss

      Early pregnancy loss is the most common complication in the first trimester of pregnancy. Approximately 15 percent
      of pregnancies end in spontaneous abortion and 2 percent end in ectopic pregnancy (Galeotti et al., 2023). The risk
      of first trimester spontaneous abortion increases with the age of the pregnant person. Cervical insufficiency is
      another cause of early pregnancy loss and is diagnosed in the second trimester of pregnancy. See Chapter 12
      Pregnancy at Risk for more information on causes and treatment of early pregnancy loss.

      Pregnancy loss after 20 weeks' gestation is commonly called an intrauterine fetal demise (IUFD) and is also known
      as a stillbirth. In the United States, late pregnancy loss occurs in 1 out of 160 pregnancies (McLaren et al., 2022).
      The most common risk factors are non-Hispanic Black race, advanced maternal age, and pregnancy resulting from
      assisted reproductive technology. The most common modifiable risk factors include obesity, chronic hypertension,
      diabetes, and alcohol and tobacco use (McLaren et al., 2022). Women of non-Hispanic Black race experience a rate
      of late pregnancy loss twice that of other groups. Pregnancies with more than one fetus are also at a higher risk.
      Refer to Chapter 12 Pregnancy at Risk for more information on causes and treatment of late pregnancy loss.

              CULTURAL CONTEXT

      Pregnancy Loss and Cultural Experiences

      Different cultures and religions deal with pregnancy loss in different ways. A study of ultraorthodox Jewish people in
      Israel discovered that the loss of a pregnancy offered a way for parents and families to experience their belief in God
      and to experience God's love. These people stated their faith provided them with calmness, stronger faith, and
      confidence in their God. The study hypothesized that, by attaching meaning to their loss, parents were able to
      process their grief and move on.

      (Hamama-Raz et al., 2014)

      Termination of pregnancy is also considered a perinatal loss, especially when performed due to fetal anomalies and
      increased risk for the life of the pregnant person. Even though counseling occurs before the decision for termination,
      bereavement is experienced by the pregnant person, their partner, and all support persons after the procedure.
      Nurses can encourage use of support groups and counseling to help with feelings of loss. Please refer to Chapter 12
      Pregnancy at Risk for more information on termination of pregnancy.

      Studies show that health-care workers caring for this population experience demanding working conditions related
      to the lack of access to these services and moral ethical dilemmas surrounding fetal viability (McLean et al., 2023).
      Facilities that do offer such services many times provide support systems and education on self-care.

              CULTURAL CONTEXT

      How Culture Can Affect Data Collection on Stillbirths

      A study performed in Afghanistan found that gathering reliable statistics on stillbirth was problematic in low- and
      middle-income communities. One cause was a difference in terminology and determination of stillbirth among
      communities. Most births occur outside a hospital. Many birth attendants did not allow the parents to see or hold
      their baby, making their recollection of the event difficult. Unintentional misclassification of the birth occurred with
      some birth attendants. The authors noted that birth attendants and families felt social pressure when reporting a

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                26.1 · Pregnancy Loss                        1163

stillbirth.

The study found that data were collected more accurately when families were shown their baby, allowing for better
recollection of life at the time of delivery or stillbirth at delivery. Families who recognized stillbirth and were open to
discussion provided better data and were less likely to underreport stillbirth.

Families were more likely to demand an investigation of the cause of stillbirth when the child was male as opposed
to female. The authors note that at times, female infants were not allowed lifesaving measures. Stillborn infants
with congenital abnormalities were many times left at the hospital when the parents secretly left the hospital due to
shame. These incidents do not allow for the collection of data for these stillbirths.

(Christou et al., 2019)

Bereavement Care

Perinatal bereavement consists of building a relationship with the family and loved ones. The nurse establishes
trust, then encourages the persons to speak honestly and openly about their emotions and feelings. The nurse
expresses understanding, respect, and support. Anticipatory guidance for grief allows the family to understand the
normal grieving process.

Perinatal bereavement care is provided in, but not limited to, antepartum settings, emergency departments,
perioperative areas, high-risk pregnancy units, labor and birth suites, mother-baby units, and neonatal intensive
care units (NICUs). The care can start after the loss has occurred (spontaneous abortion), while the loss is in
progress (intrauterine fetal demise), or when the loss is inevitable (lethal congenital anomaly). In addition to nurses
and other health-care providers, chaplains, grief counselors, funeral directors, social workers, child life specialists,
and support groups are part of bereavement services (Wool & Catlin, 2019).

Bereavement care is provided within a culture of collaboration, support, and respect within the health-care system.
Table 26.1 summarizes the actions nurses and health-care systems can take based on the expectations for
bereavement care.

Expectations Nursing and Institutional Actions

Individualized   Care should recognize personal, cultural, or religious needs.
care

Good             Communication should be clear and honest. The terms fetus, embryo, or spontaneous
communication    abortion should not be used. The nurse can ask the parents how to address the fetus.

Shared decision  Patients should be provided all information to make important decisions and given adequate
making           time to make those decisions.

Recognition of   Recognition of parenthood and memory making is important. Lack of memories of the baby is
parenthood       a reported regret of parents.

Acknowledging    Recognition of the partner and family's grief is important. Families and partners need support
partner's and    and resources.
family's grief

Burials,         Options for the baby should be provided prior to the birth, if possible, to give time for the
cremation, and   family to consider their options.
funerals

TABLE 26.1 Bereavement Care
1164  26 · Perinatal Bereavement

      Expectations Nursing and Institutional Actions

      Testing         Testing should be offered to the person experiencing loss to increase the possibility of
                      diagnosing the cause and preventing future perinatal loss. The most useful tests include
                      genetic testing (when possible), autopsy of the fetus (cost not usually covered by insurance),
                      and pathology of the placenta.

      Health-care     All health-care professionals caring for bereaved patients should have bereavement training.
      providers' and
      nurses'
      bereavement
      training

      Health-care     All staff caring for bereaved patients should have access to information about effective self-
      providers' and  care.
      nurses' access
      to self-care

      TABLE 26.1 Bereavement Care

      Nursing Care after Pregnancy Loss

      Physical recovery after pregnancy loss is similar to postabortion or postpartum recovery. The nurse educates the
      patient that bleeding can last 4 to 6 weeks after the birth and to avoid tampons, douching, or intercourse until
      bleeding has stopped. The nurse also informs the patient that menses can return at approximately 4 to 6 weeks as
      well. Contraception should be discussed and a follow-up appointment with the health-care provider scheduled.

      Patients who have a late pregnancy loss can experience lactation. The nurse educates the patient to wear a
      supportive bra and hand express a small amount of milk to relieve engorgement but not stimulate milk production.
      Patients can use a cold compress or cabbage leaves to relieve pain and decrease milk supply. The nurse can also
      suggest natural remedies to stop milk production, such as sage, peppermint, and parsley. Some patients would like
      to donate breast milk and can be referred to a lactation consultant regarding the donation process. See 26.2
      Intrapartum Fetal Death for more information on breast milk donation.

      Emotional recovery is a long process. Pregnancy loss can cause depression and posttraumatic stress disorder
      (PTSD), leading to feelings of failure, sadness, and despair; however, nurses can help provide a positive birth
      experience (Galeotti et al., 2023). Nurses give emotional and physical support, reminding the patient that this
      outcome is not their fault. Many hospitals provide training for nurses and health-care providers that teaches the
      essentials of bereavement care. This care should be individualized, considering the patient's cultural and religious
      beliefs. Referrals should be provided for counselors and mental health specialists. Nurses can also provide support
      to parents and families experiencing perinatal loss. The following are Internet links to several support groups:

      · Share Pregnancy & Infant Loss Support (https://openstax.org/r/77losssupport)
      · International Stillbirth Alliance (https://openstax.org/r/77stillbirthall)
      · SANDS (https://openstax.org/r/77SANDS)
      · The Compassionate Friends (https://openstax.org/r/77Compassfriend)
      · HAND (https://openstax.org/r/77HAND)

      26.2 Intrapartum Fetal Death

      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

          · Define the causes of intrapartum fetal deaths
          · Identify ways to debrief with fellow coworkers and providers after an intrapartum fetal death
          · Identify the nurse's role in supporting a family with grief after an intrapartum fetal death

      An antepartum fetal death is a death that occurs before the onset of labor. An intrapartum fetal death (IPFD)

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                              26.2 · Intrapartum Fetal Death                                            1165

occurs after 20 weeks of gestation and after the onset of labor but before birth (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention [CDC], 2022; McNamara, Meaney, & O'Donoghue, 2018). Globally, 1.3 million IPFDs occur each year
(McNamara, O'Donoghue, & Green, 2018). When an intrapartum fetal death occurs, all health-care providers,
nurses, and staff are affected. In this section the causes and treatment of IPFD, support of families, and debriefing
for nurses and providers during this stressful life event will be reviewed.

Causes of Intrapartum Fetal Deaths

Risk factors associated with IPFD include prior cesarean birth, multiparity, lack of obstetric ultrasound and prenatal
care, delay in decision making for escalation in care, birth weight of less than 2,500 g, advanced maternal age,
chronic medical diseases (hypertension, diabetes), congenital anomalies, and obstetric complications
(preeclampsia, gestational diabetes) (Komboigo et al., 2023; Shanker et al., 2020). IPFD occurred most often
between 33 and 37 weeks' gestation (Shanker et al., 2020). Causes of IPFD can be congenital malformations, cord
prolapse, diabetes, infections, antepartum hemorrhage, and preeclampsia (Shanker et al., 2020). Table 26.2 shows
a percentage breakdown of different causes. Chapter 12 Pregnancy at Risk and Chapter 19 Complications of Labor
and Birth provide more information on the causes of IPFD.

Causes of IPFD       Percentage of Total (%)

Unknown              53.27

Infection            20.95

Hypertensive disorder 15.77

Placental abruption  10.19

Cord accident        5.56

Fetal growth restriction 5.57

                                           Congenital anomalies 4.04

                                                  TABLE 26.2 Causes of IPFD (Shanker et al., 2020)

Reduction in IPFD can be seen with routine use of nonstress tests, early and timely interventions during the
intrapartum period, and increased antenatal visits (Shanker et al., 2020). Intermittent auscultation (IA) during labor
is appropriate for low-risk pregnant persons; however, continuous electronic fetal monitoring (CEFM) is required for
high-risk pregnant patients and can reduce the incidence of IPFD. Nurses and health-care providers must be
proficient in reading EFM strips, and most hospitals require nurses to become certified in EFM. An article by Chiweza
et al. (2022) noted that approximately 40 percent of IPFD could be prevented by careful, quality antepartum and
intrapartum monitoring with subsequent rapid operative birth.

Obstetric nurses should also be trained in intrauterine resuscitation and emergency protocols for intrapartum
events such as shoulder dystocia and prolapsed cord. All staff should participate in emergency drills to understand
the equipment available to them and be familiar with recognizing and responding to emergencies. (See 25.3
Newborn Resuscitation for more information.)

Debriefing for Nurses and Providers

Emotions felt by health-care providers and nurses during an intrapartum loss are similar to emotions described by
parents of a stillborn infant: guilt, shock, anger, sadness, and fear (McNamara, Meaney, & O'Donoghue, 2018).
Nurses can experience posttraumatic stress disorder, and health-care providers can sometimes leave obstetrics
because of the emotional trauma and self-blame. In McNamara, Meaney, & O'Donoghue's 2018 study of physicians
after an intrapartum loss, only four of 10 providers were given emotional or collegial support. They noted a "blame
culture," in which some providers openly blamed another provider. This study found that debriefing with all involved
was important for everyone's emotional health and healing.
1166  26 · Perinatal Bereavement

      Nurses must remain emotionally strong and professional while caring for a couple dealing with perinatal loss.
      However, nurses can feel ill equipped and inadequate in these situations. Some nurses will complain of headache,
      insomnia, and physical tension after caring for bereaved patients (Willis, 2019). When surveyed, nurses dealing with
      patients experiencing perinatal loss stated support from their colleagues was most helpful, but found they needed
      more managerial support (Willis, 2019). Debriefing after a perinatal loss allows nurses to express their emotions
      and feelings while accepting support and understanding from their coworkers (Willis, 2019).

              CLINICAL SAFETY AND PROCEDURES (QSEN)

      Debriefing after a Perinatal Loss

      Nurses and health-care providers must practice self-care to provide safe, appropriate care to their patients. The
      following are steps for debriefing after the perinatal loss of an intrapartum death:

        1. Introduction: The person leading the debriefing introduces the rules of the debriefing and the importance of
              confidentiality. "We are here to discuss and debrief the care of Ms. Smith. We must maintain confidentiality
              regarding the patient and the information our colleagues share."

        2. Fact gathering: Each nurse describes the event.
        3. Reflection: The person leading the debriefing facilitates the discussion of their feelings regarding the event in

              a nonjudgmental manner.
        4. Support: The person leading the debriefing discusses what happened, the positives and negatives of the care

              and activities surrounding the event; points out the opportunities to learn from the event; and helps nurses
              feel closure surrounding the event.
        5. Follow-up: The person leading the debriefing assesses those who might need additional counseling or support
              and refers them for help.

      Supporting the Birthing Person, Their Partner, Support Persons, and Family

      Grieving birthing persons, their partners, support persons, and family members need time to talk about their
      feelings without hearing advice or platitudes. Nurses can encourage friends and family to surround the birthing
      person and their partner with support. Nurses can educate the family that people can grieve in different ways, and
      the birthing person and their partner should be supported in the way that is best for them. The nurse should
      determine if a person of faith is desired to perform any rituals for the newborn and family. The nurse can directly
      contact the chaplain or the social worker or bereavement committee (per facility policy) to help arrange for a
      chaplain or spiritual leader to provide for the spiritual needs of the family.

      Most birthing persons and their partner want to see and hold their infant. Allow them time to be with the infant, take
      pictures, and honor the infant's life. Prepare the birthing person and their partners for how the infant will look; some
      infants will have peeling skin or deformities. Allow other support persons and family members to see and hold the
      infant as indicated.

      When supporting the birthing person, their partner, and other family, AVOID saying the following:

          · referring to the baby as "it"
          · pretending the stillbirth did not happen
          · suggesting the parents can get pregnant again
          · discussing faith or "God's will"
          · suggesting the parents be thankful for the children they already have

      (How to support family or friends after a stillbirth, n.d.)

              LINK TO LEARNING

      Friends and family desire to support their loved ones after a pregnancy loss; however, most people are at a loss for
      words. This video provides the voices of parents who have experienced loss (https://openstax.org/r/77stillbirth) and

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                26.2 · Intrapartum Fetal Death  1167

their suggestions on how to discuss the loss.

Cooling Cots
Many birthing persons and their partner desire to spend as much time as they can with their newborn; however, as
deterioration of the body begins, the newborn must be taken to the morgue to cool and preserve the body. This
limits the time the birthing person, their partner, and their family are able to spend with the newborn. Cooling cots
(https://openstax.org/r/77coolingcots) are mats placed in the crib that keep the infant cool, preserving the body for
2 to 3 days and allowing the newborn to remain at the bedside. This gives the birthing person and their partner time
to plan a religious ceremony or funeral. It also provides time for extended family to travel from out of town. Allowing
the family time to make memories with the newborn is important for the grieving process.

        LINK TO LEARNING

The body of a stillborn infant can be at the bedside for only a short time until it begins to break down. Cooling cots
keep the body cool to give families more time with their infant. This article and video tell the story of one family and
their experience using the cooling cot (https://openstax.org/r/77coolcotstory) after the loss of their child.

Infant Memory Boxes
Creating memories of the infant is an important part of the grieving process. Nurses can help by creating a memory
box and inserting footprints and handprints, a lock of hair, pictures, the baby's measurements, an outfit, and a
blanket. These mementos are a tangible way for the birthing person and their partner to remember their child. If the
birthing person and their partner are not ready to see these items or take them home, many hospitals will store the
box until they feel ready to accept it.

Newborn Photographs
Another way to create memories for the birthing person, their partner, and the family is by taking newborn and
family photographs. The nurse can assist with this by contacting organizations that provide this service.
Organizations such as Now I Lay Me Down to Sleep (https://openstax.org/r/77newbornphotos) provide
photographers trained in handling stillborn infants who volunteer their time to create memories for grieving families.
Again, if the birthing person and their partner are not ready to accept these pictures, the nurse can place them in the
memory box until the birthing person and their partner are ready.

Arranging for Transport to a Funeral Home
If the birthing person and their partner have decided to have a funeral and burial and they are ready to transport the
newborn to the funeral home, the nurse or social worker will contact the funeral home chosen by the parents. Many
labor and delivery units have a list of funeral homes experienced in dealing with stillborn infants. Some funeral
homes provide free burial or cremation for the baby. The hospital chaplain, social worker, or bereavement
committee (when available) can help the family make choices for a ceremony or celebration of the infant.

Trauma Possible at the Next Birth
After a perinatal loss, the birthing person and their partner can experience grief, depression, anxiety, and PTSD
during a subsequent pregnancy. Studies have shown that birthing persons and their partners can feel uncertainty,
guilt, continued grief, and fear of recurrent loss; these feelings can lead to an inability to bond with and attach to the
new infant (Donegan et al., 2023). Pregnant persons with a previous perinatal loss fear that anxiety would negatively
affect the pregnancy. This study also noted that persons with a previous perinatal loss desired more frequent fetal
monitoring and individualized care. Persons with a perinatal loss can possibly need specialized support and care
that emphasizes emotional recovery, peer support, and reassurance during subsequent pregnancies (Donegan et al.,
2023).

Antenatal care for subsequent pregnancies usually includes more frequent prenatal visits and ultrasound exams
(Wojcieszek et al., 2019). Pregnant patients with a previous intrapartum fetal loss may also be offered labor
induction or elective cesarean birth (Wojcieszek et al., 2019). Health-care providers should use shared decision
making regarding the timing and route of birth for subsequent pregnancies after a loss. Anticipatory guidance should
be provided regarding possible trauma if birthing in the same facility.
1168  26 · Perinatal Bereavement

      Lactation after Infant Death
      Nurses should provide anticipatory guidance regarding lactation after a loss. Most patients are not prepared to
      lactate after a stillbirth; however, lactation can occur 2 to 3 days after birth. A handout and online information for
      those who will experience lactation after an infant death (LAID) have been researched and found to be helpful for
      patients (Table 26.3). This information allows for anticipatory guidance on lactation after loss, acknowledges the
      complex emotions surrounding lactation, helps decrease physical side effects of poorly managed lactation, and
      provides shared decision making regarding all options for managing milk, such as donation or prevention of further
      lactation (Carroll et al., 2020).

      Goal                        Interventions

      Acknowledgment of           Acknowledge that lactation can occur; that strong emotions can be related to lactation;
      milk and lactation          and that frozen milk can be donated, kept as a memento, or discarded.
      after stillbirth or
      infant death

      Breast changes              Explain breast engorgement and milk leakage.
      associated with
      lactation

      Advice on alleviation       Discuss nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic ways to relieve symptoms. Explain signs
      of symptoms of              of infection/mastitis.
      engorgement,
      infection, pain, or
      leakage

      Description of all          Advise techniques for milk suppression. Explain that some parents have found that
      lactation suppression       lactation suppression is helpful after a loss. Provide options for what to do with saved
      options                     milk (donate, keep as memento, or discard). Use pharmacologic suppression only with
                                  the guidance of a health-care provider.

      Description of              Advise on techniques for milk expression, with the option of donating or not donating
      sustained lactation         milk. Explain that some parents find solace in expressing milk.
      options

      Description of milk         Explain the process of milk donation, how milk banks use milk, and the screening
      donation options            process for donation. Provide resources for local milk banks. Discuss the hazards of
                                  informal sharing of milk. Explain that the process of donation helps some parents with
                                  grieving.

      Recognition that            Provide resources, websites, and support groups, along with health-care professionals
      additional                  who can advise the parents.
      bereavement and
      lactation support may
      be needed

      TABLE 26.3 Lactation after Infant Death (LAID) (Carroll et al., 2020)

              LINK TO LEARNING

      Milk banks collect donated breast milk to be used for infants in need, especially premature infants. Milk banks
      screen the breast milk, pasteurize it, and test it for any infections that could be passed along to another infant. Milk

      Access for free at openstax.org
26.3 · Newborn Loss                                                                                                      1169

banks can accept donated milk from a person after a fetal death. The Human Milk Bank Association of North
America (https://openstax.org/r/77milkbank) provides information on donation after fetal death.

Postpartum Depression and Anxiety
Patients experiencing a stillbirth have higher incidences of postpartum depression (PPD), anxiety, PTSD, and
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) (Lewkowitz et al., 2022; Westby et al., 2022). Research has noted that
patients experience more PPD when their partner will not discuss the loss of the infant (Lewkowitz et al., 2022).
After a stillbirth, unmarried patients experienced more PPD than married patients (Westby et al., 2022). Research
also notes an increased risk for PPD in patients who felt a lack of emotional support during the birth and those who
did not feel that they were able to spend enough time with the infant after the birth (Westby et al., 2022).

26.3 Newborn Loss

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Describe the causes of neonatal deaths
    · Identify ways to debrief with fellow coworkers and providers after a neonatal death
    · Identify the nurse's role in supporting a family grieving after a neonatal death

A neonatal death is when a baby dies within the first 28 days of life. The occurrence in the United States is about 4
in 1,000 babies (less than 1 percent) (National Center for Health Statistics, 2023). Death of a newborn at any time is
a traumatic event and requires specialized interdisciplinary care for families. In this section, the causes of neonatal
deaths and the nurse's role in supporting the grieving family will be reviewed.

Causes of Neonatal Mortality

According to the World Health Organization ([WHO], 2022), in 2020, rates of neonatal death varied widely
depending on where the infant was born; for example, the area of sub-Saharan Africa represented 43 percent of all
neonatal deaths, and Central and Southern Asia represented 36 percent (WHO, 2022). In the United States,
neonatal mortality rates were higher in Black (non-Hispanic), American Indian, Alaskan Native, and Pacific Islander
persons, and in the states of Mississippi, Louisiana, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Arkansas (United Health
Foundation, n.d.). Most neonatal deaths occur within the first 24 hours of birth or the first week of life.

The most common causes of neonatal loss are prematurity, low birth weight, and congenital anomalies (CDC,
2023b). A pregnancy, labor, or birth with complications also increases the risk for neonatal loss, especially that due
to asphyxia and infection. Refer to Chapter 25 Care of the Newborn at Risk for more information on causes of
neonatal loss.

Preterm Birth
Preterm birth, birth occurring prior to 37 weeks' gestation, is a significant cause of neonatal mortality. Preterm
newborns are usually of low birth weight and have more health problems than term babies. In the United States in
2022, 1 in 10 infants was born preterm (Martin et al., 2022). These infants' brain, liver, and lungs lack the
intrauterine development that occurs in the last few weeks and months of pregnancy and, therefore, have
developmental delays, respiratory problems, feeding difficulties, and higher mortality (CDC, 2023c).

Newborns born prior to 34 weeks (Figure 26.2) will most likely suffer from respiratory distress syndrome due to lack
of surfactant, which allows the lungs to inflate and deflate easily (March of Dimes, 2017). Intraventricular
hemorrhage, or bleeding in the brain, is seen in preterm babies and is a common cause of mortality (March of Dimes,
2017). Preterm babies can also suffer from necrotizing enterocolitis (tissue death in the intestines); this causes
diarrhea, feeding problems, and an edematous abdomen. This is a serious complication that can lead to death
(March of Dimes, 2017). Some maternal complications can cause preterm birth, such as preeclampsia, placental
abruption, and premature rupture of membranes.
1170  26 · Perinatal Bereavement

      FIGURE 26.2 Preterm Newborn Preterm infants often need assistance with breathing and are at risk for respiratory distress due to lack of
      surfactant. (credit: "Lyra" by Chris Sternal-Johnson/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

      Childbirth Complications
      Research suggests that timely treatment of preterm birth, intrapartum complications, and infection could result in
      fewer neonatal deaths (Lawn et al., 2023). Delay in decision making during labor, delay in presenting to the hospital,
      and delay in adequate prenatal care all contribute to neonatal mortality (Lawn et al., 2023). Common intrapartum
      complications resulting in neonatal mortality include birth trauma, such as intracranial hemorrhage and skull
      fracture; placental problems, such as placental abruption, cord avulsion, vasa previa, and cord accidents; and
      maternal complications, such as uterine rupture, preeclampsia/eclampsia, injury, and substance use (Tesfay et al.,
      2022).
      Infections
      Chorioamnionitis is the infection of the bag of water affecting the uterus and the fetus. Group B streptococcus (GBS)
      is the cause of most neonatal invasive infections and is associated with a high morbidity and mortality rate. Most
      GBS infections occur within the first week of life and are acquired during birth but can occur weeks later. Between
      20 and 30 percent of pregnant persons are colonized with GBS, but only 1 to 2 percent of neonates will develop the
      infection (Mynarek et al., 2021). GBS can be a cause of preterm birth, leading to neonatal mortality (Mynarek et al.,
      2021).
      Neonatal sepsis can be caused by a maternal infection. During pregnancy, an infection can cross the placenta;
      during labor, it can ascend the vaginal canal to the uterus and fetus (Figure 26.3), and after birth, an infection can be
      acquired from breast-feeding (Pace & Yanowitz, 2022). Neonatal sepsis can be caused by a bacterium, virus, or
      fungus with a presentation of fever, tachypnea, lethargy, hypothermia, and poor feeding (Pace & Yanowitz, 2022).
      The age of the neonate can drastically change the chance of survival, with a fatality rate of 20 percent in preterm
      neonates and 2 percent in term neonates (Pace & Yanowitz, 2022).

      Access for free at openstax.org
26.3 · Newborn Loss                                                                                                              1171

FIGURE 26.3 Intrapartum Infection Bacteria, viruses, or fungi can ascend from the vagina into the uterus, causing an infection.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection occurs in 10 per 100,000 live births (Mahant et al., 2019). HSV can infect the
neonate during pregnancy or delivery and has a mortality rate of 4.1 to 7.3 percent (Mahant et al., 2019). Symptoms
of neurologic infection, usually occurring after 2 weeks of life, include seizures, poor feeding, lethargy, bulging
fontanelles, temperature irregularities, and skin lesions; disseminated disease occurs after 10 days of life, with
symptoms of respiratory failure, encephalitis, multiorgan failure, and death (Mahant et al., 2019). Another organism
causing neonatal mortality is E. coli. E. coli can cause pneumonia, sepsis, and meningitis and is transmitted mostly
as a nosocomial infection (Lai et al., 2021). Neonates with fever or temperature instability can be readmitted for
possible sepsis.

Birth Defects
Birth defects can be responsible for neonatal deaths. Cardiac defects can be treated with surgery; however, more
complex defects may not be treatable and can cause neonatal death (March of Dimes, 2017). Lung defects can
occur because of underdevelopment, which can be caused by prematurity or oligohydramnios, as lungs cannot
expand and develop with low amniotic fluid. Neurologic defects such as anencephaly, that is, lack of development of
the brain and skull, are many times the cause of stillbirth; however, some anencephalic infants are born but die
shortly after birth (March of Dimes, 2017).

Caring for the Caregiver

Many parents or caregivers blame themselves and experience extreme guilt in cases of newborn death, especially in
the case of inheritable genetic diseases. Grief has been described as a loss of an attachment, and the attachment
between a parent and child is one of the strongest of all human attachments (Duncan, 2018). Coping after the loss
of an infant can be influenced by culture, religion, family dynamics, and social support. The nurse should assess
these influences in order to provide referrals and arrange for additional support.

Nurses who care for these families need support themselves. Debriefing with other nurses, managers, and social
workers is important for self-care. Nurses can suffer from grief and depression. When they recognize these
symptoms, they must reach out for help in order to care for themselves. Being supported by peers allows nurses to
work through their feelings and ideally prevent grief from turning into depression.

Cultural Considerations
The process of grieving can be influenced by a family's culture, such as their values, beliefs, and religion (Arslan &
Buldukolu, 2019). Grief rituals can range from wearing black clothing for a certain period to avoiding weddings or
other celebrations while grieving to isolating from others (Arslan & Buldukolu, 2019). Culture can influence the
desire for a burial or cremation. Beliefs can also determine if the body will be viewed in an open casket. The nurse
1172  26 · Perinatal Bereavement

      can assess for cultural beliefs to provide culturally competent care. The nurse can contact the patient's church or
      religious group to help plan for burial or cremation.

              CULTURAL CONTEXT

      Death Rituals Practiced in Certain Religions

      In Judaism, the body is not embalmed, nor will the service include an open casket (Lowey, 2015). In Catholicism, a
      priest performs a funeral mass at the church followed by internment (Lowey, 2015). In Protestant denominations,
      cremation or burial is acceptable, and funerals may be held at a funeral home or church. For followers of Islam,
      burial occurs as soon as possible, and the body of the deceased is buried facing Mecca (Lowey, 2015). The nurse
      can assess for cultural beliefs and provide culturally competent care.

      Referrals for Help
      Validated depression screening should be done. Depending on the health-care facility, nurses can refer families to
      bereavement resources or consult the hospital's social worker or bereavement committee to obtain referrals for
      families. Cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) and counseling can be helpful to those families experiencing a newborn
      death. Grief counseling is another therapy that can be helpful. Support groups are available to provide professional
      and social support to families experiencing similar grief. Medications such as antidepressants and anxiolytics can be
      used to assist with coping.

              LINK TO LEARNING

      Mommies Enduring Neonatal Death (MEND) is a support group providing resources and support to families who have
      lost a child (https://openstax.org/r/77MENDsupport) to miscarriage, stillbirth, and infant loss.

      Helping Families Understand the Grief Process
      Parents dealing with the loss of a newborn can experience a lack of desire for life and daily activities. They may feel
      anger, sorrow, and shock. Physical symptoms, such as chest pain, fatigue, stomachache, and digestive issues, can
      result from grief (Arslan & Buldukolu, 2019). Table 26.4 lists more symptoms of grief. Families should be provided
      reassurance that these feelings and symptoms are part of the normal grief process. Nurses should explain that there
      is no timeline on grieving, and everyone grieves in their own way. Suggestions for dealing with the grief process
      include the following:

        1. Acknowledge the loss and pain.
        2. Understand that grief can trigger many unexpected emotions.
        3. Know that grief is unique to the person.
        4. Find people who care and support you.
        5. Take care of yourself mentally and physically.
        6. Recognize signs of depression.

      (Smith et al., 2023)

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                             26.3 · Newborn Loss                                                         1173

Type       Symptoms

Emotional  Shock
           Disbelief
           Sadness
           Guilt
           Fear
           Anger

Physical   Fatigue
           Nausea
           Compromised immunity
           Weight changes
           Aches/pains
           Insomnia

TABLE 26.4 Symptoms of Grief (Smith et al.,
2023)

The nurse will explain that grief is different from depression. Depression is despair and extreme sadness that
interferes with daily activities, with frequent thoughts of death, worthlessness, or suicide, and does not lessen with
time (Schimelpfening & Gans, 2023). Grief can decrease with support and time but can also recur during special
situations such as the birthday or anniversary of a loved one; depression does not change depending on the
circumstances (Schimelpfening & Gans, 2023).

Helping Siblings
Helping a sibling understand the death of a newborn is difficult. Children's understanding of death depends on their
age, development, their ability to think abstractly, their other experiences with loss, and their cognitive development
(Arslan & Buldukolu, 2019). Young siblings who experience loss can exhibit anxiety and have behavior issues; older
children can show signs of depression (Arslan & Buldukolu, 2019).

Supporting a sibling through a newborn death requires honesty and openness. Parents should acknowledge the
sibling's grief, be honest about their own grief, and help the sibling keep the memory of the newborn alive (Support
for Siblings after a Neonatal Death, n.d.). Give the sibling permission to cry and grieve, explain that the death was
not anyone's fault, and reassure them their parents are okay, as children many times fear other loved ones dying
(Support for Siblings after a Neonatal Death, n.d.). Counseling specifically for siblings and children is available and
referrals can be provided by the nurse.
1174 26 · Summary

Summary

26.1 Pregnancy Loss

Pregnancy loss at any stage in the pregnancy is devastating to the parents. They are grieving the loss of their child
and the family they had envisioned. During this grief, they must then make decisions about what treatment plan is
best. Treatment options are dependent upon the gestational age of the fetus and the patient's preference. During
this time of discussing treatment, the nurse and health-care providers use shared decision making and allow the
parents sufficient time to make decisions.

The cause of early and late pregnancy loss is many times related to chromosomal abnormalities. Early prenatal
testing can detect some anomalies and allow patients to determine a plan of care during the first trimester. At other
times, fetal abnormalities or maternal risk factors are not apparent until after the first trimester, making options for
care more limited. Parents should be offered fetal autopsy and placental pathology to determine the cause of
stillbirth or IUFD.

Bereavement care is provided throughout the process of perinatal loss. Nurses and health-care providers should be
trained in bereavement care and should offer patients individualized care based on their culture, religion, and
personal beliefs. Families should be offered bereavement care as well. Mental health resources should be provided
to all family members.

Nurses will give education on postabortion or postpartum care at discharge. Use of support groups and counseling
experts is encouraged. Nurses caring for families with perinatal loss experience emotional distress and should
practice self-care.

26.2 Intrapartum Fetal Death

Intrapartum fetal death is devastating to the birthing person, their partner, support persons, family, health-care
providers, and nurses. The common question is, "How could this happen?" Causes of fetal death during labor can be
infection such as chorioamnionitis, hypertensive disorders, placental abruption, a cord problem or accident, growth
restriction in the fetus, or a congenital anomaly. Unfortunately, many causes of fetal deaths are unknown.

Nurses caring for a family during an intrapartum fetal death can feel grief, sadness, anger, guilt, and fear. Nurses
must support one another, and debriefing is a great way to provide support and allow them to talk about their
feelings. Debriefing is part of self-care.

After an intrapartum fetal death, the role of the nurse is to provide routine nursing care for the postpartum person
and also to meet the needs of a grieving patient, their partner, and family. The nurse can provide a cooling cot to
allow the patient, their partner, and families more time with the newborn, create a memory box with mementos,
contact social workers and religious support, and discuss lactation and what to expect. The nurse also screens for
postpartum depression and anxiety, as this is much more prevalent after an infant loss. This process of loss affects
everyone, and nurses must also care for themselves after caring for these families.

26.3 Newborn Loss

Neonatal deaths occur for multiple reasons, such as prematurity, childbirth complications, infection, and birth
defects. The loss of a newborn affects all caregivers, nurses, parents, and family. Nurses must support the parents
and family through the grief process. Nurses can offer resources for support groups and ensure that the family's
culture and beliefs are respected. Nurses should also debrief with their colleagues as a form of self-care. Grief is a
process, and everyone involved in a neonatal death will navigate the process in different ways. Grief support is
essential.

Key Terms

antepartum fetal death death that occurs before the onset of labor
early pregnancy loss occurs before 20 weeks' gestation and is most often the result of an abortion
intrapartum fetal death (IPFD) death that occurs after 20 weeks of gestation and after the onset of labor but

    before birth
late pregnancy loss occurs after 20 weeks' gestation and is commonly defined as intrauterine fetal demise

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       26 · Assessments 1175

neonatal death when a baby dies within the first 28 days of life
neonatal loss when a newborn dies before 28 days of life
perinatal bereavement experience of perinatal persons, their partners, support persons, and family members

    during and after a perinatal loss
perinatal loss involuntary end of pregnancy after implantation or death of a newborn within 28 days after birth

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. The nurse is caring for a patient with a spontaneous abortion at 8 weeks' gestation. What is the most common
        cause of first trimester loss?
           a. ectopic pregnancy
           b. spontaneous abortion
           c. cervical insufficiency
           d. stillbirth

    2. A 29-year-old Chinese American patient is admitted for IUFD. Her blood pressure (BP) is 90/60, body mass
        index (BMI) is 41, and the medical and surgical history is noncontributory. She does not smoke or have
        substance use disorder. What part of her history places her at risk for IUFD?
           a. age
           b. obesity
           c. hypotension
           d. ethnicity

    3. What type of testing should be offered to a patient who has had a stillbirth?
           a. NIPTs
           b. ultrasound
           c. placental pathology
           d. blood crossmatch

    4. The nurse is providing bereavement care to a family after a stillbirth. What is an example of communication
        with a patient that demonstrates effective bereavement care?
           a. "It is so sad that you never became a parent."
           b. "Don't worry. We will take good care of the fetus."
           c. "Are there any religious ceremonies you would like for us to coordinate for you?"
           d. "I know you are grieving. I will take care of all of the decisions for you."

    5. The nurse provides education on care after a first trimester loss. What is an example of communication with a
        patient that demonstrates effective aftercare education?
           a. "You will need to follow up with us in several weeks. We want to make sure you are doing well."
           b. "You should call us if you are bleeding and soaking 4 maxi pads in a day."
           c. "Your period will return in 2 weeks."
           d. "You should wait 2 months before having intercourse."

    6. The nurse provides education on care after a second trimester loss. What is an example of a topic of effective
        discharge education?
           a. list of local perinatal support groups
           b. consent for manual removal of placenta
           c. signs and symptoms of chorioamnionitis
           d. how to donate breast milk

    7. The nurse is caring for a patient who has been diagnosed as having a fetal death. The nurse is aware of the
        possible causes of intrapartum fetal death. How can the nurse explain the potential causes of IPFD to the
        patient?
1176 26 · Assessments

           a. "We will always find the cause of fetal death with an autopsy."
           b. "Infection is never a cause of fetal death."
           c. "Umbilical cord entanglement can cause fetal death."
           d. "Congenital anomalies cause growth restriction, not fetal death."

    8. After reviewing a patient's history, what does nurse recognize as a risk factor for IPFD?
           a. chronic hypertension
           b. hypothyroidism
           c. depression
           d. asthma

    9. The nurse manager is planning a debriefing for several of the nurses after an IPFD. What should the manager
        expect?
           a. The nurses will need to discuss fault in order to alleviate feelings of guilt.
           b. During the debriefing, some nurses will complain of physical tension, headache, and insomnia.
           c. The nurse caring for the patient will need to defend herself to the health-care provider.
           d. The charge nurse will discuss the nurse's documentation to prevent a lawsuit.

  10. Postpartum depression and anxiety are prevalent among parents experiencing an IPFD. What is an example
        of a statement by the parent that would alert the nurse to signs of depression?
           a. "I really miss feeling the baby move in my belly."
           b. "My family is supportive, but my partner and I just need a few hours to ourselves."
           c. "Before the baby died, I really enjoyed spending time with friends. Now nothing I do brings me joy, and
                I hate leaving the house."
           d. "I feel very sad about not becoming a parent. I really need my support group right now."

  11. How can the nurse explain the complications of preterm birth?
           a. Intraventricular hemorrhage is not a serious complication of prematurity.
           b. Necrotizing enterocolitis is a condition of prematurity that causes constipation.
           c. Respiratory distress is a cause of death related to prematurity.
           d. Surfactant causes premature lungs to be overly pliable and opens the lungs too quickly.

  12. How can the nurse caring for a patient with a neonatal loss practice self-care?
           a. Refrain from discussing her feelings at work.
           b. Understand that depression is normal after neonatal loss.
           c. Take off work for a week.
           d. Debrief with manager and colleagues.

  13. How can the nurse be culturally sensitive after a neonatal death?
           a. Call a priest for all families during this time of grief.
           b. Recognize that most religions have traditions surrounding death.
           c. Encourage families to have an open casket to help them deal with the death.
           d. Discuss cremation, as it is the best process for a neonatal death.

  14. Supporting siblings through grief after a neonatal loss is difficult. What suggestions should the nurse give
        parents?
           a. Try not to discuss your grief with siblings.
           b. Wait until children are older to be honest about their sibling's death.
           c. Give them permission to cry and grieve.
           d. Avoid displaying pictures of the newborn until the sibling is older.

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. List the principles of bereavement care that can be used to help families cope with pregnancy loss.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       26 · Assessments 1177

    2. The nurse educates the patient who has experienced a pregnancy loss on what to do when her milk comes in.
        What should be included in this education?

    3. Explain the benefits of debriefing after an IPFD.

    4. Explain the importance of discussing the signs of PPD with persons and their partners, after experiencing an
        IPFD.

    5. List ways nurses can help families deal with grief after a neonatal loss.

Reflection Questions

    1. Discuss the difference in counseling provided for early pregnancy loss and early pregnancy termination.

    2. Explain nursing actions to assist a birthing person, their partner, and family to grieve an IPFD.

    3. Explain the importance of nurses debriefing after caring for a newborn who dies.

    4. Explain the difference between grief and depression.

What Should the Nurse Do?

Remy, a 32-year-old female, arrives at the obstetrics and gynecology clinic after experiencing vaginal bleeding and
abdominal cramps at 10 weeks of gestation. She is visibly distressed and tearful. Remy reports having a smooth first
trimester until yesterday when she noticed the bleeding. She denies any trauma or abdominal pain. Remy has a
history of one previous full-term pregnancy without complications and no chronic medical conditions. Her vital signs
include a blood pressure of 120/80 mm Hg, a heart rate of 80 beats per minute, and a respiratory rate of 18 breaths
per minute. The health-care team is concerned about a potential early pregnancy loss.

    1. How might Remy's previous full-term pregnancy history contribute to the analysis of the current situation?
    2. As the nurse, what immediate actions should be taken to address Remy's bleeding and cramps?

Cindy, a 28-year-old female, arrives at the labor and delivery unit after experiencing decreased fetal movement at
38 weeks of gestation. She reports a sudden onset of abdominal pain and is visibly anxious. Cindy has a history of
gestational diabetes, well controlled with diet, and a previous uncomplicated vaginal delivery. Fetal heart rate
monitoring reveals absent fetal heart tones, and ultrasound confirms the devastating news of an intrapartum fetal
death.

    3. Considering the absence of fetal heart tones, what would be the priority hypotheses regarding the cause of
        the intrapartum fetal death, and how would you approach communicating this information to Cindy?

    4. As the nurse, what immediate and long-term solutions can be implemented to support Cindy and her family in
        the aftermath of an intrapartum fetal death?

Competency-Based Assessments

    1. A pregnant patient arrives at a clinic with vaginal bleeding and cramps and in obvious emotional distress. An
        exam reveals a pregnancy loss. How might this timing influence the patient's coping mechanisms? how might
        the timing of the pregnancy loss influence her coping mechanisms?

    2. As the nurse, what immediate actions can be taken to support a pregnant patient and her family in the early
        stages of coping with the pregnancy loss?

    3. What knowledge is essential for a nurse to effectively support a family experiencing grief after an intrapartum
        fetal death, and how does this knowledge contribute to the identification of potential causes of such
        incidents?

    4. As a maternity nurse, how can you prioritize hypotheses and generate solutions during a debriefing session
        with colleagues, considering the emotional impact of an intrapartum fetal death, and how does this align with
        identifying causes of such incidents?

    5. How can the nurse's role in supporting a family who is grieving after a neonatal death evolve over time, and
        what knowledge and skills are necessary to provide ongoing assistance, considering the potential causes of
        neonatal deaths?
1178 26 · References

    6. As a nurse, describe how you would prioritize hypotheses during a debriefing session with colleagues after a
        neonatal death, considering emotional cues and potential causes of such incidents, and how does this align
        with supporting grieving families?

References

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2018). ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 200: Early pregnancy loss.
   Obstetrics & Gynecology, 132(5), e197-e207. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000002899

Arslan, B. ., & Buldukolu, K. (2019). Grief support programs implemented to reduce the effects of grief on family.
   Psikiyatride Güncel Yaklaimlar, 11(3), 402-417. https://doi.org/10.18863/pgy.444297

Carroll, K., Noble-Carr, D., Sweeney, L., & Waldby, C. (2020). The "lactation after infant death (AID) framework": A
   guide for online health information provision about lactation after stillbirth and infant death. Journal of Human
   Lactation, 36(3), 480-491. https://doi.org/10.1177/0890334420926946

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2022). What is stillbirth? https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/stillbirth/
    facts.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023a, March). Sudden unexpected infant death and sudden infant
   death syndrome. https://www.cdc.gov/sids/data.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023b, September 13). Infant mortality. https://www.cdc.gov/
    reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/infantmortality.htm

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023c, October). Preterm birth. https://www.cdc.gov/
    reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/pretermbirth.htm

Chiweza, C., Iwuh, I., Hasan, A., Malata, A., Belfort, M., & Wilkinson, J. C. (2022). Can artificial intelligence-
    augmented fetal monitoring prevent intrapartum stillbirth and neonatal death in a low-income setting: An
   observational study? BJOG, 1-3. https://doi.org/10.1111/1471-0528.17321

Christou, A., Alam, A., Hofiani, S. M., Rasooly, M. H., Mubasher, A., Rashidi, M. K., Dibley, M. J., & Raynes-Greenow, C.
    (2019). How community and healthcare provider perceptions, practices and experiences influence reporting,
   disclosure and data collection on stillbirth: Findings of a qualitative study in Afghanistan. Social Science &
   Medicine, 236, 112413. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112413

Donegan, G., Noonan, M., & Bradshaw, C. (2023). Parents experiences of pregnancy following perinatal loss: An
   integrative review. Midwifery, 121, 103673. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.midw.2023.103673

Duncan, J. R. (2018). SIDS sudden infant and early childhood death: The past, the present and the future. University
    of Adelaide Press. https://doi.org/10.20851/sids

Galeotti, M., Heaney, S., Robinson, M., & Aventin, A. (2023). Evaluation of a pregnancy loss education intervention
   for undergraduate nursing students in Northern Ireland: A pre- and post-test study. BMC Nursing, 22(1),
    268-268. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12912-023-01408-4

Hamama-Raz, Y., Hartman, H., & Buchbinder, E. (2014). Coping with stillbirth among ultraorthodox Jewish women.
   Qualitative Health Research, 24(7), 923-932. https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732314539568

How to support family or friends after a stillbirth. (n.d.). Tommy's. https://www.tommys.org/baby-loss-support/
    stillbirth-information-and-support/family-and-friends-how-give-support-after-stillbirth

Komboigo, B. E., Zamane, H., Coulibaly, A., Sib, S. R., Thiombiano, M., & Thieba, B. (2023). Factors associated with
   intrapartum stillbirth in a tertiary teaching hospital in Burkina Faso. Frontiers in Global Women's Health, 4,
    1038817-1038817. https://doi.org/10.3389/fgwh.2023.1038817

Lai, J., Zhu, Y., Tang, L., & Lin, X. (2021). Epidemiology and antimicrobial susceptibility of invasive Escherichia coli
   infection in neonates from 2012 to 2019 in Xiamen, China. BMC Infectious Diseases, 21(1), 295-295.
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-021-05981-4

Lawn, J. E., Bhutta, Z. A., Ezeaka, C., & Saugstad, O. (2023). Ending preventable neonatal deaths: Multicountry

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          26 · References 1179

   evidence to inform accelerated progress to the sustainable development goal by 2030. Neonatology, 120(4),
    491-499. https://doi.org/10.1159/000530496

Lewkowitz, A. K., Cersonsky, T. E. K., Reddy, U. M., Goldenberg, R. L., Dudley, D. J., Silver, R. M., & Ayala, N. K. (2022).
    Association of perceived lack of paternal support after stillbirth with maternal postpartum depression or anxiety.
   JAMA Network Open, 5(9), e2231111-e2231111. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.31111

Lowey, S. E. (2015). Diversity in dying: Death across cultures. In Nursing care at the end of life.
    https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/nursingcare/chapter/diversity-in-dying-death-across-cultures/

Mahant, S., Hall, M., Schondelmeyer, A. C., Berry, J. G., Kimberlin, D. W., & Shah, S. S. (2019). Neonatal herpes
   simplex virus infection among Medicaid-enrolled children: 2009-2015. Pediatrics (Evanston), 143(4),
    e20183233. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2018-3233

March of Dimes. (2017). Neonatal death. https://www.marchofdimes.org/find-support/topics/miscarriage-loss-
    grief/neonatal-death

Martin, J. A., Hamilton, B. E., & Osterman, M. J. (2023, August). Births in the United States, 2022: NCHS Data Brief
    No. 477. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db477.htm

McLaren, H., Cancino, D., McCulloch, M., Wolff, S., & French, V. (2022). Rates of complication for dilation and
   evacuation versus induction of labor in treatment of second trimester intrauterine fetal demise. European Journal
   of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, 277, 16-20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejogrb.2022.08.003

McLean, E., Blystad, A., Mirkuzie, A. H., & Miljeteig, I. (2023). Health workers' experience of providing second-
   trimester abortion care in Ethiopia: A qualitative study. Reproductive Health, 20(1), 154-154. https://doi.org/
    10.1186/s12978-023-01698-6

McNamara, K., Meaney, S., & O'Donoghue, K. (2018). Intrapartum fetal death and doctors: A qualitative exploration.
   Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica, 97(7), 890-898. https://doi.org/10.1111/aogs.13354.

McNamara, O'Donoghue, K., & Green, R. A. (2018). Intrapartum fetal deaths and unexpected neonatal deaths in the
   Republic of Ireland: 2011-2014: A descriptive study. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth, 18(9), 1-10.
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-017-1636-6

Metz, T., Berry, R. S., Fretts, R. C., Reddy, U. M., & Turrentine, M. A. (2020). Obstetric Care Consensus #10:
   Management of stillbirth. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 222(3), B2-B20. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.ajog.2020.01.017

Mynarek, M., Bjellmo, S., Lydersen, S., Afset, J. E., Andersen, G. L., & Vik, T. (2021). Incidence of invasive Group B
   Streptococcal infection and the risk of infant death and cerebral palsy: A Norwegian Cohort Study. Pediatric
   Research, 89(6), 1541-1548. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41390-020-1092-2

National Center for Health Statistics. (2023, September 21). Infant mortality dashboard. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
    nvss/vsrr/infant-mortality-dashboard.htm

Pace, E., & Yanowitz, T. (2022). Infections in the NICU: Neonatal sepsis. Seminars in Pediatric Surgery, 31(4),
    151200-151200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151200

Qian, J., Sun, S., Wu, M., Liu, L., Yaping, S., & Yu, X. (2021). Preparing nurses and midwives to provide perinatal
   bereavement care: A systematic scoping review. Nurse Education Today, 103, 104962. http://doi.org/10.1016/
    j.nedt.2021.104962

Schimelpfening, N., & Gans, S. (2023, September 25). Grief vs. depression: Which is it? Understanding the
   difference is important for getting help. https://www.verywellmind.com/grief-and-depression-1067237

Shanker, O., Saini, V., & Gupta, M. (2020). Stillbirths: Incidence, causes and surrogate markers of intrapartum and
   antepartum fetal deaths. International Journal of Innovative Research in Medical Science, 5(8), 289-295.
    https://doi.org/10.23958/ijirms/vol05-i08/927

Smith, M., Robinson, L., & Segal, J. (2023, June). Coping with grief and loss. https://www.helpguide.org/articles/
    grief/coping-with-grief-and-loss.htm
1180 26 · References

Support for siblings after a neonatal death. (n.d.). Tommy's.org. https://www.tommys.org/baby-loss-support/
    neonatal-death-information-and-support/support-siblings-after-neonatal-death

Tesfay, N., Tariku, R., Zenebe, A., Dejene, Z., & Woldeyohannes, F. (2022). Cause and risk factors of early neonatal
   death in Ethiopia. PloS One, 17(9), e0275475-e0275475. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0275475

United Health Foundation. (n.d.) America's Health Rankings: Analysis of CDC WONDER, Linked Birth/Infant Death
   Files 2019-2020. Accessed January 28, 2024, at https://www.americashealthrankings.org/explore/measures/
    neonatal_mortality_b

Westby, C. L., Erlandsen, A. R., Nilsen, S. A., Visted, E., & Thimm, J. C. (2021). Depression, anxiety, PTSD, and OCD
   after stillbirth: A systematic review. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth, 21(1), 782. https://doi.org/10.1186/
    s12884-021-04254-x

Willis, P. (2019). Nurses' perspective on caring for women experiencing perinatal loss. MCN: The American Journal
   of Maternal/Child Nursing, 44 (1), 46-51. https://doi.org/10.1097/NMC.0000000000000490

Wojcieszek, A. M., Heazell, A. E., Middleton, P., Ellwood, D., Silver, R. M., & Flenady, V. (2019). Research priorities
    and potential methodologies to inform care in subsequent pregnancies following stillbirth: A web-based survey
   of health-care professionals, researchers and advocates. BMJ Open, 9, e028735. https://doi.org/10.1136/
    bmjopen-2018-028735

Wool, C., & Catlin, A. (2019). Perinatal bereavement and palliative care offered throughout the healthcare system.
   Annals of Palliative Medicine, 8(S1), S22-S29. http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/apm.2018.11.03

World Health Organization. (2022, January). Newborn mortality. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
    detail/levels-and-trends-in-child-mortality-report-2021

Zhuang, S., Ma, X., Xiao, G., Zhao, Y., Hou, J., & Wang, Y. (2022). Clinical practice guidelines for perinatal
   bereavement care: A systematic quality appraisal using AGREE II instrument. Journal of Pediatric Nursing, 166,
    49-56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pedn.2022.04.007

Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 27

Unfolding Case Study: Applying Clinical
Judgment

FIGURE 27.1 Making Decisions in Practice Nurses make decisions as often as every 30 seconds when providing patient care. The ability
to make safe and effective decisions is learned through direct experience and the guidance of colleagues. The thinking underlying the
decision-making process is clinical judgment. (credit: "U.S. Navy Doctors, Nurses and Corpsmen Treat COVID Patients in the ICU Aboard
USNS Comfort" by "Shutter Runner"/flickr, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
27.1 Clinical Judgment within the Nursing Process
27.2 Measuring Clinical Judgment within Nursing Practice

INTRODUCTION The steps of the nursing process provide direction for nurses when making patient care decisions.
Each decision affects the patient's health status because safe and effective decisions made by nurses enhance
patient outcomes (Nibbelink & Brewer, 2018). Clinical judgment is an essential part of safe and effective decision
making in nursing practice (Tanner, 2006). The process of clinical judgment is cognitive and is the integrated
thinking performed by nurses when making patient care decisions (Lasater, 2007). This chapter focuses on how to
use clinical judgment when providing nursing care for gynecologic and obstetric patients. The unfolding case study
offers opportunities for practice of clinical judgment and NCLEX-style questions.

27.1 Clinical Judgment within the Nursing Process

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

    · Explain the application of the nursing process
    · Explain clinical judgment in nursing practice
    · Explain the integration of clinical judgment within the nursing process
Applying the nursing process to a multitude of different people, patients, settings, conditions, and experiences
requires the ability to discover and analyze subjective and objective data, think about those findings critically, and
1182  27 · Unfolding Case Study: Applying Clinical Judgment

      proceed to action when required. Nurses assess patients to discover and analyze their subjective and objective data.
      Analysis of the data leads the nurse to the diagnosis of the patient's problem(s). The diagnosis leads to the
      identification of the patient outcomes. The nurse begins to develop a plan of care based on prioritizing the identified
      problem(s) and associated outcomes. The nurse next implements actions to treat the problem(s), prevent
      complications of the problem(s), and improve the patient's condition.

      Nursing Process

      The nursing process (Figure 27.2) is what nurses do. The nurse evaluates the patient's condition to determine if the
      nursing actions brought about the expected patient outcomes. The five steps of the process--assessment,
      diagnosis, planning/outcomes, implementation, and evaluation (ADPIE)--are performed by nurses in all areas of
      gynecologic and obstetric nursing practice.

      FIGURE 27.2 The Nursing Process The nursing process consists of five steps. The nurse usually follows the cyclic direction of the steps
      but may need to move forward and backward between steps based on the patient's responses. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
      OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

      Assessment
      Nursing assessment includes gathering data provided by the patient, the patient's medical record, the patient's
      physical assessment, and other sociocultural considerations. In gynecologic and obstetric nursing practice, all the
      information in the patient's prenatal record provides many subjective and objective sources of assessment data.
      (See Chapter 11 Prenatal Care.)

      Assessment also involves analyzing the patient data within the context of the patient's current situation (Benner et
      al., 2009). This analysis leads the nurse to discover the essential data relevant to patient care decisions. The nurse
      acknowledges the expected data, focuses on unexpected data, and finds patterns in the data. An example is when
      the nurse notices that over the past three prenatal visits, the patient's blood pressure measurements have gradually
      risen above normal values. The blood pressure pattern is recognized as a trend and is not routine or expected during
      pregnancy.

      Diagnosis
      Analysis of the patient data provides direction for the nurse to diagnose or determine the patient's current or
      potential problem(s). The nurse also considers the patient's situation. Using the assessment data example, the
      nurse sees that the current problem is gestational hypertension and the potential problem is preeclampsia. If a
      similar trend in blood pressure values were to occur in a patient who was not pregnant, the nurse would determine

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                27.1 · Clinical Judgment within the Nursing Process       1183

the problem to be essential hypertension.

The nurse also prioritizes the patient's diagnosed problems. If the same patient arrived in the labor and delivery
suite and informed the nurse that the baby was coming, the patient's imminent delivery would take priority over the
patient's preeclampsia. The context of the patient's situation has changed. Prioritization of diagnoses is the
foundation of the patient's plan of care.

Outcomes/Planning
The nurse identifies the outcomes and goals for each diagnosis that will enhance the patient's condition. For the
patient with preeclampsia who is about to deliver, the planned outcomes are controlled blood pressure and seizure
prevention. To achieve these outcomes, the nurse plans for possible complications, such as seizure and postpartum
hemorrhage. Everyone involved in the patient's care is aware of the planned actions to achieve the outcomes.

Implementation
The nurse implements a series of interventions that align with the assessment, diagnosis, and plan for the
individualized plan of care. These actions are based on the planned patient outcomes: control blood pressure and
prevent seizure, ultimately aiming for prevention of the complication of preeclampsia and the desired outcome of a
vaginal delivery. Nursing interventions are also prioritized to enhance patient safety and effectiveness (Magley et al.,
2024).

Evaluation
Once the nursing interventions have been implemented, the nurse evaluates the patient's current status and
determines if the actions were effective and if the patient outcomes have been achieved. This evaluation may result
in a modified diagnosis, plan, or implementation. The nursing process continues to circle from assessment through
outcomes (American Nurses Association, 2021). Documentation of all steps in the nursing process is essential.

What Is Clinical Judgment in Nursing Practice?

The process nurses use in cognitive decision-making while providing patient care is called clinical judgment
(Tanner, 2006). Nurses use clinical judgment to organize and prioritize nursing knowledge and skills into nursing
actions based on the clinical situation. The clinical judgment process used in nursing practice is multifaceted and is
learned. As the nurse evolves from novice to expert, cue recognition and analysis become instinctual (Benner,
1984). Effective solutions for patient care situations are formed and implemented quickly. Developing sound
(appropriate) clinical judgment is the foundation of safe and competent nursing practice. The new graduate nurse
will be expected to demonstrate novice achievement of sound clinical judgment when taking the National Council
Licensure Examination, NCLEX-RN.

Theoretical Foundation of Clinical Judgment in Nursing Care
Patricia Benner (1984) is credited with developing the novice-to-expert model of nursing practice. Benner's
research demonstrated how nurses start out as novices in professional practice. Novice nursing actions are rule
driven. Advanced beginners become aware of how nursing actions are situation driven. Expert nurses can apply
clinical judgment within each patient's situation. Benner's research described how clinical judgment evolved with
experience and is summarized in Table 27.1.

Stage        Characteristics

1: Novice    Has no practical experience in the patient care situation
             Follows the rules and is inflexible

2: Advanced  Has minimal clinical experience
Beginner     Is task oriented with difficulty in establishing priorities, building nursing skills

TABLE 27.1 Characteristics of Benner's Novice-to-Expert Stages
1184  27 · Unfolding Case Study: Applying Clinical Judgment

      Stage          Characteristics

      3: Competent   Has 2-3 years of experience as a nurse
                     Is organized, self-directed, confident in their skill level
                     Begins to see situations holistically and can anticipate the next steps in care
                     Performs slowly but can cope with situational context by consciously organizing a plan of
                     care

      4: Proficient  Has 3-5 years of experience as a nurse
                     Understands the patient's situation
                     Can draw from past experiences and make decisions with ease

      5: Expert      Relies on intuition to integrate needed changes when providing patient care

      TABLE 27.1 Characteristics of Benner's Novice-to-Expert Stages

      Christine Tanner (2006) created a Clinical Judgment Model in the world of nursing. Tanner's research delineated the
      structure of how nurses think when using clinical judgment. Nurses first notice things when caring for patients.
      Nurses next interpret what the noticed things mean. Based on their analysis of the noticed things, nurses develop a
      prioritized plan of action. The nurse then implements the prioritized plan of action. After responding, the nurse
      evaluates the patient outcomes of the nursing actions and reflects on the effectiveness of the actions. Tanner's
      research on clinical judgment described the thinking process linked to the steps of the nursing process and is
      summarized in Table 27.2.

      Step           Characteristics

      Noticing       Awareness of the patient's subjective and objective data, situation, and environment

      Interpreting   Analyzing the subjective and objective data, situation, and environment for relevance, normality,
                     and completeness

      Responding Implementation of nursing actions based on the patient data, situation, and environment

      Reflecting     Evaluating the effectiveness of the nursing actions and reflecting on what actions were omitted or
                     need to be modified

      TABLE 27.2 The Four Steps of Tanner's Clinical Judgment Model

      Kathie Lasater (2007) is credited with the development of the clinical judgment competency assessment rubric for
      clinical nursing practice. Lasater based her rubric on Tanner's Clinical Judgment Model and added a numerical value
      for clinical instructors and preceptors to assess the current level of nursing students' and new graduates' clinical
      judgment. The four levels in Lasater's rubric are similar to the novice, advanced beginner, competent, proficient, and
      expert levels of Benner (Benner, 1984). Lasater's assessment levels are beginning, developing, accomplished, and
      exemplary (Lasater, 2007).

      What Part Does Clinical Judgment Play within the Nursing Process?

      Clinical judgment is the multifaceted thinking required while carrying out the steps of the nursing process when
      providing safe and effective nursing care. Nurses use clinical judgment during every step of the nursing process. The
      interaction between these concepts is shown in Figure 27.3. The Clinical Judgment Measurement Model (CJMM) is
      the framework for measuring both clinical judgment and decision making in assessment. Both clinical judgment and
      decision making are important factors in the education of nurses. Current evidence-based research has shown the
      need for a CJMM to bring all aspects of high-level reasoning and actions together (National Council of State Boards
      of Nursing, 2019).

      Access for free at openstax.org
27.1 · Clinical Judgment within the Nursing Process                                                                                      1185

FIGURE 27.3 Integration of Clinical Judgment Model and Nursing Process Model Tanner's Clinical Judgment Model, the nursing
process, and the Clinical Judgment Measurement Model work together for effective patient care. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Assessment requires the nurse to gather, review, and analyze the subjective and objective data of patients.
Assessment, or noticing, includes observation, auscultation, palpation, questioning, review of the patient's medical
record, and exploration of the patient's situation and sociocultural considerations. All the assessed data are
analyzed (or interpreted) for relevance and accuracy. Interpretation of the data also clusters data into normal versus
abnormal, expected versus unexpected, and stable or unstable. Analysis and interpretation are cognitive processes
and are not observed.

The data's analysis and interpretation provide the foundation for identifying the patient's problems (diagnoses) and
developing the plan of care based on the desired outcomes. Nurses use their knowledge of and experience with
similar situations when prioritizing the problems. The prioritization aspect of diagnosing and outcome planning is
also a cognitive process.

Implementation (or responding) refers to the nursing actions the nurse performs. Actions are prioritized and carried
out based (again) on the nurse's knowledge and previous experience. The nurse has determined the priority of each
required action in the same cognitive process of clinical judgment.

When evaluating (or reflecting) on the effectiveness of the nursing actions (responses), the nurse determines if the
patient outcomes were met or not met (another cognitive activity) and if the patient's status has improved,
remained the same, or worsened. The nurse also reflects on what actions were effective, what additional actions
need to be implemented, and what data were overlooked, beginning the nursing process and steps of clinical
judgment all over again.
1186  27 · Unfolding Case Study: Applying Clinical Judgment

      27.2 Measuring Clinical Judgment within Nursing Practice

      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

          · Explain why clinical judgment in nursing practice is measured
          · Explain the six steps of clinical judgment that are measured by NCLEX-RN
          · Correctly apply the six steps of clinical judgment to an unfolding case study

      Today's patients often have complex health problems, challenging the nurses who provide their care. For a nurse to
      provide safe and competent patient care, sound clinical judgment is essential (Dickison et al., 2018). Understanding
      the importance of clinical judgment to the practice of nursing was discussed in the previous section. How clinical
      judgment can be measured is the focus of this section.

      Why Measure Clinical Judgment?

      Measuring clinical judgment is important to demonstrate that a new graduate nurse can provide nursing care safely
      and competently. To this end, the National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) has developed and
      implemented the NCSBN Clinical Judgment Measurement Model (CJMM). The CJMM was developed specifically to
      determine new ways to test clinical judgment in new, or novice, nurses. It is used to develop a portion of the test
      items on the NCLEX-RN exam.

      NCSBN Clinical Judgment Measurement Model

      The NCSBN assessed the complex thinking within clinical judgment required for nursing practice (Dickison et al.,
      2018). The NCSBN decided to focus on nurses' decision making in patient care situations. The cognitive processes
      within clinical judgment are measured at six specific points: recognize cues, analyze cues, prioritize hypotheses,
      generate solutions, take actions, and evaluate outcomes.

      Recognize Cues
      The nurse's ability to recognize cues involves determining what information related to the patient's situation is the
      most important. This information includes the patient's subjective data and the objective data obtained from the
      physical assessment and the electronic health record. The health-care environment also plays a role in cue
      recognition.

      Analyze Cues
      The nurse's ability to analyze cues involves determining what the patient's cues mean within the context of the
      patient's situation. The recognized patient cues are analyzed for relevance and accuracy and organized in relation to
      the patient's situation. The analysis also groups the data into normal versus abnormal and expected versus
      unexpected.

      Prioritize Hypotheses
      The nurse's ability to prioritize hypotheses involves arranging the identified patient problems based on urgency.
      Prioritization includes maintaining the airway, breathing, or circulation; trends in data demonstrating the patient's
      condition is deteriorating; and preventing complications. Acknowledgment of a risk for a major complication is also
      considered when determining priorities.

      Generate Solutions
      The nurse's ability to generate solutions involves developing an individualized plan to achieve patient outcomes.
      The actions within the plan are designed to achieve the identified outcomes. Noting actions to avoid is also
      important when planning solutions.

      Take Actions
      The nurse's ability to take actions involves implementing what intervention(s) to do first, next, or in order of
      sequence. Nursing interventions are based on the patient's data, situation, and environment of care. These
      interventions may require the nurse to educate, prepare for a procedure, administer medications, and carry out
      orders.

      Evaluate Outcomes
      The nurse's ability to evaluate outcomes involves determining if the expected patient outcomes are met. The

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        27.2 · Measuring Clinical Judgment within Nursing Practice        1187

evaluation may determine the effectiveness of the nursing actions. Actions that are evaluated could include
temperature in a febrile patient after administering an antipyretic or prevention of declining blood pressure for a
patient in shock by administering fluids (NCSBN, 2019).

Table 27.3 provides questions the nurse can ask themselves to encourage use of clinical judgment.

Cognitive     Questions
Processes

Recognize     What information is relevant/irrelevant?
cues          What information is most important?
              What is of immediate concern?

Analyze cues  What patient conditions are consistent with the cues?
              Are there cues that support or contraindicate a particular condition?
              Why is a particular cue or subset of cues of concern?
              What other information would help establish the significance of a cue or set of cues?

Prioritize    Which explanations are most/least likely?
hypotheses    Which possible explanations are the most serious?

Generate      What are the desirable outcomes?
solutions     What interventions can achieve those outcomes?
              What should be avoided?

Take action   Which intervention or combination of interventions is most appropriate?
              How should the intervention/interventions be accomplished (performed, requested,
              administered, communicated, taught, documented, etc.)?

Evaluate      What signs point to improving/declining/unchanged status?
outcomes      Were the interventions effective?
              Would other interventions have been more effective?

TABLE 27.3 Clinical Judgment Measurement Model Questions (National Council of State Boards of Nursing, 2019)

        LINK TO LEARNING

The National Council of State Boards of Nursing provides information about the licensure exam
(https://openstax.org/r/77NCSBNtests) for new graduate nurses to help them prepare for the exam. The information
includes the NCSBN test plans, which provide a list of content and concepts on the exam, examples of test items,
and practice questions.

Unfolding Case Study: Clinical Judgment in Maternal-Newborn and Women's Health Nursing
Care

Bringing together the tools of the nursing process and the ability to use critical thinking and decision making is a
skill. To show that you can recognize, analyze, prioritize a hypothesis, generate solutions, take action, and ultimately
evaluate the outcome, complete the following case study questions.

Clinical Judgment Case Study Part One: Toni Seeks Contraceptive Care
As you work through the case study, be sure to carefully read the information presented. Answer the questions as
they arise during the unfolding case.

Recognizing Cues
Toni is a 16-year-old high school junior who has come to the family planning clinic to discuss options for birth
1188  27 · Unfolding Case Study: Applying Clinical Judgment

      control. Toni states she and her partner have discussed having sex. Toni does not want to get pregnant.

      Toni lives in an apartment with two younger siblings, her mother, and grandfather. Toni does not work and often
      takes care of her siblings while her mother and grandfather are at work.

      RCQ1.1 List the cues that are relevant to the purpose of Toni's visit to the family planning clinic.

      1.
      2.
      3.

      [Answers: 16 years of age, wants to discuss birth control, does not want to get pregnant]

      Analyzing Cues
      The nurse proceeds to obtain Toni's health history and learns that she:

      · is allergic to penicillin.
      · has a medical history positive for asthma and takes albuterol and budesonide. (AIRSUPRA).
      · is not currently taking any over-the-counter medications or herbal preparations.
      · has a negative history of STIs.
      · denies history of intimate contact except kissing and touching above the waist.
      · denies any surgeries.
      · has a family history of type 2 diabetes mellitus and HTN.

      Clinical Data:
      Height: 5 ft 3 in.
      Weight: 135 lb
      BP: 112/72

      ACQ1.1. What is the relevant information obtained by the nurse during the health history?

      Select all that apply.

      a. history of asthma
      b. taking budesonide for asthma
      c. allergy to penicillin
      d. family history of diabetes mellitus
      e. negative history of STIs
      f. weight 135 lb

      [Answers: a, b, c, e, f]

      Prioritizing Hypotheses
      Before the nurse begins to discuss birth control options, Toni informs the nurse that the only methods of birth
      control she has heard about are condoms, the shot, and the pill.

      PHQ1.1. The nurse identifies the priority problem at this time as        .

      a. knowledge deficit regarding birth control options
      b. risk for unintended pregnancy
      c. knowledge deficit regarding the transmission of STIs

      [Answer: a]

      Generating Solutions
      The nurse continues to discuss birth control options with Toni.

      GSQ1.1. What topics should the nurse include in the discussion about each method of birth control? Select all that
      apply.

      a. effectiveness
      b. adverse effects

      Access for free at openstax.org
                27.2 · Measuring Clinical Judgment within Nursing Practice                                            1189

   c. benefits
  d. how the option works
  e. how often to take a home pregnancy test
   f. consequences of unprotected sex

[Answers: a, b, c, d, f]

Taking Action
Nursing Notes: Toni expresses the need to learn more about different methods of birth control before making a
decision. The nurse discusses over-the-counter (OTC), combined hormonal, and progestin-only birth control options
with Toni. The nurse also provides pamphlets with illustrations of the methods.

Toni chooses combined oral contraceptives.

The following questions discuss the actions taken by the nurse. Identify if the actions taken by the nurse to assist
Toni in safely and effectively using combined oral contraceptives as a method of birth control were correct or
incorrect.

TAQ1.1. Discuss the signs and symptoms of adverse effects with Toni.

  a. action correct
  b. action incorrect

[Answer: a]

TAQ1.2. Provide Toni with a list of actions to take if she forgets to take a pill.

  a. action correct
  b. action incorrect

[Answer: a]

TAQ1.3. Discuss with Toni the use of the vaginal ring as a backup method.

  a. action correct
  b. action incorrect

[Answer: b]

TAQ1.4. Discuss with Toni a plan for setting a daily alarm to remember to take the pill.

  a. action correct
  b. action incorrect

[Answer: a]

Nursing Action                                                                      Correct Incorrect

Discussing the signs and symptoms of adverse effects with Toni                      

Providing Toni with a list of actions to take if she forgets to take a pill         

Discussing with Toni the use of the vaginal ring as a back-up method                  

Discussing with Toni a plan for setting a daily alarm to remember to take the pill  

Evaluating Outcomes
Nursing Notes: Three months later, the nurse makes a follow-up phone call to Toni. The nurse asks Toni several
questions about her experience using oral contraceptives.

EOQ1.1. Which statement made by Toni best demonstrates to the nurse that the patient's education about using
1190  27 · Unfolding Case Study: Applying Clinical Judgment

      combined oral contraceptives was effective?

        a. "I am lucky I am not pregnant."
        b. "The alarm I set on my cell phone has helped me remember to take the pill daily."
         c. "I went to my primary care doctor to find out why I had bleeding between my last two periods."
        d. "If I continue to take the pill for more than 2 years, I may not be able to get pregnant for at least 3 months."

      [Answer: b]

      Clinical Judgment Case Study Part Two: Toni Seeks Prenatal Care after Positive Pregnancy Test
      Take what you have learned in the preceding section and read carefully through the case study that follows. Answer
      each question as it arises.

      Recognizing Cues
      Two years later, Toni stops taking the combined oral contraceptives because she broke up with her partner. Toni
      begins a relationship with a new partner, and 3 months into the relationship, she misses her period. Toni buys a
      home pregnancy test, and it is positive. Toni informs her partner and her mother about the positive pregnancy test.

      Toni still lives at home with her siblings, mother, and grandfather. Both Toni and her partner work at a local
      convenience store.

      Toni makes an appointment with an obstetric care provider's office to begin prenatal care.

      Health History: When completing the health history forms, Toni provides the following information:

          · LMP: 8 weeks ago
          · This is her first pregnancy.
          · Current medications: albuterol and budesonide (AIRSUPRA)
          · Denies routine use of over-the-counter medications, herbal preparations, and recreational/illegal substance

              use. Denies tobacco use but has drunk alcohol on two different occasions since her LMP.

      RCQ2.1. What additional information would the nurse review in Toni's completed prenatal health history form?
      Select all that apply.

        a. gynecologic history
        b. genetic history
         c. STI history
        d. immunizations
        e. breast- or bottle-feeding desire

      [Answers: a, b, c, d]

      Analyzing Cues
      Nursing Notes: The nurse continues to review the information on Toni's completed prenatal health history form.

      Identify the information in Toni's health history that is a risk factor for complications during pregnancy and the
      information that is not a risk factor during pregnancy.

      ACQ2.1. History of asthma

        a. risk factor
        b. not a risk factor

      [Answer: a]

      ACQ2.2. Alcohol use since LMP

        a. risk factor
        b. not a risk factor

      [Answer: a]

      ACQ2.3. Family history of HTN

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     27.2 · Measuring Clinical Judgment within Nursing Practice  1191

  a. risk factor
  b. not a risk factor
[Answer: a]
ACQ2.4. Patient is 18 years old.
  a. risk factor
  b. not a risk factor
[Answer: a]
ACQ2.5. Tobacco use
  a. risk factor
  b. not a risk factor
[Answer: b]
ACQ2.6. Current prescribed medications
  a. risk factor
  b. not a risk factor
[Answer: b]

Cues (data)                                     Risk Factor Not a Risk Factor

History of asthma                                    

Alcohol use since LMP                                

Family history of HTN                                

Patient is 18 years old                              

Tobacco use                                            

Current prescribed medications                         

Prioritizing Hypotheses
Nursing Notes: Toni is now 18 weeks pregnant and arrives at the office for a prenatal appointment.

The nurse is reviewing Toni's prenatal lab work.

Lab Test                                Result

Blood type and Rh O neg

H&H                                     12.4 & 36.8

HIV                                     Neg

VDRL                                    Neg

UDS                                     Neg

Rubella titer                           Immune
1192  27 · Unfolding Case Study: Applying Clinical Judgment

                                       Lab Test              Result

                                       Sickle cell screen Neg

                                       Quad screen           Increased risk for neural tube defect

      PHQ2.1. After reviewing the lab report, the nurse identifies the priority problem as          .

      [Answer: increased risk for neural tube defect]

      Generating Solutions

      GSQ2.1. Based on the priority problem, the nurse anticipates the health-care provider will order a(n)                .

      a. obstetric ultrasound
      b. RhoGAM injection
      c. ferrous sulfate
      d. CVS testing

      [Answer: a]

      Taking Action
      Toni is now 28 weeks pregnant and is seen at the office for a routine prenatal visit. During the visit, the nurse
      provides education on topics specific to Toni's current gestation.

      TAQ2.1. What does the nurse include in the prenatal education at this time? Select all that apply.

      a. fetal movement counts
      b. purpose of Rho(D) immune globulin (RhoGAM) injection
      c. signs and symptoms of preterm labor
      d. signs and symptoms of preeclampsia
      e. genetic testing
      f. CVS

      [Answers: a, b, c, d]

      Evaluating Outcomes
      The nurse has completed providing prenatal education on the topics specific to Toni's current gestation.

      EOQ2.1. Which statement by Toni demonstrates the education provided by the nurse was effective?

      a. "I need to count the baby's movements 10 times a day."
      b. "I need to call the office or the on-call health-care provider if I notice any leaking of fluid from my vagina."
      c. "The baby's movements should start slowing down during this last part of the pregnancy."
      d. "I do not need to worry about getting preeclampsia, since my BP has been normal."

      [Answer: b]

      Clinical Judgment Case Study Part Three: Toni Receives Care during Labor and Delivery
      The preceding case study showed early prenatal care. The next portion of the case study will focus on Toni later in
      her pregnancy. Consider what items now become the priority in her care. Read the information carefully and answer
      the questions to the best of your ability.

      Recognizing Cues
      Toni is now 30 weeks pregnant. Early this morning, Toni noticed some occasional lower back pains. The pains have
      now become stronger and are occurring every 8 to 10 minutes. Toni also noticed some pink-tinged mucus on the
      toilet paper after voiding.

      Toni calls the office and discusses the backache and mucus with the prenatal nurse.

      RCQ3.1. What additional information related to the back pains is most important for the nurse to obtain from Toni

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       27.2 · Measuring Clinical Judgment within Nursing Practice  1193

now? Select 4 that apply.

  a. any leaking of fluid from the vagina
  b. swelling in her feet
   c. active fetal movements
  d. abdominal cramping
  e. pain with cramping
   f. any difficulty in walking

[Answers: a c, d, e]

Analyzing Cues
Nursing Notes: The nurse instructs Toni to go to the labor and delivery (L&D) triage unit for an assessment.

After arriving at the L&D triage area, Toni is placed on the external fetal heart rate monitor and uterine contraction
monitor, and the nurse performs an assessment on Toni.

ACQ3.1. Identify which assessment data obtained by the nurse are of most concern.

Select all that apply.

  a. contractions every 6 minutes; palpate moderate quality
  b. FHR 155 baseline, moderate variability
   c. BP: 120/78; T: 97.8° F (36.5° C); P: 88; R: 16
  d. pain level 4 out of 10
  e. trace pedal edema
   f. VE: cervix 2 cm/ 90 percent effaced/ vertex 0 station

[Answers: a, d, f]

Prioritizing Hypotheses
PHQ3.1. Based on the cues (data) that are of most concern, the nurse determines Toni

  a. is experiencing preterm labor
  b. has a placenta previa
   c. has experienced spontaneous rupture of membranes

[Answer: a]

Generating Solutions
The nurse notifies Toni's health-care provider (HCP) of the fetal monitor data and the patient's symptoms. The nurse
then receives a set of orders.

Identify the HCP orders that are expected and the orders that are not indicated for Toni's diagnosis.

GSQ3.1. Continuous external fetal heart rate and uterine contraction monitoring

  a. anticipated
  b. not indicated

[Answer: a]

GSQ3.2. Magnesium sulfate 4 g bolus IV over 30 minutes, then 2 g per hour continuously

  a. anticipated
  b. not indicated

[Answer: a]

GSQ3.3. Betamethasone (Alphatrex) 12.5 mg IM every 12 hours for two doses

  a. anticipated
  b. not indicated
1194  27 · Unfolding Case Study: Applying Clinical Judgment

      [Answer: a]
      GSQ3.4. Oxytocin (Pitocin) IV per protocol

        a. anticipated
        b. not indicated
      [Answer: b]
      GSQ3.5. Prepare for cesarean section
        a. anticipated
        b. not indicated
      [Answer: b]
      GSQ3.6. Regular diet
        a. anticipated
        b. not indicated
      [Answer: b]

      HCP Prescription or Order                                                       Anticipated Not Indicated

      Continuous external fetal heart rate and uterine contraction monitoring         

      Magnesium sulfate 4 g bolus IV over 30 minutes, then 2 g per hour continuously  

      Betamethasone (Alphatrex)12.5 mg IM every 12 hours for two doses                

      Oxytocin (Pitocin) IV per protocol                                                

      Prepare for cesarean section                                                      

      Regular diet                                                                      

      Taking Action
      Nursing Notes: The nurse implements the health-care provider's orders. The following morning, Toni informs the
      nurse that she felt a gush of fluid coming from her vagina. She now feels lower abdominal pains coming and going
      every 5 minutes.

      The FHR is 156. Uterine contractions are tracing every 5 minutes, lasting 45 seconds.

      TAQ3.1. What is the nurse's next action?

        a. Check Toni's temperature.
        b. Palpate the uterus.
         c. Notify the health-care provider.
        d. Assess the color, amount, and consistency of the fluid.

      [Answer: d]

      Evaluate Outcomes
      Nursing Notes: Preterm rupture of membranes is confirmed. The nurse also performs a vaginal exam, and Toni's
      cervix is 4 cm/ 100 percent effaced/ vertex is +1 station. The nurse informs the HCP of the rupture of membranes,
      clear fluid, and change in vaginal exam. The nurse also informs the neonatal unit of Toni's current status and
      expected preterm delivery.

      EOQ3.1. Additional actions the nurse could anticipate and perform before notifying the HCP?

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    27.2 · Measuring Clinical Judgment within Nursing Practice  1195

List two or three of the additional actions.

1.
2.
3.

[Answers: Assess FHTs and uterine contraction pattern for strength and frequency.

Obtain Toni's vital signs.

Obtain a neonatal consult to talk with parents due to delivering a preterm infant.]

Nursing Notes: Two hours after rupture of membranes, Toni receives an epidural for labor discomfort.

Six hours later, Toni spontaneously delivers a female infant, who cries with minimal stimulation.

The neonatal team is present and assigns an Apgar score of 5 at 1 minute and 9 at 5 minutes.

Ten minutes after the delivery of the baby, the placenta delivers spontaneously. The assessment of the placenta
determines the placenta to be intact. The QBL is determined to be 350 mL. The health-care provider repairs a first-
degree perineal laceration.

Toni's partner and mother were supportive during Toni's labor and birth.

Clinical Judgment Case Study Part Four: Toni Receives Postpartum Care
Toni was able to stop at the NICU to visit the baby as she was being transferred from the L&D unit to the mother/
baby unit.

Recognizing Cues
It is 3 hours after delivery, and Toni is in the mother/baby unit.

RCQ4.1. Toni notices a gush of fluid from her vagina and informs the nurse. The nurse assesses Toni. What data
does the nurse obtain? Select all that apply.

a. consistency and location of the fundus
b. consistency, amount, and color of the lochia
c. vital signs
d. status of the baby
e. location of Toni's support person
f. when Toni last voided

[Answers: a, b, c, f]

Analyzing Cues
ACQ4.1. Which cue (data) obtained during the nurse's assessment of Toni is of most concern?

a. Fundus is at the umbilicus, deviated to the right, and firms with massage.
b. Lochia is heavy, dark red, with two 5-cm clots.
c. BP is 110/70; P is 96.
d. Toni has not voided since delivery.

[Answer: b]

Prioritizing Hypotheses

PHQ4.1. Based on the assessment cues (data) that are most concerning, the nurse concludes the priority need for

Toni at this time is to     .

a. empty her bladder
b. use the breast pump
c. take pain medication
d. be instructed to massage her uterus

[Answer: a]
1196  27 · Unfolding Case Study: Applying Clinical Judgment

      Generating Solutions
      GSQ4.1. Based on the identified priority need, what are the anticipated actions by the nurse in the correct
      sequence?

        1. Assist Toni back into the bed.
        2. Assist Toni to sit on the side of the bed.
        3. Assess Toni's fundus and lochia.
        4. Ask Toni if she is experiencing any dizziness.
        5. Instruct Toni in performing pericare.
        6. Assist Toni to the bathroom.

        a. 1, 3, 5, 6. 4, 2
        b. 2, 4, 6, 5, 1, 3
         c. 3, 2, 6, 5, 4, 1
        d. 2, 6, 4, 1, 3, 5

      [Answer: b]

      Taking Action
      The nurse is making rounds on Toni 2 hours later. Toni expresses the following concerns to the nurse:

          · providing breast milk for the baby
          · how often she and her partner can go to the NICU
          · how much bleeding is considered normal
          · the frequency and amount of urination

      TAQ4.1. Identify the most important nursing education based on Toni's current concerns.

        a. Have Toni empty her bladder.
        b. Show Toni how to use the breast pump.
         c. Instruct Toni to call if bleeding is through more than one pad per hour.
        d. Allow Toni's partner to take Toni to the NICU.

      [Answer: c]

      Evaluate Outcomes
      The nurse discusses the normal fluid shift that occurs in the immediate postpartum period. She reinforces the
      normal amount of blood loss (one pad per 1 to 2 hours) and shows Toni how to locate, assess, and massage the
      uterus. The nurse also instructs Toni to call the NICU about times to visit the baby.

      EOQ4.1. Which statement by Toni demonstrates the education provided by the nurse was effective? Select all that
      apply.

        a. "I should go to the bathroom every 2 to 3 hours for the next 2 days."
        b. "I will expect the uterus to need to be massaged every hour."
         c. "The NICU nurse let me know I can see the baby anytime."
        d. "I should use the restroom if my uterus is above my belly button."
        e. "Can you call the NICU to see if it's okay for me to see the baby?"
         f. "My uterus should be firm whenever I check it."
        g. "My bleeding should be red for the next few days."
        h. "I may pass small blood clots for the next day or so, but not larger than a golf ball."

      [Answers: a, c, d, f, g, h]

      Clinical Judgment Case Study Part Five: Toni's Newborn Receives Care during the First Hours of Life
      We will now move from Toni to her newborn as the primary character in our case study. Read through each prompt
      and answer the questions to the best of your ability.

      Recognizing Cues
      Toni has successfully delivered. The baby, Drew, is immediately cared for by the baby nurse and the NICU team that

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                27.2 · Measuring Clinical Judgment within Nursing Practice  1197

had been called for the delivery of a 30-week-gestation neonate. The infant's initial Apgar at 1 minute is 5, but after
briskly drying the newborn and placing her on the warmed incubator bed, her 5-minute Apgar is 9. Drew's weight is
1,450 g.

RCQ5.1. What additional monitoring would the nurse want to have placed for this newborn?

a. a temperature probe to monitor thermoregulation during the transitional period
b. telemetry to monitor cardiac and pulmonary function
c. a Foley catheter to monitor urine output and kidney function closely
d. an arterial umbilical catheter to monitor blood pressure and obtain frequent lab work.

[Answer: a]

Analyzing Cues
The premature newborn is taken to the NICU.

After arrival at the NICU, the NICU nurse keeps the newborn in the warmed incubator, connects her to cardiac and
respiratory monitoring equipment, attaches a temperature probe, and performs an assessment.

ACQ5.1. Identify which assessment data obtained by the nurse is of most concern. Select all that apply.

a. heart rate of 156
b. pulse oximetry saturation of 72 percent
c. current temperature of 96.1° F (35.6° C)
d. respiratory rate of 20 with an irregular breathing pattern, including long pauses
e. acrocyanosis to hands and feet

[Answers: b, c, d]

Prioritizing Hypotheses

PHQ5.1. Based on the preceding assessment data, the nurse determines Drew             .

a. is hypothermic and intermittently apneic
b. is tachycardic and cyanotic, requiring a cardiology consult
c. is currently in respiratory distress

[Answers: a]

Generating Solutions
The nurse prepares to notify the health-care provider of Drew's current temperature, irregular breathing pattern,
and low oxygen saturation. Identify the interventions the nurse would anticipate or not anticipate being ordered by
the health-care provider for Drew's current condition.

GSQ5.1. Reapply the temperature monitoring device.

a. anticipated
b. not anticipated

[Answer: a]

GSQ5.2. Assess the infant's blood glucose.

a. anticipated
b. not anticipated

[Answer: a]

GSQ5.3. Bottle-feed the infant with donor breast milk.

a. anticipated
b. not anticipated

[Answer: b]
1198  27 · Unfolding Case Study: Applying Clinical Judgment

      GSQ5.4. Place oxygen via nasal CPAP to the infant's nares.
        a. anticipated
        b. not anticipated

      [Answer: a]
      GSQ5.5. Decrease the incubator heating setting.

        a. anticipated
        b. not anticipated
      [Answer: b]

      HCP Prescription or Order                                   Anticipated Not Anticipated

      Reapply the temperature monitoring device.                  

      Assess the infant's blood glucose.                          

      Bottle-feed the infant with donor breast milk.                

      Place oxygen via nasal CPAP to the infant's nares.          

      Decrease the incubator heating setting.                     

      Taking Action
      The nurse has implemented the ordered interventions. Drew continues to have oxygen saturations in the high 70
      percent or low 80 percent and exhibits much agitation and crying.

      TAQ5.1. What is the nurse's next action?

        a. Check the placement of the CPAP nasal prongs.
        b. Reapply the temperature monitoring device.
         c. Call the health-care provider.
        d. Prepare for newborn resuscitation.

      [Answer: a]

      Evaluate Outcomes
      The nurse implements the next action. After 5 minutes, the nurse evaluates Drew to determine the effectiveness of
      the actions implemented by the nurse.

      EOQ5.1. What findings would indicate that positive outcomes were achieved by the actions implemented by the
      nurse? Select all that apply.

        a. Temperature is now 98.8° F (37.1° C).
        b. RR is 41.
         c. Pulse oximeter reads 91 percent.
        d. Acrocyanosis of the feet is present.
        e. The NIPS (Neonatal Infant Pain Score) is 3.

      [Answers: a, b, c]

      Clinical Judgment Case Study Part Six: Toni's Newborn Receives Care during the First Days of Life
      After the initial transition to extrauterine life, we continue to care for Drew. Drew is now a newborn and is becoming
      more accustomed to life outside the uterus. Read each piece of the case study and be sure to answer each question.

      Recognizing Cues
      Drew is now 3 days old and has been successfully weaned off the nasal CPAP. The nurse, when assessing Drew at

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       27.2 · Measuring Clinical Judgment within Nursing Practice  1199

the beginning of the shift, notes that Drew has a noticeable yellow tinge to her skin, especially on the face and
abdomen.

RCQ6.1. What additional information (cues) would the nurse obtain at this time?

  a. when the newborn last had a bath
  b. the most recent bilirubin level
   c. the newborn's current vital signs
  d. the newborn's current blood glucose level

[Answer: b]

Analyzing Cues
ACQ6.1. Which cue obtained during the nurse's assessment is of most concern?

  a. newborn's last bath at 2100 last evening
  b. total bilirubin 22 mg/dL (expected <13 mg/dL)
   c. current vital signs: T 99° F (37.2° C), RR 36, HR 142
  d. intake and output for the past 24 hours: +56 mL with a urine output averaging 2.1 mL/kg/hr

[Answer: b]

Prioritizing Hypotheses
PHQ6.1. Based on the assessment cues, the nurse concludes the priority need for Drew at this time is to

               .

  a. place Drew under bilirubin light therapy per the protocol
  b. give Drew a bath this shift
   c. prepare to give Drew a fluid bolus
  d. obtain blood with a heel stick for the newborn screen test

[Answers: a]

Generating Solutions
GSQ6.1. Based on the identified priority need; the nurse begins to plan their actions. Place the nursing actions in
the correct sequence.

  1. Place eye coverings on the newborn for safety while under the phototherapy lights.
  2. Place the infant under the phototherapy lights.
  3. Verify the order for phototherapy lights.
  4. Remove the newborn's blankets and clothing.

  a. 3, 4, 1, 2
  b. 4, 3, 2, 1
   c. 1, 2, 4, 3
  d. 1, 2, 3, 4

[Answers a]

Taking Action
Drew has been under the bilirubin therapy lights for the past 2 hours. Drew has begun to cry, suck on her fist, and
smack her lips.

TAQ6.1. What is the priority nursing intervention at this time?

  a. Inform the birthing parent that Drew is showing signs of hunger and can be fed at this time.
  b. Notify the health-care provider that Drew is in pain and requires medication.
   c. Recheck the bilirubin level with the handheld bilirubin monitoring unit.
  d. Continue bilirubin light therapy.

[Answer: a]
1200  27 · Unfolding Case Study: Applying Clinical Judgment

      Evaluate Outcomes
      The NICU nurse educates Toni on how best to feed Drew while the phototherapy is in place. Toni has been pumping
      and working with lactation support staff to try to breast-feed.

      EOQ6.1 Which statement by Toni indicates the education is effective?

        a. "I will need to pump my breasts every hour to ensure there is enough breast milk."
        b. "I will need to change to formula if I do not produce enough breast milk."
         c. "I will feed Drew frequently and supplement with donor milk if my breast milk supply runs out or breast-

              feeding is not going well."
        d. "Drew will need to remain under the bilirubin therapy lights, but I will be able to use a bottle when it is time for

              feeding."

      [Answer: c]

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            27 · Summary 1201

Summary

27.1 Clinical Judgment within the Nursing Process

Nurses use the nursing process when providing patient care. Clinical judgment is the thinking the nurse performs
when carrying out the steps of the nursing process. Clinical judgment is essential for providing safe and effective
nursing care that enhances the achievement of patient outcomes.

27.2 Measuring Clinical Judgment within Nursing Practice

The measurement of clinical judgment is essential to demonstrate that a new graduate nurse is prepared to provide
safe and competent patient care. Understanding how clinical judgment is measured prepares the new graduate for
the Next Generation of NCLEX-RN question formats.

To recap, we have met Toni, been with her through the early days of her pregnancy, supported her in preterm labor,
followed her newborn, Drew, into the nursery, and helped Toni make decisions about the care of her newborn as
Drew transitions to extrauterine life. You have been able to use your skills of recognizing, analyzing, prioritizing,
generating a solution, taking action, and evaluating outcomes. Awareness of the steps of the Clinical Judgment
Measurement Model used on the NCLEX-RN exam will assist you to be successful on the NCLEX-RN and to be a safe
and competent beginning generalist nurse.

Key Terms

analyze cues ability to determine what the patient cues mean within the context of the patient situation
clinical judgment cognitive, decision-making process nurses perform while carrying out the nursing process
evaluate outcomes ability to determine if the expected patient outcomes are met
generate solutions ability to develop a plan to achieve patient outcomes
prioritize hypotheses ability to arrange the identified patient problems based on urgency
recognize cues ability to determine what information related to the patient situation is most important
take actions ability to implement what intervention(s) to do first, next, or in order of sequence

Assessments

Review Questions

    1. What does the nursing process describe?
           a. what nurses do
           b. how nurses think
           c. where nurses provide care
           d. who nurses care for

    2. Whose theoretical model describes how clinical judgment evolves with experience?
           a. Benner
           b. Tanner
           c. Lasater
           d. Nightingale

    3. What two steps of the CJMM are included in the assessment step of the nursing process?
           a. noticing cues and evaluating outcomes
           b. analyzing cues and generating solutions
           c. noticing and analyzing cues
           d. analyzing cues and taking action

    4. What organization developed the CJMM?
           a. ACOG
           b. ANA
           c. AWHONN
1202 27 · References

           d. NCSBN

    5. Developing a plan to achieve patient outcomes is included in which step of the CJMM?
           a. prioritizing hypotheses
           b. generating solutions
           c. taking action
           d. evaluating outcomes

Check Your Understanding Questions

    1. How do the steps of the nursing process affect patient outcomes?
    2. How did Lasater incorporate Tanner's Model of Clinical Judgment?
    3. Why is it important to measure clinical judgment in a graduate nurse?
    4. How do the steps of the CJMM demonstrate how a nurse thinks when providing patient care?

Reflection Questions

    1. Explain how clinical judgment is used when carrying out each step in the nursing process.
    2. Why is it important for the NCLEX-RN to measure how a graduate nurse thinks when taking care of patients?

References

American Nurses Association. (2021). Nursing: Scope and standards of practice (4th ed.). American Nurses
    Association.

Benner, P. A. (1984). From novice to expert: Excellence and power in clinical nursing practice. Addison-Wesley
    Publishing.

Benner, P., Tanner, C., & Chesla, C. (2009). From novice to expert: Excellence and power in clinical nursing practice
    (2nd ed.). Springer Publishing.

Dickison, P., Haerling, K. A., & Lasater, K. (2018). Integrating the National Council of State Boards of Nursing Clinical
   Judgment Model into nursing education frameworks. Journal of Nursing Education, 58(2), 72-78. https://doi.org/
    10.3928/01484834-20190122-03

Lasater, K. (2007). Clinical judgment development: Using simulation to create an assessment rubric. The Journal of
   Nursing Education, 46(11), 496-503. https://doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20071101-04

Magley, M., Hinson, M. R., & Haddad, L. M. Eclampsia (Nursing) [Updated 2023, January 30]. StatPearls [Internet].
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK570548/

National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2019, Winter). The layers of the Clinical Judgment Measurement
   Model. Next Generation NCLEX News, 3-5.

Nibbelink, C. W., & Brewer, B. B. (2018). Decision-making in nursing practice: An integrative literature review.
   Journal of Clinical Nursing, 27(5-6), 917-928. https://doi.org/10.1111/jocn.14151

Tanner, C. A. (2006). Thinking like a nurse: A research-based model of clinical judgment in nursing. Journal of
   Nursing Education, 45(6), 204-211. https://doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20060601-04

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   Answer Key 1203

ANSWER KEY

Chapter 11

Unfolding Case Study

    1. positive home pregnancy test; breasts are tender; most recent period was 6 weeks ago
        Rationale: The patient has cues indicating she is pregnant: positive pregnancy test, amenorrhea, and breast
        tenderness. The additional information is not relevant to why the patient came to the office.

    2. a, b, f
        Rationale: Nonimmune to rubella places the fetus at risk for congenital rubella
        Elevated GCT requires additional testing to determine gestational diabetes
        GBS carrier status places fetus at risk for neonatal infection
        H&H are expected values due to hemodilution
        US results are expected

Chapter 12

Unfolding Case Study

    1. a
        Rationale: The patient is asking questions about the diagnosis. The nurse should provide teaching regarding
        gestational diabetes.

    2. a, b, d, e, h, i
        Rationale: Nutrition education is the first level of glycemic control.
        Education on how to monitor fasting and 2-hour postprandial blood glucose readings and the expected range
        provide a measure of glycemic control.
        Daily FMCs provide reassurance of fetal well-being.
        Gestational diabetes is associated with an increased incidence of PIH.
        Exercise helps regulate blood glucose.
        Relaxation techniques are included in childbirth education.
        Gestational diabetes (GD) is not associated with a planned cesarean birth.
        GD diagnosed in the third trimester is not associated with an increased risk for congenital anomalies.

Chapter 13

Unfolding Case Study

1.              Education Point 1  Education Point 2               Education Point 3
      Prenatal
      Test

Fetal            performed daily    fetus should move 10 times      requires daily reporting to
movement                           within 1 hour                   the HCP
count
                 performed daily    amniotic fluid should measure   fetal weight should be
Ultrasound                         between 5 and 25 cm             below the 10th percentile
1204 Answer Key

    Nonstress     performed                  reactive indicates need for        nonreactive indicates need
    test         monthly                    further testing                    for further testing

    Biophysical   performed                  ordered when the NST is            ordered when the NST is
    profile      every other week           reactive                           nonreactive

    Rationale: Fetal movement counts are performed daily. The normal amount of amniotic fluid is 5 to 25 cm.

    Nonreactive NST results are nonreassuring, and a BPP is recommended as follow-up. The fetus does not

    move the expected number of times, i.e., move 10 times within a 2-hour period, and the patient is required to

    report the test result only when the fetus does not meet the expected number of movements within the

    2-hour period. Ultrasound during pregnancy is not routinely performed on a daily basis. The expected fetal

    weight is between the 10th and 90th percentile. NST results are expected to be reactive to demonstrate fetal

    well-being and are performed weekly. BPP is not indicated if NST is reactive and are most often performed

    weekly.

2.

    Patient Statement                                                               Effective Ineffective

    I will need to sign a consent for the NST every time it is obtained.                

    I can lie on my side during the NST.                                                

    The NST is obtained by using an external fetal monitor.                             

    Each time I feel the baby move during the NST, I will press the marker button.      

    The baby's heart rate needs to stay within the baseline for the NST to be           
    reactive.

    Rationale: NST is noninvasive and does not require written consent before being obtained. NST can be
    obtained in the side-lying and semi-Fowler positions. NST is obtained using the external fetal and contraction
    monitor. The pregnant person is instructed to press the marker button each time the fetus moves. The FHR is
    expected to rise above the FHR baseline a minimum of 15 beats per minute for 15 seconds at least two times
    within 20 minutes to be reactive.

Chapter 18

Unfolding Case Study

1. 36-year-old, G1 P0; induction of labor; gestational diabetes; 39 weeks' gestation; urine positive for GBS;

    36-week ultrasound indicates EFW 3150 g (7 lb); fundal height at 39 weeks is 40 cm; allergy to penicillin

    Rationale: Age is >35, parity, 39 weeks with gestational diabetes and possible macrosomia, need to treat GBS

    with PCN alternative during induction.

2.

    Prenatal Data                                                         Risk Factor Not a Risk Factor

    Gestational diabetes                                                              

    Estimated fetal weight (EFW) of 3,150 g at 36 weeks' gestation                    

    A negative                                                                        

    36 years old                                                                      

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  Answer Key 1205

GBS status                                          
BP range 118-128/64-80
                                                    

        Rationale: Age, gestational diabetes, and the EFW increase the risk for prolonged labor and cesarean birth.
        Gestational diabetes and EFW increase the risk for labor shoulder dystocia.
        GBS status increases the risk for infection.
        Blood type and BP range are normal and not linked to complications of labor.

Chapter 19

Unfolding Case Study

    1. Option 1: a; Option 2: c

    Rationale: The labor has progressed only 0.5 cm in 4 hours, indicating the active phase of labor is slower than
    expected.
    Failure of fetal descent is a problem in the second stage of labor.
    Increased risk of postpartum hemorrhage is a problem after the complete labor and birth process.
    Because the contractions are being monitored externally, the strength can only be estimated by palpation.
    The fetal heart rate pattern is expected and not the priority.
2. HCP Order AnticipatedNot IndicatedContraindicated

Increase IVF of LR to 125 mL/hr                   

Regular diet                                      

Discontinue Pitocin infusion                      

Start magnesium sulfate 40 g/liter at 2 g/hr      

Oxygen at 6 L/min via face mask                   

Insert fetal scalp electrode now                  

Prepare patient for amniotomy                     

Prepare patient for insertion of intrauterine   
pressure catheter

Rationale: Fluid increase is anticipated due to increase in maternal temp.
Regular diet is contraindicated due to decrease in peristalsis during active labor.
There is no indication for discontinuing the Pitocin infusion because the contraction pattern and fetal heart
rate (FHR) are normal.
No indication for starting magnesium sulfate or oxygen because the maternal vital signs (VS) and FHR are
normal.
Nurse application of a fetal scalp electrode (FSE) is contraindicated because membranes are intact.
Preparing the patient for an amniotomy and insertion of an intrauterine pressure catheter (IUPC) is
anticipated to monitor the contraction pattern more accurately.
1206 Answer Key

Chapter 21

Unfolding Case Study

1. e, g, h

    Rationale: The patient's lochia is heavier than normal due to displacement of the uterus by the bladder, as

    indicated by the position of the uterus. Massaging the uterus will expel anymore lochia and cause it to

    become firm. Emptying the bladder will change the lochia and consistency of the uterus to normal

    expectations. Determining the cumulative QBL will show if the amount of bleeding indicates a postpartum

    hemorrhage. Administration of pain medication and education are not the priority nursing actions at this time;

    the priority is adequate perfusion. Insertion of a Foley catheter is an invasive procedure and should not be

    performed unless the patient is unable to void spontaneously.

2.

    Patient Data  Data Obtained prior to Nursing      New Patient Data after  Effective, Ineffective,
                  Actions                             Nursing Actions         or Unchanged

    Pain/location 5/uterine cramping                  2/uterine cramping      a. effective

    Location of   Deviated to right/2 finger breaths  Midline/at the umbilicus a. effective
    fundus        above umbilicus

    Consistency   Boggy                               Firm                    a. effective
    of fundus

    Color of      Rubra                               Rubra                   c. unchanged
    lochia

    Amount of     Saturated peripad and passed two    Saturated ¼ of the      a. effective
    lochia        walnut-sized clots                  peripad

    Laceration    Intact                              Intact                  c. unchanged

    Perineum      Soft, no bruising                   Soft, no bruising       c. unchanged

        Rationale: Massaging the uterus and assisting the patient to void are effective, as evidenced by the location
        and consistency of the uterus, amount of lochia, and decrease in the pain level. The data for the color of the
        lochia and assessment of the laceration and perineum are the same, therefore, unchanged.

Chapter 22

Unfolding Case Study

    1. Respirations: 66; pulse oximetry, 92%, respirations: shallow, irregular; nasal flaring; Marcus has not been
        interested in nursing
        Rationale: Pulse oximetry is lower than expected, respirations are shallow, and nasal flaring is present. All are
        linked to increased respiratory effort.
        Increased respiratory effort interferes with a newborn's ability to breast feed.
        Temperature, heart rate, color, and glucose are expected values.

    2. c
        Rationale: Nasal flaring indicates increased respiratory effort.
        The respiratory rate is above normal.
        The pulse oximetry reading is at the lowest normal value.
        The glucose in in the normal range for a newborn.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                Answer Key 1207

Chapter 23

Unfolding Case Study

    1. Option 1: c; Option 2: b
        Rationale: Nasal flaring indicates increased respiratory effort. The color of the newborn is within normal
        limits, so respiratory distress is not supported. The glucose is in the normal range for a newborn, so
        hypoglycemia is not supported.

    2. b, c, e, f, g
        Rationale: Closer observation of respiratory effort and oxygenation is provided within the transitional nursery
        when compared to the admission nursery. Increased work of breathing requires more energy to maintain
        oxygenation, placing the infant at risk for hypothermia. The radiant warmer helps to prevent heat loss more
        effectively than skin-to-skin.
        Continuous oxygenation and monitoring of pulse oximetry assists with prevention of hypoxia and respiratory
        distress.
        NPO status is required to prevent hypoxia that can occur when breast-feeding.

Chapter 25

Unfolding Case Study

    1. b
        Rationale: Placing the infant under the radiant warmer is first because this allows for full observation and
        access of the newborn without increasing the risk for hypothermia. Placing the infant under the oxygen hood
        with continuous oxygen flow is second because this action addresses the primary problem. Performing the
        respiratory assessment third provides a baseline assessment of the primary problem. Continuous pulse
        oximetry is fourth because it provides a way to monitor the effectiveness of the nursing actions. The infant
        was separated from the mother, so breast feeding was not possible and NPO status would now need to be
        maintained. The chest x-ray is last because it can be obtained with the infant under the radiant warmer and
        after the actions to oxygenate and assess respiratory status have been implemented.

    2. temperature: b; heart rate: a; respiration rate: a; breath sounds: b; color: b; nasal flaring: a; retractions: a
        Rationale: Heart and respiratory rate have decreased, showing improvement. The absence of nasal flaring
        and retractions demonstrate improvement in respiratory effort, showing improvement. Temperature, breath
        sounds, and color are the same, therefore unchanged.
1208 Answer Key
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      Index 1209

INDEX

A                                  Alexander Technique 642              465, 595, 600, 603, 607, 611,
                                   alpha-fetoprotein 595, 600, 603      613
AAP 1041, 1043                     Alterations in perfusion 860       amniotic fluid index (AFI) 613
abdominal binder 946, 949          Alzheimer's 73, 80, 82             amniotomy 782, 822
abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB)    ambulation 939, 945, 948           amniotomy hook 717
                                   amenorrhea 230                     Ampicillin 329, 1076
  265                              American Academy of Family         Amsel diagnostic criteria 324
abortion 13, 15, 21, 25, 25, 201,                                     ANA Standards of Practice 21
                                     Physicians 75                    analgesia 753, 755
  231, 242, 501, 511, 519, 557,    American Academy of Nursing        analgesic 335, 1061
  561, 564, 565                                                       analyze cues 1186
absent FHR variability 702           14                               anaphylactoid syndrome of
absent variability 725             American Academy of Pediatrics       pregnancy (ASP) 853
abstinence 208                                                        and advanced maternal age 835
accelerations 696, 705               14, 25, 1039, 1075, 1083, 1088   anemia 219, 223, 230, 242, 425,
acetaminophen 241, 243, 906,       American Academy of Pediatrics       438, 446, 503, 513, 517, 524,
  930, 949, 1061, 1068, 1074                                            527, 538, 548, 551, 559, 563,
acid attack 401                      (AAP) 964, 977, 1114, 1135         565, 727
acne 431, 466, 1072                American Cancer Society 90,        anencephaly 458, 466, 605
ACOG 85, 560, 592, 610                                                aneuploidy 156, 162, 592, 601
acquaintance rape 392                353                              Angiotensin receptor blockers
acquired heart disease 839         American College of Nurse            (ARBs) 127
acquired immunodeficiency                                             Angiotensin-converting enzyme
  syndrome 321                       Midwives 635                       (ACE) inhibitors 127
acrocyanosis 966, 1012             American College of Obstetricians  Annovera 224
active genital herpes 827                                             anorexia 439
active phase 672, 678                and Gynecologists 14, 17, 85,    Anorexia nervosa 105
acupressure 742, 750                 184, 242, 542, 592, 610, 633,    anovulation 165
acupuncture 264, 269, 270, 274,      847, 932, 952                    antepartum fetal death 1164
  742, 750                         American College of Obstetricians  antepartum hemorrhage 1165
acyanotic 1117                       and Gynecologists (ACOG) 283,    anterior fontanelle 1003
acyclovir (Zovirax) 318              539, 964                         antibiotic 350
adenomyosis 222                    American College of Radiology      antibiotic therapy 1140
adjustment disorder 950              (ACR) 87                         antibiotics 274, 283, 290, 647,
adolescent pregnancy 538           American Heart Association           726, 830, 839, 928, 931, 936
adoption 784                         1083                             antibody titer 608
adrenogenital syndrome 1021        American Heart Association         anticipatory guidance 1053,
advanced maternal age 121,           (AHA) 977                          1081
  557, 560, 565, 832               American Nurses Association 21     anticoagulant therapy 839
affirmations 640, 673              American Society for Colposcopy    anticoagulants 895
AFP 595, 603                         and Cervical Pathology 284       antihypertensive 836, 839
age-related rape 392               American Society for Reproductive  antimicrobial 332
Agency for Healthcare Research       Medicine 184                     antiphospholipid syndrome 613
  and Quality 44                   American Society for Reproductive  antipyretics 335, 726, 929
aggravated rape 392                  Medicine (ASRM) 173
AIDS 321                           Aminoglycosides 127
Albuterol 552                      Amitriptyline (Elavil) 336
                                   amniocentesis 163, 596, 619,
                                     1114
                                   amnioinfusion 826, 827, 834
                                   amniotic fluid 423, 462, 464,
1210 Index

antiretroviral medications 81      aztreonam 332                     birthing place 469
antral follicles 176                                                 Bishop score 824
anxiety 73, 78, 82, 92, 100, 110,  B                                 bismuth ointment (Anusol) 446
                                                                     bisphosphonate 263
  264, 274, 385, 388, 392, 395,    baby acne 1072                    bladder distention 787
  402, 405, 443, 742, 744, 754     baby-friendly hospital 470        bladder infection 439
aortic stenosis 839                Baby-Friendly Initiative (BFI)    blastocyst 154, 182, 458, 458
Apgar 965, 966, 977                                                  blended famil 41
Apgar assessment 964                 633                             blighted ovum 557
Apgar score 1036                   bacterial meningitis 1076         blood glucose 128, 1069
apnea 1001, 1070                   bacterial STI 306                 Blood pressure cuff 790
apnea of prematurity (AOP) 1133    bacterial vaginitis (BV) 324      blood transfusion 939
appropriate for gestational age    Bactrim 332                       blood volume 425, 427
  (AGA) 1022                       bag-valve mask 968, 977           bodily autonomy 393
arcuate 278                        Bakri Balloon 937                 bonding 1141
arm recoil 1021                    Ballard Score 1019                bowel discomfort 910
aromatherapy 742, 750              Barlow maneuver 1009              brachial palsy 1009
arterial thrombotic disease 268    barrier method 210, 217, 238,     brachial plexus injury (BPI) 1107
arthritis 73                                                         Bradley Method 637
ASCCP 284                            240                             bradycardia 698, 725, 726,
Ask Suicide-Screening Toolkit 85   Bartholin's cyst 283
asocial stage 1141                 Bartholin's gland 282               1133, 1143
asphyxia 1169                      basal body temperature 207        brain injury 1066, 1070
Aspirin 84, 539, 545, 574, 575,    basal body temperature method     Braxton Hicks contractions 423,
  895
ASRM 184                             205                               449, 521
assessment 1182                    BBT 207                           Brazelton Behavioral
Association of Women's Health,     BBT thermometer 207
  Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses    bearing down effort 785             Assessment 1023
  16, 21, 932                      benign breast changes 346         BRCA1 356
Association of Women's Health,     benign growth 279                 BRCA2 356
  Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses    benign prostatic hyperplasia 119  breast cancer 72, 76, 85
  (AWHONN) 638, 794                beta-human chorionic              breast cancer screening 354,
asthma 77, 81, 551
Asymptomatic bacteriuria 336         gonadotropin (beta-hCG) 263       374
attachment 1109, 1141              bicornuate 278                    breast care 908, 916
augmentation of labor 844          bili blanket 1068                 breast exam 15
auscultation 1001                  bili light 1068                   breast milk jaundice 1067
autoimmune disease 80, 120         bilirubin 1066, 1068              breast milk storage bags 1054
automatic blood pressure cuff      Billings Ovulation Method 206     breast pain 346
  757                              bimanual 499, 501                 breast reconstruction 363
autosomal dominant 159             bimanual compression 937          breast self-exam 354
autosomal recessive 159, 161       bimanual examination 117          breast tenderness 447
autosomes 155                      Binge eating disorder 105         breast-feeding 796, 900
Avoidant/restrictive food intake   biofeedback 742, 750              breast-feeding jaundice 1067
  disorder (ARFID) 105             biologic response modifier 365    Breastcancer.org 357
AWHONN 932                         biophysical profile (BPP) 545,    breasts 425, 431, 439, 447
axillary temperature 1088                                            breathing exercises 640
azithromycin (Zithromax) 305         576, 612                        breech 523
azoospermia 168                    biopsy 281, 285, 348, 357         breech presentation 833, 841,
                                   birth center 19
                                   birth injury 1104, 1108, 1123       844
                                   birth plan 646, 673, 683          broad-spectrum beta-lactam
                                   birth setting 635
                                   birth trauma 1104, 1104             332
                                   birthing ball 747, 781

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     Index 1211

bronchiolitis 1074                  Medicaid Services 75               935, 1170
bronchomalacia 1136               cephalic 523                       Chorionic villi 155
bronchopulmonary dysplasia        cephalohematoma 841, 1003,         chorionic villus sampling 1114
                                                                     chorionic villus sampling (CVS)
  (BPD) 1126, 1135                  1105
brow presentation 819             cephalopelvic disproportion 820,     597
bulb syringe 905, 967, 977,                                          Christine Tanner 1184
                                    832, 841, 843                    chromosomal abnormalities 156,
  1079                            cerclage 564
Bulimia nervosa 105               cerebral palsy 840                   163, 165
bupivacaine 755                   certified professional midwife     chromosome 155, 158
bupivacaine (Marcaine) 759                                           chromosome abnormalities 456
Bureau of Justice Statistics 384    468                              chronic hypertension 544, 574
burp cloth 1057                   cervical cancer 73, 81, 88, 89,    chronic kidney disease 553
butoconazole (Gynazole-1) 327                                        chronic renal disease 613
butorphanol (Stadol) 727, 754       284, 287                         Cipro 332
                                  cervical cancer screening 316      circumcision 1060
C                                 cervical cap 215                   citalopram 952
                                  cervical closure 855               citric acid 214
CA-125 test 90                    cervical cultures 500, 524         CKD 553
calcification 355                 Cervical diaphragms 303            Clavicle fractures 1106
calcium 265, 269                  cervical dilation 815, 817, 820,   cleansing breath 749
calcium acetate 103                                                  cleft lip 1110
calcium carbonate 103               835, 843                         cleft palate 1110
calcium citrate 103               cervical dilator 243               clindamycin cream (Cleocin
calcium gluconate 103             cervical examination 775
calendar rhythm method 205        cervical insufficiency 495, 564      Vaginal) 326
cancer 10, 14, 25, 439            cervical mucus 206, 219, 231       clinical judgment 1183, 1184,
candida 118                       cervical ripening 524, 821, 824,
caput succedaneum 818, 1003,                                           1186
                                    847                              Clinical Judgment Measurement
  1105                            Cervical screening 284
car seat screening 1144           Cervidil 824                         Model 1186
Carbamazepine (Tegretol) 127      cervix 423, 424, 439, 449          Clinical Judgment Model 1184
carboprost 795                    cesarean birth 17, 25, 837, 839,   clinical pelvimetry 502
carboprost (Hemabate) 858, 937                                       Clomid 179
cardiac arrhythmias 839             841, 843, 846, 847, 852, 854,    Clomiphene citrate 179
cardiac disease 552                 858, 928, 939, 945, 948          clotrimazole 327
cardiorespiratory compromise      Chadwick sign 439                  clubfoot 1009, 1010, 1122
                                  chance 322                         cluster feeding 1053
  1144                            chancre 309                        CMV 1074
Cardiovascular disease 839        chanting 750                       co-testing 284
cardiovascular system 422, 425,   chemotherapy 361, 364, 372         coaches 637
                                  chest-feeding 913                  coagulation 427
  459                             child marriage 403                 coagulopathy 756
carrier screening 125, 161, 183   child-rearing 51                   COC 219
CBC 128                           childbirth education 15, 17, 632,  codeine 543
CDC 57, 73, 553, 998                637, 640, 646                    cognitive behavioral therapy
cefixime (Suprax) 305             childhood mortality 12
cefotaxime 1076                   chlamydia 306, 312, 326, 333,        (CBT) 265, 269, 952
ceftriaxone (Rocephin) 305          396, 501, 503, 524               coitus interruptus 208
cell-free DNA (cfDNA) screening   cholecystitis 428                  cold stress 985, 986
                                  cholelithiasis 428, 513            collectivism 49
  595                             cholestatic jaundice 221           colonoscopy 92
Centers for Disease Control and   chorioamnionitis 777, 817, 821,    colorectal cancer 81, 91
                                    827, 829, 854, 857, 928, 932,
  Prevention 73, 104, 203, 998
Centers for Medicare and
1212 Index

colostrum 883, 899, 944, 1046,   consanguinity 495                 cryoprobe 348
  1067                           consent 204, 239                  cryptorchidism 1007
                                 constipation 428, 445, 446        CT colonography 92
colposcopy 285                   continuous electronic fetal       cultural competence 17, 40, 52
combined oral contraceptive                                        Culturally and linguistically
                                   monitoring 695, 719
  219, 263, 272                  continuous external monitoring      appropriate services (CLAS) are
comfort measure 741, 743, 751,                                       44
                                   714, 716                        culturally responsive care 40
  780, 802                       continuous fetal monitor 757      culture 46, 47, 60
common discomforts of            continuous internal monitoring    Culture Care Theory 52
                                                                   cultures 53
  pregnancy 421, 444               716                             cyanosis 853, 860, 1070, 1081
community health nurse 20        continuous positive airway        cyanotic 1117
community-based nursing 20                                         Cycle of Violence Theory 386
complete abortion 555              pressure (CPAP) 1126            CycleBeads 206
complete blood count 266, 290,   contraception 912, 915            cystic fibrosis 161, 454, 504,
                                 contraception counseling 208,       551, 596, 605, 776
  335, 503                                                         Cystitis 331, 331
complete metabolic blood panel     243                             cystocele 276
                                 contraceptive abstinence 208      cystoscopy 334
  335                            contraceptive counseling 201      cytology 316
complex fibroadenoma 347         Contraceptive gel (Phexxi) 214    cytomegalovirus 1074
complications of pregnancy 495,  contraceptive implant 234         Cytotec 795, 824, 858
                                 contraceptive method 202, 218,
  506, 510, 515, 516, 519, 521                                     D
computed tomography (CT) 263,      237, 240
                                 contraceptive patch 223           D&C 855
  274, 286, 1106                 contraceptive sponge 216          date rape 392
concavity 1077                   contraction frequency 719         Deep abdominal breathing, 749
conception 148, 152, 153, 165,   contraction length 720            deep vein thrombosis 269, 889
                                 contraction strength 720          deepening 641
  169, 176                       contraction stress test 617       dehydration 1047, 1058, 1067,
condom 303, 319, 326             controlled breathing 749
conduction 983, 985              convection 983                      1074
Condylomata acuminata 282        Coombs test 1067                  dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
Congenital abnormalities of the  COPD 81
                                 copper T380A IUC 232                263
  uterus 167                     cord care 1042                    delayed cord clamping 792
congenital anomalies 461, 495,   core needle biopsy (CNB) 357      dementia 73, 80, 82
                                 corticosteroid 351, 1136, 1139    Department of Justice 396, 398
  1165                           cortisol 742                      depot-medroxyprogesterone
congenital diaphragmatic hernia  counter pressure 745, 747
                                 couplet 912                         acetate (DMPA) 225
  1128                           couvade syndrome 443              depression 73, 78, 92, 100, 107,
congenital diaphragmatic hernia  COVID-19 81, 107, 1075
                                 cradle cap 1073                     110, 264, 268, 274, 385, 388,
  (CDH) 1135                     cranial deformity 1109              394, 402, 405, 442, 443
congenital disorder 1109, 1142   Craniosynostosis 1110             Dermal melanocytosis 1013
Congenital Heart Defects 777     crepitus 1077                     dermatitis 1073
congenital heart disease 595,    critical congenital heart defect  Developmental data 525
                                                                   developmental perspective 525
  725, 1110, 1114                  1037                            DHEAS 263
Congenital heart disease (CHD)   crying pattern 1078               diabetes 73, 80, 104, 121, 126,
                                 Cryoablation 348                    267, 272, 434, 436, 442, 469,
  1117                           cryopreservation 182                565, 724, 1165
congenital hip dysplasia 1009
congenital malformation 278
congenital mental impairment

  495
congenital talipes equinovarus

  (CTEV) 1122
Congenital uterine anomaly 843
Conization 285

Access for free at openstax.org
diabetes mellitus 349, 835, 837,   doula 635, 638, 742, 746, 751                                         Index 1213
  840, 843                         Down syndrome 454, 456, 595,
                                                                    Eliphos 103
diagnose 1182                        776, 1009                      Ella 236
diagnostic testing 263, 268, 272,  Down syndrome (DS) 1114          embryo 155, 162, 181, 184
                                   doxycycline 307, 333             embryonic stage 459
  276, 285, 287                    doxylamine 444                   emergency contraception 204,
diaper rash 1073                   Dr. Dick-Read 640
diaphoresis 880                    dual-career family 41              215, 395
diaphragm 214                      ductus arteriosus 465            emergency contraception (EC)
Diaphragmatic electrical           ductus venosus 465, 973
                                   Dulcolax 446                       235
  stimulation 1109                 DVT 889, 945, 950                empowerment 99, 109
diaphragmatic hernia 610           dysfunctional uterine bleeding   encephalocele 466
Diaphragmatic paralysis 1109                                        encephalopathy with
Diclegis 444                         222
didelphys 278                      dysmenorrhea 107, 204, 222,        hyperammonemia 975
digital thermometer 1088                                            End Violence Against Women
dilation and curettage 855           230
dilation and curettage (D&C) 555   dyspareunia 102                    International 395
Dimension I: Interactive Process   dyspepsia 428, 445               endometrial biopsy 266
                                   dyspnea 427, 447                 endometrial cancer 80, 90, 266,
  1023                             dystocia 814, 817, 831, 843,
Dimension II: Motoric Process                                         287
                                     850, 854                       endometrial hyperplasia 234,
  1023
Dimension III: Organizational      E                                  266, 268
                                                                    endometrial polyp 281
  Process 1023                     early decelerations 706          endometriosis 80, 120, 167,
Dimension IV: Physical Response    early intervention 1024
                                   early phase 671                    176, 181, 184, 230, 269, 286
  to Stress 1024                   early PPH 933                    endometritis 829, 855
diminished capacity rape 392       early pregnancy loss 1161        Endotracheal tube 790
dinoprostone 824                   early-onset jaundice 1067        Engerix-B 1011
diploid 149, 156                   eating disorder 73, 105, 840     engorgement 884, 908, 930,
directing 643, 673                 EC pill 236
disabilities 40, 45, 385, 391      echocardiogram 1134                944
disability 57                      eclampsia 80, 551, 572, 575,     enoxaparin 895
disease prevention 9, 10, 14                                        EPDS 895, 952
disordered eating 104                774, 860                       Ephedrine (Akovaz) 758
disseminated intravascular         ectopic pregnancy 167, 177,      epidural anesthesia 663, 671,

  coagulation (DIC) 561, 576,        184, 225, 230, 237, 539, 557,    676, 677, 680, 755, 758, 817,
  860                                593, 608                         839, 854
diversity 40                       eczema 1073                      epidural catheter 754, 755, 757
dizziness 445, 446                 edema 427, 429, 880, 890, 894    episiotomy 633, 647, 674, 682
DM 837, 840                        Edinburgh Postnatal Depression   epispadias 1007
DNA probes 325                       Scale 93, 895, 952             Epstein pearls 1005
Domestic Abuse Intervention        Edwards syndrome 596             Erb palsy 1009
  Programs 387                     effleurage 743, 746              Erb-Duchenne paralysis 1107
domestic violence 388, 401,        EHR 722, 723                     error of omission 22
  405, 904                         elacestrant 367                  Erythema toxicum 1012
donor breast milk 1049             electrocardiogram 1125           erythema toxicum neonatorum
dopamine agonist 263               electronic health record 488,      (ETN) 1072
Doppler 499, 517, 523, 528,          722                            erythropoiesis-stimulating
  712, 713                         electronic health record (EHR)     agents, 51
double balloon catheter 825          44                             esophageal atresia (EA) 1120
                                                                    esophagus 428, 460
                                                                    Essure 238
                                                                    estimated date of delivery (EDD)
1214 Index

  493                              fecundity 152                       fetal lie 522
estrogen 72, 94, 101, 118, 203,    Federal Bureau of Prisons 56        fetal monitor 696, 714, 720,
                                   Federally qualified health
  206, 217, 221, 226, 263, 422,                                          723, 726
  423, 425, 427, 428, 431, 434,      centers 56                        fetal monitor tracing 821, 835,
  439, 444, 447, 448, 465          feeding pattern 1068, 1076,
ET tubes 977                                                             839, 849
ethambutol 552                       1090, 1090                        fetal mortality 12
ethinyl estradiol 221, 236         female factor infertility 165       fetal movement count 524, 614
Etibi 552                          female genital mutilation and       fetal nervous system 725
evaluate outcomes 1186                                                 fetal oxygenation 726, 729
evaporation 982                      cutting (FGM/C) 24                fetal position 658, 664, 668, 678
EVAWI 395                          female sterilization 238            fetal presentation 523
evidence collection 395            Fentanyl 754                        fetal reserve 725, 726
evidence-based care 23             ferning 206                         fetal resorption 561
excitement phase 102               fertility 148, 152, 165, 171, 205,  fetal scalp electrode 719, 786
extended families 56                                                   fetal scalp electrode (FSE) 716,
extended family 41                   225, 232
external cephalic version (ECV)    fertility awareness 101, 107,         717
  665                                                                  fetal stage 461
external condom 211, 240             121                               fetal surveillance 548, 576
external fetal monitors 780        fertility awareness methods         fetal ultrasound 1119
extracorporeal membrane                                                fetal well-being 695, 701, 705,
  oxygenation (ECMO) 1128            (FAM) 205
extracranial birth injuries 1105   Fertility preservation 44             712, 719, 724, 727
extrauterine life 964, 973         fertility testing 178               fetoscope 609, 712
                                   fertilization 95, 100, 154, 165,    fetoscopy 609
F                                                                      FHR 698, 702, 705, 712, 714,
                                     176, 181, 454
F. Matthias Alexander 642          fetal acidemia 701                    721, 724, 828, 831, 849, 853,
facial paralysis 1108              Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder       854
failed intubation 760                                                  FHR baseline 696, 700, 705,
failure to descend 854               127, 861                            709, 725, 726
fall risk assessment 111           Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders    FHR decelerations 697, 706,
fallopian tube 153, 167, 176,                                            719, 724, 730
                                     (FASD) 1112                       FHR monitor 726
  183                              Fetal alcohol syndrome 1112         FHR variability 700, 725
famciclovir (Famvir) 318           fetal attitude 666                  fibroadenoma 347
family assessment 47               fetal bradycardia 726               fibrocystic breast changes 346
Family development 47              fetal cardiovascular system 725     fibroid 266, 274, 280, 290
family history 90, 91, 125         fetal circulation 465, 971, 975     fibrosis 347
family practice 467, 469           fetal development 425, 458,         fight-or-flight 641, 742
family roles 41, 49, 60                                                financial abuse 384, 389
Family structure 40                  462, 466                          fine needle aspiration (FNA) 357
family structures 55               fetal distress 697, 726, 728,       Finnegan Neonatal Abstinence
family-centered care 15, 17, 17                                          Scoring Tool (FNAST) 1124
fatigue 428, 439, 441, 443, 445,     827, 832, 835, 836, 839, 843,     first period of reactivity 979
                                     846, 849                          first stage 663, 671, 677
  446, 452                         fetal dystocia 819, 843             first trimester 486, 504, 507,
FDA 1043                           fetal growth 600, 611                 512, 515, 515
fear-tension-pain theory 641       fetal growth restriction 724        first-degree laceration 796
fecal immunochemical test (FIT)    fetal growth restriction (FGR)      fissure 1078
                                     601                               fistula 277
  92                               fetal heart rate 499, 514, 517,     flexible sigmoidoscopy 92
fecal occult blood test (FOBT) 92    522, 822, 841, 844
                                   fetal heart rate (FHR) 696
                                   fetal heart rate monitoring 779
                                   fetal heart rate patterns 720
                                   Fetal hypoxia 696, 705, 708,
                                     725, 728, 729

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     Index 1215

flu 439                           Gaskin maneuver 850                gravidarum 445
Fluconazole (Diflucan) 127, 327   gastric tube (G-tube) 1144         gravidity 494
fluid volume deficit 933, 939     gastroenteritis 439                group B streptococcus 561
fluoroquinolone 305, 332          gastroesophageal reflux (GER)      group B streptococcus (GBS)
fluoxetine 952
focal points 743                    1056                               328
Foley catheter 825                gastroesophageal reflux disease    growth chart 1022
folic acid 72, 103, 121                                              grunting 1074
follicle-stimulating hormone 263    (GERD) 428, 445                  gynecologic cancers 90
Follitropins 179                  gastrointestinal system 427
fontanelle 1003                   gastroschisis 461, 1121            H
Food and Drug Administration      gavage 1144
                                  GDM 775                            Haberman feeder 1111
  238                             gender inequality 384, 403         habitat data 526
food groups 436                   gender-affirming language 43       haploid 149, 156
foramen ovale 465, 973            general anesthesia 744, 760        harassment 384, 401, 404
forced labor 397                  General Anxiety Disorder-7 92      hate crime 392, 401
forced marriage 403               General hygiene 108                HBIG 320
forceps 819, 827, 839, 841, 854   generate solutions 1186            HBV 319
foremilk 884                      genetic counseling 457, 458        hCG 593, 602
fosfomycin (Monurol) 332          genetic disorder 162, 594, 604,    hCGhmg 179
Foster care 42                                                       head ultrasound 1106
Four Cs of Cultural Assessment      1109, 1143                       head ultrasound (HUS) 1143
                                  genetic history 119                Head ultrasound (HUS) 1138
  52                              Genetic Information                headache 445, 448
Four Cs of Culture model 54                                          health beliefs 44, 50
four Ts 935                         Nondiscrimination Act of 2008    health disparities 55, 57
fourth stage 671, 679, 681          596                              health history 202, 242
fourth stage of labor 799         Genetic screening 128              health inequities 56
fourth-degree laceration 797      genetic testing 157, 162, 182,     health promotion 9, 10, 14, 20
FQHC 56                             356                              health screening 80, 114
fracture 1170                     genetics 453, 454, 457, 473        HealthCare.gov 56
Fragile X syndrome 161            genital piercing 283               Healthy People 2030 10, 55, 58
free-standing birthing center     gentamicin 1076                    heart 425, 426, 440, 447, 451,
                                  gentamicin (Garamycin) 305
  471                             gestational age 591                  467
frenulum 1005                     gestational age assessment         heart disease 10, 14, 73, 80,
FSH 179, 263                        1019
fulvestrant 367                   gestational carrier 183              104
fundal assessment 939             gestational diabetes 56, 81, 105,  heartburn 427, 445
fundal height 499, 516, 522         123, 126, 271, 559, 601, 616,    heat therapy 264
fundal massage 800, 905, 929,       724, 775, 837, 843, 859          heel stick 1037, 1062, 1068,
                                  gestational trophoblastic disease
  936                               558                                1070
fundus 931, 935, 939, 945         GINA 596                           heel to ear 1022
                                  Glucola 518                        Hegar sign 439
G                                 glucuronic acid 1066               HELLP syndrome 572, 573, 576,
                                  Gomco 1060
gabapentin 274                    gonadotoxins 169                     836, 853, 860
galactosemia 885, 975             gonorrhea 304, 312, 326, 333,      Hemabate 795
gallbladder disease 221, 427,       396, 501, 503, 524               hematoma 235, 240
                                  Goodell sign 439                   hemoglobin and hematocrit 503,
  428                             Grand multiparity 817
gamete intrafallopian transfer                                         517
                                                                     hemoglobinopathies 596, 613
  (GIFT) 183                                                         hemophilia 495, 776
gas pain 946, 950                                                    hemorrhage 538
1216 Index

hemorrhoids 446                   human immunodeficiency virus      hypoxic ischemia (HI) 1137
heparin 895                         (HIV) 320                       hysterectomy 264, 275, 280,
hepatic inflammation 513
hepatic neoplasm 221              human papillomavirus (HPV)          289, 939
hepatitis 319                       303, 315                        hysterosalpingogram 183
hepatitis A 303                                                     hysterosalpingography 177
hepatitis B 303, 319, 396, 598,   human placental lactogen (hPL)    hysteroscopy 263, 266
                                    434, 465
  619, 1074                                                         I
hepatitis B immune globulin 320,  Human Rights Campaign 44
                                  human trafficking 74, 440         ibuprofen 263, 949
  1011                            hydrocele 1007                    ibuprofen (Motrin) 241, 243, 347
hepatitis C 598, 619              hydrocortisone 910                Idiopathic granulomatous mastitis
Heplisav-B 1011                   hydrosalpinx 168
HER2 (human epidermal growth      hydrotherapy 742, 743               (IGM) 350
                                  hydroxyurea (Droxia) 551          imagery 743
  factor receptor 2) 359          Hydroxyzine (Vistaril) 754        imiquimod (Aldara) 317
herpes simplex virus 1074         hygiene 428, 444, 451             immune thrombocytopenia (ITP)
herpes simplex virus (HSV) 318    hyperandrogenism 263, 271
High chest breathing 749          hyperbilirubinemia 1047, 1066       551
high-frequency flow interrupters  hypercoagulability 427            immunization 107, 119, 1039,
                                  hyperemesis 445
  1126                            hyperemesis gravidarum 512,         1075, 1083
High-frequency ventilation (HFV)                                    immunoglobulins 51
                                    558                             impaired tissue perfusion 939
  1126                            Hypergonadotropic                 imperforate anus 1008
high-risk infant 1141, 1142,                                        implantation 148, 151, 155,
                                    hypoestrogenic anovulation
  1143, 1144, 1145                  165                               166, 425, 458, 463
high-risk pregnancy 538, 553,     hypermenorrhea 265                in vitro fertilization (IVF) 167,
                                  hyperpigmentation 430, 439
  559                             Hyperprolactinemia 165, 263         181, 273
hindmilk 884                      hypertension 57, 73, 104, 124,    inadequate milk supply 944
historical trauma 43                221, 267, 436, 469, 707, 724,   Inadequate supply 943
HIV 307, 323, 327, 396, 467,        729, 832, 840, 843, 860, 1162,  incest 392
                                    1165                            incisional pain 946
  495, 551, 553, 561, 1049, 1074  hypertensive disorders 559        inclusive language 40
HIV prophylaxis (PrEP) 76         hyperthyroidism 548, 559, 727     income 79, 80
home feeding pump 1145            HypnoBirthing 640                 incomplete abortion 555
homelessness 540, 542, 578        hypnosis 742, 750                 incubator 983
homeothermic 981                  hypocalcemia 1015                 indiscriminate stage 1141
homicide 384                      hypoglycemia 1000, 1015, 1069     individualism 49
honor killing 402                 hypogonadism 168, 179             Indomethacin (Indocin) 828
hormonal contraceptives 221       Hypogonadotropic hypogonadal      induction 633, 828, 835, 844
hormonal therapy 266, 268, 348      anovulation 165                 induction of labor 823
hormone replacement therapy       hypospadias 1007                  indwelling urinary catheter 758
                                  hypotension 853, 880              Ineffective latch 943
  73, 268, 276, 290               hypothermia 966, 986, 1123,       inevitable pregnancy loss 556
hospice care 1147                   1125, 1137                      Infant cardiopulmonary
HPV DNA testing 284               hypothyroidism 265, 268, 539,
HPV infection 284                   548, 551                          resuscitation (CPR) training
HPV testing 89                    hypovolemia 756, 934, 939           1146
HPV vaccine 76, 282, 284          hypoxia 703, 707, 709, 724,       Infant CPR 1083
HRT 268, 276                        724, 727, 730                   infant mortality 12, 17
Human chorionic gonadotropin                                        infection 1165, 1169, 1170
                                                                    infectious disease 80, 107
  179, 593, 602                                                     infertility 148, 155, 161, 165,
human immunodeficiency virus                                          168, 170, 175, 179, 183, 186,

  553

Access for free at openstax.org
  202, 230, 405                      intrauterine fetal demise 511,                                        Index 1217
inflammatory bowel disease 840         560, 562, 566, 572, 576, 831
influenza 906, 1075                                                     819, 845
informed consent 14, 21, 24, 25,     intrauterine growth restriction  labor dystocia 814, 820, 832,
                                       840, 846
  230, 238, 597, 599, 605, 619                                          843
inheritance pattern 161              intrauterine insemination (IUI)  labor induction 17
inhibiting 643                         180                            labor support 683
insomnia 107, 447                                                     labor, delivery, recovery,
insulin 545, 547, 551, 570, 837,     intrauterine life 964, 971
                                     intrauterine pressure catheter     postpartum (LDRP) suite 470
  840, 1070                                                           lacerations 835, 841, 850, 854,
insulin resistance 166, 184            820, 827
integrated or sequential             intrauterine pressure catheter     858, 859
                                                                      lactation 880, 892, 913
  screenings 515                       (IUPC) 716                     Lactational amenorrhea method
integrated screen part 1 595,        Intrauterine resuscitation 695,
                                                                        (LAM) 208
  602                                  726, 729                       lactic acid 214
integrated screen part 2 602         intraventricular hemorrhage      lactogenesis 882
integumentary system 430                                              Lamaze International 15
intercostal retraction 1075            1128                           Lamaze method 632
Intergenerational Transmission of    inversion of the uterus 858      Lanugo 1013
                                     involution 800                   laparoscopic excision surgery
  Violence Theory 387                isoimmunization 606, 613
intermittent auscultation 714,       isolation 387, 397, 404            270
                                     isoniazid 552                    laparoscopy 176, 263, 274, 289,
  720                                isotretinoin (Accutane) 466
intermittent auscultation (IA)       Isotretinoin (Accutane) 127        312, 315
                                     itching 431, 445                 large for gestational age (LGA)
  712                                IUFD 831
internal condom 211                  IV fluid 729                       1022
International Childbirth Education                                    Laryngoscope 790, 977
                                     J                                LATCH screen 943
  Association 15                                                      late decelerations 707, 725, 729
Interstitial cystitis 331, 334, 439  J-tube 1144                      late PPH 933
interval history 496, 513, 515,      jaundice 1066, 1089              late pregnancy loss 1162
                                     jet ventilators 1126             leg cramps 447, 449
  519, 521, 524                                                       leiomyoma 280
interventions 1183                   K                                Leopold's maneuvers 522, 523,
intestinal blockage 439
intestinal parasites 840             karyotype 155                      712, 715
intestines 423, 446, 447, 461        karyotyping 263                  lethargy 1070
intimacy 452                         Kathie Lasater 1184              letrozole 367
intimate partner rape 392            Kegel exercise 276, 886          Leuprolide 179
intimate partner violence 74, 82     kernicterus 1066                 Levetiracetam (Keppra) 1139
intimate partner violence (IPV)      kidney cancer 78                 levofloxacin (Levaquin) 307
                                     Klumpke palsy 1108               levonorgestrel 230
  442                                KOH preparation 327              levonorgestrel-releasing
intracerebellar hemorrhage           Kyleena 232
                                     kyphosis 118                       intrauterine device (IUD) 280
  1138                                                                LGBTQIA+ 203, 218
intracranial hemorrhage 841,         L                                LGBTQIA+ community 385, 400
                                                                      LGBTQIA+ families 42, 56
  1105, 1138, 1170                   La Leche League 943              lidocaine 802, 1061
intraductal papilloma 351            labetalol (Trandate) 545         lidocaine (Xylocaine) 759
intrapartum fetal death (IPFD)       Labial growth 118                Lidocaine gel/foam/spray 909
                                     labor 658, 671, 677, 681         lifestyle modification 263, 265,
  1164                               labor and birth suite 469
intrauterine contraception (IUC)     labor augmentation 822, 847        269, 270, 273
                                     labor complication 815, 817,     lightening 659
  device (IUD) 231
intrauterine device 219
1218 Index

Liletta 232                      marked FHR variability 703       menstrual migraines 222
linea nigra 430                  marked variability 727           menstrual start method 220
linguistic competence 45         Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs      mental health condition 73, 105,
Lithium 127
liver 427, 428, 448, 467           403                              110
liver disease 268, 271, 504      massage 742, 744, 746, 750,      mental health hygiene 110
LNG-IUC 230                                                       metabolic acidemia 724
local anesthesia 759               751                            metabolic syndrome 267
local anesthetic 755             mastalgia 346                    Metformin 272, 547
lochia 800, 859, 929, 931, 933,  mastectomy 361, 369              methadone 543
                                 mastitis 908, 930                Methergine 795, 858, 937
  945                            maternal complication 80         methimazole 548
lochia alba 886                  maternal exhaustion 841          Methotrexate 127, 168, 185,
lochia rubra 886                 maternal mortality 11, 12
lochia serosa 886                Maternal movement 746              554
long-acting reversible           Maternal Role Attainment Theory  methylene blue/gentian violet

  contraception (LARC) 229         900                              smear 333
longitudinal lie 522             maternal-fetal conflict 21, 25   methylergonovine 795, 858, 937
loop electrosurgical excision    maternal-fetal medicine          metronidazole (Flagyl) 308
                                                                  metrorrhagia 265
  procedure (LEEP) 285             specialist 468                 miconazole 327
lordosis 432                     maternal-newborn attachment      microcephaly 1110
Lovenox 895                                                       microscopy 324
low-dose computed tomography       905                            midwife 468, 469
                                 maturity rating 1019             Midwives Alliance of North
  (LDCT) 92                      McRoberts maneuver 850
lower back discomfort 447        mechanical ventilation 1109,       American 635
lumpectomy 348, 361, 368                                          mifepristone 242
lung cancer 77, 84, 89, 92         1126, 1135, 1135, 1144         migraine with aura 268
luteinizing hormone (LH) 263     meconium 965, 980, 1067,         Migrant farm workers 542
Lysteda 280, 795                                                  Milia 1012
                                   1078                           minimal FHR variability 701
M                                meconium aspiration syndrome     minimal variability 729
                                                                  MiraLAX 446
Macrobid 332                       1126                           Mirena 232
macrosomia 840, 843, 858,        meconium ileus 1008              Misconceptions about UTIs 336
                                 meconium-stained amniotic fluid  misoprostol 242, 795, 824, 858
  1123                                                            misoprostol (Cytotec) 724
magnesium 265, 270                 (MSF) 827                      Misoprostol (Cytotec) 127, 937
magnesium sulfate 701, 726       meconium-stained fluid 827,      missed abortion 555
magnetic resonance imaging 350                                    mitotic 149, 154, 156
magnetic resonance imaging         834                            mittelschmerz 208
                                 medical interpreters 44          mm Hg 718, 720
  (MRI) 1106, 1143               medically induced abortion 242   mobile health clinic 20
malabsorption 840                meiotic 149, 154, 156, 165       moderate FHR variability 700
male sterilization 240           melasma 221, 430                 moderate variability 726
malnutrition 439, 817, 840       membranes 452, 465               Mogen 1060
malpresentation 827, 832, 843,   menarche 98, 153                 molding 665
                                 meningitis 1036, 1171            Mongan Method 640
  843                            menopausal hormone therapy       Montevideo units 720
mammary ductal ectasia 349                                        morbidity 80, 92, 102
mammogram 347, 352, 354            102                            Moro reflex 1015
mammography 85, 350, 354         menopause 102, 153, 165
March of Dimes 18, 121           menorrhagia 107, 232, 265
Marfan syndrome 839              menstrual cycle 72, 96, 100,
marginalized communities 400
Marie F. Mongan 640                105, 110, 125, 151, 167, 175,
                                   202, 205, 217, 346
                                 menstrual hygiene practice 101,
                                   108

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        Index 1219

mortality 80, 92, 102                 Violence 390                      neonatal seizures 1139
morula 154, 458                     National Center on Shaken Baby      Neonatal sepsis 1136
MRI 270, 274, 286, 350, 600,                                            neonatal transition 964
                                      Syndrome 1086                     neural tube defect 72, 103, 121,
  610, 612                          National Coalition Against
mucous cyst 282                                                           123, 595, 603, 605
multifactorial inheritance 159        Domestic Violence 384             Neural Tube Defects 776
multiparous 515                     National Commission on              neurofibromatosis 597
multiple gestation 539, 559,                                            neurologic disease 756
                                      Correctional Health Care 56       neutral thermal environment
  565, 568, 569, 572, 831, 835,     National Comprehensive Cancer
  844                                                                     981
multiple marker screen 595, 603       Network 354                       newborn behavior 1076, 1087
multiple papillomas 351             National Council of State Boards    newborn screen 164
multiple stage 1141                                                     newborn screening 1037
multitarget stool DNA test (MT-       of Nursing 1186                   Nexplanon 234
  sDNA) 92                          National Domestic Violence          NICU 965, 968, 986
murmur 1119                                                             nifedipine (Adalat) 545
muscle tone 965, 980                  Hotline 390                       nipple discharge 346
Muscular dystrophy 840              National Health Council 57          nipple shell 944
musculoskeletal assessment          National Health Service 215         nirsevimab 1075
  1009                              National Institute of Child Health  nitrofurantoin monohydrate/
musculoskeletal system 432
Myasthenia gravis 840                 and Human Development 720,          macrocrystals 332
myelomeningocele 466                  728                               nitroglycerine 855
myocardial infarction 221, 230      National Institute of Mental        Nitrous oxide (N2O) 755
myomectomy 266, 280                   Health 85                         Non-pneumatic anti-shock
                                    National Institutes of Health 15,
N                                     24                                  garment 932
                                    National Intimate Partner and       non-rebreather mask 729
NAAT 308, 318                         Sexual Violence Survey 406        Noncommunicable disease 80
Nabothian cyst 282                  National LGBT Health Education      nondisjunction 156
Naegele's Rule 493                    Center 44                         nonlactation mastitis 349
Nalbuphine (Nubain) 754             natural family planning 128         nonoxynol-9 210, 216
Naloxone 755                        nausea 428, 428, 439, 443, 444,     nonphysiologic jaundice 1067
naproxen 263                          445                               nonreassuring 707
Narcan 755                          NCADV 385                           nonreassuring fetal heart rates
narcotic 906, 915                   NCCN 354
NAS 861                             necrotizing enterocolitis 944         716
nasal cannula 1125                  necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC)     nonreassuring FHR 724
nasal flaring 1074                    1139                              nonreassuring FHR tracing 730
NASG 932                            neonatal abstinence syndrome        nonshivering thermogenesis 982
nasogastric (NG) tube 1144            861                               nonshivering thermogenesis
National Association for            neonatal abstinence syndrome
                                      (NAS) 1123                          (NST) 985
  Continence 276                    neonatal circulation 971, 973       Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
National Association of Certified   neonatal death 1169
                                    neonatal hypoglycemia 840             drugs 263, 906
  Professional Midwives 635         neonatal intensive care unit 17,    nonstress test (NST) 545, 576,
National Association of               18, 977
                                    neonatal jaundice 1014, 1066          615
  Community Health Centers 75       neonatal loss 1162                  Normogonadotropic
National Cancer Institute Division  neonatal pain evaluation 996
                                    neonatal respiratory distress         normoestrogenic anovulation
  of Cancer Epidemiology and          727                                 165
  Genetics 185                      Neonatal seizure 1015               NoseFrida 1080
National Center on Domestic                                             NSAID 270, 274, 347, 367, 886,
                                                                          914
1220 Index

NSAIDs 263                         Ovarian growth 117                 patient education 91
nuchal translucency screening      ovarian hyperstimulation           Patient Health Questionaire-9 92
                                                                      patient interval data 515
  594                                syndrome 180, 185                Patricia Benner 1183
nursing diagnoses 400              ovarian reserve 175                PCOS 90, 105, 165, 271, 287
nursing process 1182               ovaries 423, 425                   PCR 305, 318, 328
nutritional needs 428, 435, 436    overnutrition 539                  peanut ball 748, 781
NuvaRing 223                       ovulation 153, 172, 175, 206,      pelvic dystocia 817
Nydrazid 552                                                          pelvic exam 497, 499, 503
                                     220, 231, 236                    pelvic floor 638
O                                  ovulation induction 176, 179,      pelvic floor disorders 275
                                                                      Pelvic floor questionnaires 276
OB/GYN 468, 468                      184, 273                         Pelvic floor therapy 276
obesity 10, 76, 80, 84, 90, 95,    Ovulation Induction 181            pelvic hematomas 841
                                   ovulation predictor kit 128, 172,  pelvic inflammatory disease 306,
  104, 107, 129, 436, 439, 724,
  1162                               176                                309, 312
oblique lie 522                    Oxygen equipment 790               pelvic inflammatory disease
obstetric examination 777          oxygen flowmeter 968
obstetric forceps 841              oxygenation 695, 702, 724, 725,      (PID) 230
obstetric triage 773                                                  pelvic organ prolapse 275
obstructive sleep apnea 271          726, 729                         Pelvic rest 931
occiput posterior 819, 820, 832,   oxytocin 617, 633, 658, 675,       pelvic tilts 747
  854                                                                 Pelvic ultrasound 263, 270, 274
Office of Disease Prevention and     681, 724, 779, 792, 795, 798,    penicillin 311, 329
  Health Promotion 58                817, 820, 826, 844, 847, 855,    penicillin G aqueous (Pfizerpen)
OHSS 180, 185                        858, 883, 885, 909
oligohydramnios 565, 569, 576,     oxytocin (Pitocin) 707, 722, 724,    311
  601, 613, 828, 833, 844, 1171      932, 935, 936, 941               penicillin G benzathine (Bicillin L-
oligoovulation 165
oligospermia 168                   P                                    A) 311
omega-3 fatty acids 265, 270                                          Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) 443
omphalitis 1071                    pain management 646                percutaneous umbilical blood
omphalocele 1121                   pain pump 947
ondansetron 444                    palmar grasp reflex 1015             sampling (PUBS) 606
oogenesis 97, 100                  pancreatitis 840                   perfect use effectiveness 209,
open glottis pushing 786           Panting 750
operative delivery 831, 837, 840   Pap smear 88, 128, 285, 308,         211, 215, 219, 226
Opioid 949                                                            peri-bottle 893, 909, 914
opioid antagonist 754                316                              peri-care 929
oral glucose gel 1070              Paragard 232                       Periductal mastitis (PDM) 349
organogenesis 459, 461             Parent-infant attachment 896,      perimenopause 74, 101, 107,
orgasmic phase 102
orogastric (OG) tube 1144            905                                118, 266, 281
Ortolani maneuver 1010             Parental education 1077, 1080,     perinatal bereavement 1162
oscillators 1126                                                      perinatal care 18, 19, 22
osmotic dilator 242                  1084                             perinatal loss 1161
osteoporosis 73, 103, 119, 263     parity 494                         perineal care 914
Other specified feeding or eating  paroxetine 952                     perineal cleansing 788, 795
  disorders (OSFED) 105            Paroxetine (Paxil) 127             Perineal discomfort 909
outcomes 1183                      partner-newborn attachment         perineal trauma 859
ovarian cancer 72, 89, 285, 439                                       period of decreased
ovarian cyst 274, 281                902
                                   passage 662, 678                     responsiveness 980
                                   passenger 662, 678                 periodic changes 696, 719, 725
                                   Patau syndrome 596                 periodic changes in the FHR 705
                                   patent ductus arteriosus 1117      periodontitis 452
                                   patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)

                                     974, 1135
                                   patent foramen ovale (PFO) 974
                                   paternal involvement 637

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  Index 1221

peripheral vascular resistance   plan of care 527                   952
  427, 446, 448                  plantar surface 1020             postpartum psychosis (PPP) 951
                                 Plastibell 1060                  postpartum recovery 905, 945
Perpetrators of IPV 390          plateau phase 102                Postprocedure care 240
persistent pulmonary             pneumonia 1036                   postterm 1104, 1134
                                 podofilox (Condylox) 317         postterm pregnancy 827, 831,
  hypertension of the newborn    polycystic ovaries 222, 272
  (PPHN) 1135                    polycystic ovary syndrome 90,      834
pessary 276                                                       posttraumatic stress disorder
phenazopyridine 336                105, 165, 271, 287
Phenergan 444                    polycystic ovary syndrome          (PTSD) 110, 385, 394
phenobarbital 1068                                                posture 1020
Phenytoin (Dilantin) 127           (PCOS) 439                     potassium bitartrate 214
phimosis 1007                    polydactyly 1009                 poverty 41, 57, 389, 397, 400,
PhosLo 103                       polyhydramnios 565, 601, 613,
Phototherapy 1067, 1069                                             403
PHQ-9 92                           817, 833, 835, 852             power 662
phrenic nerve paralysis 1109     polymerase chain reaction 305    Power and Control Wheel 387
physical abuse 388, 404          polyploidy 156                   PPH 792, 794, 802
physical environment 742         polyps 266, 280                  pre-eclampsia 80, 774
physical examination 72, 115,    Ponseti method 1122              precipitous labor 835, 857
  119, 127                       popliteal angle 1021             preconception care 121
physical therapy 274             Populations at higher risk for   preconception counseling 120,
physician 468, 469
physiologic anemia of pregnancy    complications 911                552
  425                            position 662                     preconception risk factors 120
physiologic birth 635, 658, 670  positioning in labor 646         preeclampsia 56, 271, 442, 448,
physiologic jaundice 1067        positive pressure ventilation
physiologic regurgitation 1056                                      486, 488, 509, 521, 538, 541,
pica 438                           (PPV) 1125                       544, 545, 548, 551, 553, 554,
PID 306, 312                     positive signs of pregnancy 440    561, 565, 572, 574, 575, 659,
Pitocin 633, 820, 858, 885       posterior fontanelle 1003          677, 715, 724, 821, 836, 843,
pituitary disease 439            Postoperative care 240             853, 860, 1165
pituitary tumor 263, 268         postpartum blues 895             Preeclampsia Foundation 880
PKU (phenylketonuria) 1037       postpartum depression 73, 538,   preexisting condition 124
placenta 421, 423, 425, 428,                                      preexisting medical condition
  431, 434, 435, 452, 458, 461,    861, 900, 912                    538, 544
  463, 464, 465, 467, 473, 724   postpartum depression (PPD)      preexposure prophylaxis 322
placenta accreta 567, 611, 856                                    pregabalin 274
placenta hormones 434              895                            pregnancy 421, 422, 423, 425,
placenta previa 512, 525, 554,   postpartum education 879, 890,     425, 427, 427, 428, 428, 429,
  565, 601, 611, 724, 827, 833,                                     430, 432, 434, 435, 435, 438,
  846, 856                         905, 912                         439, 441, 441, 442, 443, 444,
placental abruption 511, 512,    postpartum endometritis 929        446, 446, 447, 448, 449, 452,
  543, 548, 551, 561, 564, 566,  postpartum hemorrhage 803,         454, 458, 459, 465, 466, 468,
  574, 575, 601, 609, 611, 612,                                     469, 469, 470, 471, 473, 473
  724, 827, 829, 831, 835, 843,    829, 844, 850, 854, 855, 860,  pregnancy complication 512
  846, 853, 861                    880, 885, 890                  pregnancy planning 121
placental insufficiency 559      postpartum hemorrhage (PPH)      pregnancy prevention 202
Plan B 236                         797                            Prematurity 1118, 1131, 1132
Plan B One-Step 236              postpartum infection 928, 931,   premenstrual dysphoric disorder
                                   935                              222
                                 postpartum period 879, 895,      premenstrual dysphoric disorder
                                   905                              (PMDD) 72, 264
                                 postpartum preeclampsia 880
                                 postpartum psychiatric disorder
                                   950
                                 Postpartum Psychiatric Disorder
1222 Index                         854                             radiation therapy 361, 368
                                 prolonged stimulation 727         raloxifene 366
premenstrual syndrome (PMS)      promethazine 444, 445             rape 389, 392, 402, 406
  72, 106, 264                   Promethazine (Phenergan) 754      Rape myth 392
                                 Prophylactic antibiotics 396      Rape trauma syndrome 394
prenatal care 539, 541, 544,     propylthiouracil 548              rapid plasma reagin 503
  550, 553, 561                  prostaglandin 847                 rapid plasma reagin (RPR) 562
                                 prostaglandins 824                reanastomosis 240
prenatal diagnosis 162           prothrombin complex               recognize cues 1186
prenatal genetic assessment                                        recombinant factor VIIa 51
                                   concentrate 51                  Recombivax HB 1011
  592                            protozoan STI 313                 rectal thermometers 1088
Prenatal Psychosocial Profile    pruritic urticarial papules and   rectocele 276
                                                                   rectovaginal examination 117
  (PPP) 443                        plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP)    rectovaginal fistula 277
prenatal screening 162, 162        432                             rectovaginal septum 269
prenatal testing 591, 599, 610   psyche 662, 670, 681              recurrent abortion 556
PrEP 322                         psychologic abuse 404             REEDA scale 911, 931
Preparation H 446                psychosocial assessment 1146      reflex irritability 965
presumptive signs of pregnancy   psychotic symptoms 951            reflux 1056
                                 psyllium (Metamucil) 446          relaxation technique 264, 266,
  438, 439                       PTU 548
preterm 486, 498, 504, 509,      ptyalism 428                        274
                                 pubarche 117                      relaxin 427, 431, 432, 434, 446,
  511, 512, 519, 1104, 1123,     puberty 93, 117
  1128, 1146                     pudendal block 758                  447, 465
preterm birth 271, 829, 835,     pulmonary edema 837, 839,         religious beliefs 46, 50
  840, 855                         843, 860                        renal disease 561, 572, 575
preterm labor 544, 550, 559,     pulmonary embolism 269, 895       Reproductive coercion 389
  563, 567, 570, 840, 846        pulmonary hypertension 839        reproductive health 10, 13, 72,
Preterm newborns 1169            pulse oximeter 757, 790, 860,
preterm premature rupture of       880, 967, 977, 1037               93, 113, 119, 389, 394
  membranes (PPROM) 569          pulse oximetry 977, 980, 1119,    reproductive rights 15
preterm rupture of membranes       1125, 1126                      reproductive system 72, 93, 111,
  565                            purity culture 392
preventive care 72, 79, 111      pyelonephritis 334, 439             423
Prilosec 446                     pyridoxine 444                    resolution phase 102
primary amenorrhea 262                                             respiratory depression 753, 755,
primary dysmenorrhea 263         Q
primary infertility 164                                              760
primary ovarian insufficiency    quad marker screen 517            respiratory distress 835, 853,
  (POI) 165                      Quality and Safety Education for
primary PPH 933                                                      1109, 1119, 1132, 1133
primiparous 516                    Nurses 21, 23                   respiratory distress syndrome
prioritize hypotheses 1186       quantitative blood loss (QBL)
probable signs of pregnancy                                          (RDS) 1126, 1131
  438, 439                         932                             respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
progesterone 72, 94, 101, 206,   quick start method 220
  219, 224, 230, 236, 263, 267,  quickening 439, 439                 1074
  280, 287, 422, 424, 427, 427,                                    respiratory system 427
  428, 429, 432, 434, 435, 439,  R                                 restitution 674
  444, 445, 446, 447, 448, 465                                     resuscitation 964, 965, 968,
progestin therapy 263            racism and discrimination 78
prolapsed cord 822, 829, 851     Radiant warmer 790, 795, 964,       985, 1129, 1135
prolonged decelerations 709,                                       retained placenta 797, 846
  725, 729                         981, 985, 986                   retinopathy of prematurity (ROP)
Prolonged second stage labor     radiation 983
                                                                     1126, 1143
                                                                   retrograde ejaculation 169

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       Index 1223

Rh immune globulin 907              semen analysis 177                   1022
Rh incompatibility 608              sepsis 561, 929, 931, 936,         SNP microarray 1115
Rh(D) immune globulin 608                                              social determinants of health 10,
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 554         1076, 1170
Rho(D) immune globulin 502,         septate 278                          20, 27, 57
                                    septum 263, 278                    social support 900, 903
  518, 597                          sertraline 952                     social violence 400
RhoGAM 518, 597, 608, 907           serum 1066                         Society of Radiologists in
Rifadin 552                         sexual abuse 391, 398
rifampin 552                        sexual activity 452                  Ultrasound 281
ring forceps 856, 858               sexual assault 384, 391            socioeconomic status 541
risk factors 1162, 1165             Sexual assault nurse examiner      solid tumor 347
risk factors for violence 384                                          solitary papilloma 351
risk management 22, 22, 23            395                              sonography machine 831
rocking 746, 747                    sexual development 98              sonohysterogram 176
rooming-in practices 1146           sexual harassment 384              sonohysterography 266
rooting reflex 1016                 sexual health 217, 916             soothing technique 1035
rubella 597, 906                    sexual response 102                specific stage 1141
rubella titer 503                   sexual violence 74, 406            speculum 117
                                    Sexuality 107                      Sperm antibodies 169
S                                   sexually transmitted infection     spermatogenesis 149, 169
                                                                       spermicide 210, 214, 218, 303,
safe sleep 1082                       202, 237, 389
SANE 395                            Sexually transmitted infections      331
SBS/AHT 1086                                                           spina bifida 466, 605, 609, 1010
scarf sign 1022                       302, 323, 333, 486, 495          spinal block 759
SCD 550                             shaken baby syndrome/abusive       spinal headache 889
screening 592                                                          spinnbarkeit 206
screening for IPV 390                 head trauma 1086                 spirituality 46, 50
screenings 600, 610                 Shared decision making 673         spironolactone 272
seborrheic dermatitis 1073          shock 1165, 1172                   spontaneous abortion (SAB) 856
second period of reactivity 980     shoulder 523                       Spontaneous labor 632
second stage 671, 678, 681          shoulder dystocia 788, 837, 840,   square window sign 1021
Second stage labor 854                                                 squat bar 746, 781
second stage of labor 841             849                              squat stool 746
second trimester 486, 507, 515,     sibling rivalry 1142               squatting 746
                                    sickle cell disease 164, 495,      SSRIs 952
  515, 519                                                             staging 359
second-degree laceration 796          550, 592, 597, 605, 776          standard days method 206
secondary amenorrhea 262            signs of placental separation 792  stem cells 25
secondary dysmenorrhea 263          signs of pregnancy 438, 473        Step Family Foundation 41
secondary infertility 164           signs of trafficking 399           stepping reflex 1017
secondary PPH 933                   silver nitrate 1062, 1071          stethoscope 996, 1001
seizure 836, 843, 853, 860,         simethicone 910, 946               STI 202, 302, 389
                                    sinecatechins (Veregen) 317        STI protection 210, 218
  1070                              single-career family 41            STI testing 75, 598
seizure disorders 548               single-parent families 41          stigma 302
selective serotonin reuptake        sitz bath 909, 931                 stomach 428, 445, 445, 460
                                    skin cancer 92                     stool softener 910
  inhibitors (SSRIs) 265            skin change 346, 369               stooling pattern 1058, 1078
self-care 72, 74, 81, 83, 93, 103,  skin-to-skin contact 647, 795,     Stork bites 1012
                                                                       Strawberry hemangioma 1013
  119, 123                            803, 900
self-care practices 444, 451,       skull fracture 1105, 1106
                                    sleep apnea 107
  452                               sleep pattern 1035, 1081
self-esteem 109                     small for gestational age (SGA)
1224 Index

stretch marks 882                 taking-hold phase 901           Three Principles of Patient Safety
striae 882                        taking-in phase 901               724
striae gravidarum 431             talipes deformity 1010
stroke 11, 73, 80, 84, 126, 221,  tamoxifen 366                   three-lead cardiac monitor 1125
                                  tamponade 937                   three-tiered classification
  230, 237, 836, 839, 843, 860    Tapazole 548
structural disorder 275           Tay-Sachs disease 495, 597,       system 720
subarachnoid hemorrhage 1138                                      thrombocytopenia 756, 936
subdural hematoma 1105              605                           thrush 930
subdural hemorrhage 1138          Tay-Sachs Disease 776           thyroid disease 547
Subgaleal hemorrhage 1106         Telangiectatic nevus 1012       thyroid disorder 126
subinvolution 933                 temperature 1171                thyroid dysfunction 439
substance misuse 110              temperature sensor 977          thyroid function 263, 265, 266,
substance use 76, 103, 110,       temporal artery thermometry
                                                                    268
  120, 124                          1089                          thyroid function test 128
substance use disorders 905       ten-step warm chain 984         tioconazole 327
succenturiate lobe 857            teratogen 460, 466              Title X clinics 76
sucking reflex 1016               teratogens 126, 487, 515        tocodynamometer 714, 786
sucrose solution 1062             Terbutaline 700, 726, 729       tongue-tie 1005
Suctioning 1079                   terconazole (Terazol 3) 327     tonic neck reflex 1017
SUD 905                           testosterone 15, 94, 101, 263,  TORCH 466
sudden infant death syndrome                                      toremifene 366
                                    272                           toxic shock syndrome 214, 218
  (SIDS) 120, 1082                Testosterone supplementation    tracheal-esophageal (TE) fistula
suicidal ideation 394, 405
Suicide 78, 82, 109                 169                             460
Sunday start method 220           thalassemia 551                 tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
superovulation 179                Thalidomide 127
supine hypotension 729            The American College of           1120
supplemental oxygen 1125,                                         tracheostomy 1136, 1145
                                    Obstetricians and             traditional healing 50
  1125, 1144                        Gynecologists 50              trafficking victim 398
surfactant 462, 985, 1169         The American Psychological      tranexamic acid 51, 280, 795,
surgical biopsy 358                 Association 51
surgically induced abortion 242   The Annie E. Casey Foundation     937
surrogacy 24                        41                            tranexamic acid (Cyklokapron)
swaddling 1063                    The Joint Commission 45
symptothermal method 207          The North American Menopause      858
syncope 446                         Society 73                    Transcultural Assessment Model
syndactyly 1009                   thelarche 117
syphilis 306, 309, 311, 396, 503  Therapeutic hypothermia 1138      52
systemic lupus erythematosus      Thermometer 790, 996            transcultural nursing 52
                                  thermoregulation 966, 981,      transcutaneous bilirubin (TCB)
  592, 613                          1087, 1131, 1137
systemic lupus erythematosus      third party reproduction 183      monitor 1066
                                  third stage 671, 681            transcutaneous bilirubin meter
  (SLE) 554                       third stage of labor 792, 855,
systolic murmur 426                 858                             1014
                                  third trimester 486, 507, 521,  transcutaneous electric nerve
T                                   524
                                  third trimester ultrasound 611    stimulation (TENS) 264
tachycardia 697, 709, 725, 726,   third-degree laceration 797     transient neonatal pustular
  931, 934, 939                   threatened abortion 555
                                                                    melanosis (TNPM) 1072
tachysystole 707, 720, 729, 825,                                  transient neonatal
  835, 844
                                                                    thrombocytopenia 979
take actions 1186                                                 transitional stool 1058
                                                                  transvaginal ultrasound 90, 128,

                                                                    176, 181, 185, 266, 281
                                                                  transverse lie 522

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           Index 1225

transverse position 817, 819             Force 90, 354                     uterine activity 720
Trauma and Mental Health               U.S. Preventive Services Task       uterine anomalies 832, 855
                                                                           uterine atony 803, 855, 857,
  database 390                           Force (USPSTF) 283
trauma-informed care 57, 130           ulipristal acetate 236                860
Trexall 554                            Ultrasonography 178                 uterine biopsy 288
trichomoniasis 307, 396                ultrasound 278, 280, 286, 347,      uterine cancer 268, 287
trimester 486, 517                                                         uterine contraction 786, 795
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole            350, 356, 486, 497, 501, 515,     uterine contraction (UC) 696
                                         518, 593, 600, 827, 844           uterine contractions 814, 820
  332, 332                             ultrasound (US) with Doppler        Uterine cramping 886, 909
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole            545                               uterine dystocia 815, 817, 820,
                                       ultrasound transducer 602, 712,
  (Bactrim) 127                          713, 715                            843
triple negative cancer 359             Umbilical cord accidents 831,       uterine enlargement 423
triple positive cancer 359               844                               uterine fibroid 265, 280
trisomy 13 595, 608, 1114              Umbilical Cord Care 1042            Uterine fibroids 166
trisomy 18 595, 602, 1114              umbilical cord clamp 790            Uterine growth 118
trisomy 21 495, 504, 595, 598,         umbilical cord granuloma 1070       uterine malformation 278
                                       umbilical cord infection 1071       uterine massage 932
  603, 605, 1009, 1114                 umbilical Doppler study 601         uterine polyp 167, 281
tromethamine (Tham) 858                umbilical hernia 1071               uterine prolapse 276
trophoblast 154, 435, 458, 458         undernutrition 540                  uterine rupture 724, 726, 821,
tubal embryo transfer 183              undocumented immigrant 540,
tubal ligation 239                       542                                 847, 852
tubal patency 177                      undocumented immigration 578        uterine tachysystole 720, 726,
tuberculosis 554                       unicornuate 278
tuberculosis (TB) 552                  unifactorial inheritance 159          821
TUMS 103                               unintended pregnancy 229            uterine trauma, 852
Turner syndrome 165, 595               United Nations Children's Fund      uteroplacental insufficiency 707,
Turner syndrome (TS) 1116                (UNICEF) 278, 633
TXA 937                                United Nations Population Fund        724, 729, 834, 839, 844, 846,
Tylenol 241, 243                         (UNFPA) 278                         854
tympanic thermometer 1088              United States Department of         uterotonics 795, 835, 855
type 1 diabetes 545, 547                 Agriculture 76                    uterus 423, 425, 426, 427, 429,
type 2 diabetes 545, 547               United States Preventive Services     432, 439, 441, 445, 446, 447,
typical use effectiveness 209,           Task Force 90, 304                  448, 451, 458, 473
                                       urethral swab 305, 308, 333         UTI 335, 929
  211, 214, 215, 224, 226              urethritis 331, 333
                                       urethrovaginal 277                  V
U                                      uridine diphosphogluconurate
                                         glucuronosyltransferase (UGT)     vacuum aspirator 242
U.S. Department of Agriculture           1066                              vacuum extractor 842, 854
  104                                  Urinalysis 128, 332, 334, 336       vagina 423, 439
                                       urinary frequency 429, 439          vaginal birth 844, 847, 854
U.S. Department of Health and          urinary tract infection 497, 504,   vaginal birth after cesarean
  Human Services 1089                    512, 777, 929
                                       urinary tract infections 331, 335,    (VBAC) 847
U.S. Department of Health and            487                               vaginal bleeding 773, 792, 794
  Human Services (HHS) 104             USDA 76, 104                        vaginal breech birth 833, 844
                                       USPSTF 92                           vaginal cancer 288
U.S. Food and Drug                                                         vaginal coitus 205, 243
  Administration 1043                                                      vaginal culture 327
                                                                           vaginal delivery 819, 832, 844,
U.S. Medical Eligibility Criteria for
  Contraceptive Use (US MEC)                                                 857
  203                                                                      vaginal examination 777
                                                                           vaginal exams 829
U.S. Office of Disease Prevention
  and Health Promotion 10

U.S. Preventive Services Task
1226 Index                       Vernix caseosa 1013                    Theory 389
                                 vertical transmission 159            Warfarin (Coumadin) 127
vaginal fistula 277              vesicovaginal fistula 277            wellness exam 111
vaginal malformation 279         viability 462                        wet preparation 327
vaginismus 103                   vibroacoustic stimulation (VAS)      whiff test 325
vaginitis 512                                                         whispered ah 644
valacyclovir (Valtrex) 318         615                                WHO 80, 632
Valproic acid (Depakote) 127     vibroacoustic stimulator 615         WIC 542, 943
valvular heart disease 756       Victims of Trafficking and Violence  witch hazel 909
variable decelerations 708                                            World Health Organization 11,
varicocele 169, 178                Protection Act 398
varicosities 427                 video-electroencephalogram             80, 883, 984
vasa previa 845, 857                                                  World Health Organization
vasectomy 240                      (EEG) 1139
vasomotor symptoms 267           violence against women 384,            (WHO) 177, 998, 1048, 1049
velamentous insertion of the                                          wound infection 928
                                   393, 400, 404
  cord 845                       Violence Against Women Act 406       X
vena cava syndrome 447           visualization 640, 673
venereal disease research        vital sign 935, 939, 996             X-linked 161
                                 vitamin B6 265                       Xylocaine 802
  laboratory 503                 vitamins and minerals 435
venous thromboembolism 221       vomiting 427, 428, 444, 445          Y
ventilation 1109, 1125, 1134,    von Willebrand disease 936
                                 vulvar hygiene 108                   Yuzpe regimen 236
  1145                           vulvovaginal candidiasis 323
ventilator 1126, 1126, 1135,     vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC)       Z

  1145                             326                                Zofran 444
Ventolin 552                                                          zygote 151
ventricular septal defect (VSD)  W                                    zygote intrafallopian transfer

  1119                           Walker's Cycle of Violence             (ZIFT) 183
verbal abuse 404

Access for free at openstax.org
Index 1227
